



Thursday, 16 July 2020

Parliament met at 03.28 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I just have one matter to communicate, about the Ugandans who have been repatriated. I received a complaint that they were advised before they left the countries where they were that they would be quarantined for 14 days. They, therefore, planned to spend money for 14 days. However, as we speak, they have been told to spend an additional three days and it is becoming expensive for them.

They asked me to find out from the Ministry of Health - first, they have been found negative. They do not know why they have been told to stay extra three days beyond the 14 days quarantine. They are here at Sheraton- at least the ones who called me. I hope that the Minister of Health can give them relief on that issue so that they know what to do.

Honourable members, there are some matters here but only the two of them qualify. The sector ministers should handle the constituency issues. May be, the only one I will allow is the issue for Islamic Banking because that is national. The issue of honoraria has been raised many times; we should not bring it back to today and may be, the one of schools not using grants from the Central Government. 

Hon. Achiro, yours should go to the sector minister.  Let me invite hon. Sebaggala only on Islamic Banking; do not deal with the other one.


3.31
MR BERNARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. About your communication, it is true that most of these returnees are being informed that they would be kept in quarantine for three extra days.

I had a case of United Nations (UN) staff who returned and they were taken to one of the hotels which did not meet the hygiene and sanitation requirements. Some of the rooms never had water, others were not flushing and others were like prison rooms without any view. If you are going to be quarantined in a place, you should be able to have access to fresh air and a good environment.

When the UN staff raised complaints about the facility -
THE SPEAKER: But shouldn’t you raise that when the minister comes to respond?

MR ATIKU: Madam Speaker, I thought I should put this because when the UN staff complained, it was forwarded to their headquarters in New York as a violation of country strategy to contain COVID-19. Now that is overboard because this was just a question of the conditions under which people are quarantined. 

I thought it did not deserve to be raised to that level instead of addressing the concerns that were raised by the returnees. Therefore, the minister should come and clarify this so that the people who are in quarantine are not put to another psychological torture of thinking that their jobs are at risk. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. The Ministry of Health should come- and today is Thursday, one of them is supposed to be here to give us an update on the COVID-19 situation, I hope they will come. We want an answer today, if you are not available today, please, come on Tuesday.

3.34
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA SENGENDO (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Way back in the Ninth Parliament, we amended the Financial Institutions Act, which opened doors for Islamic Banking.

Ever since then, we have been getting various explanations especially now in this Tenth Parliament about Islamic Banking and its progress. We were informed by Bank of Uganda that the regulations were supposed to be made. Even the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development told us the same.

Madam Speaker, when I raised this issue, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development informed us that they are almost done. We are almost ending the Tenth Parliament and yet, many people down for this extraordinary product of Islamic Banking.

Madam Speaker, given the fact that COVID-19 has affected us economically, Islamic Banking could be the ideal in as far as boosting our economy is concerned.

Madam Speaker, I would like to know what has hindered the implementation of Islamic Banking, yet when the President is outside the country and even when he invites investors, he tells them - especially the Arab World and others who are very interested in Islamic Banking - that everything is set. Despite this, up to now, we have not seen any development or any bank that has started giving out this product, which is of great benefit to all Ugandans. 

What has hindered the implementation and the opening up of Islamic Banking, which is going to assist many Ugandans in as far as our economy is concerned?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you recall, it is true we made the law on Islamic Banking and I do recall that the minister actually came here and said the regulations had been done but he has never laid them here. Therefore, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is required to lay the regulations on Tuesday because several months ago, he said they had been done. Let him lay them on Tuesday next week.   


3.37
MS JUDITH AKELLO FRANCA (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter of national importance I would like to raise is about money that was disbursed to schools for operations. The grants for the fourth quarter were sent but the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development followed it up with a circular stopping them from using that money and yet schools, as much as there is no schooling going on because of COVID-19, are supposed to be cleaned and a lot of other activities have to go on. Therefore, schools are not able to utilise the grants that are meant for operations. 

I would like to find out from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development where that money is going and yet, the fourth quarter has already ended. You have stopped the schools from using the money, the headteachers would like to know why they have not been authorised to use the money. (Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, hon. Akello, for giving me way. Madam Speaker, the matter my honourable colleague is raising is very important. Right now, most of the schools are very bushy, yet, there were letters that were given to the Chief Administrative Officers stopping the headteachers from accessing the funds. Right now, most of the schools are begging members of Parliament to help them access the money so that they can slash the school compounds.

Let the ministry take this very seriously. Thank you.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you very much, for that information. In summary, Madam Speaker, I see many members of Parliament want to give information, which means it cuts across many regions. 

We would like to request the ministry to come before this House and explain clearly on the whereabouts of the monies they are stopping the schools from using. Some schools have structures to be renovated and this would be the right time for them to do such kinds of renovations or other activities. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that one of our colleagues, hon. Patrick Nsamba, came here with a picture of anthills that were eating up a school. Many of the structures are Government buildings, where we have spent money to build them. If they are being damaged and no one is caring – 

First, we would like to know - the money was stopped, where is it? Does the Minister of Education and Sports know what happened to the money? 
3.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS)(Mr Denis Obua): Madam Speaker, as raised by the two colleagues, it is, indeed, true that this particular facility that should help our schools to maintain cleanliness is no more. This is an issue that requires an explanation from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development because in a circular to all accounting officers, the minister clearly indicated that they will not be sending money meant for schools until schools re-open. 

I would think that the ministry should be tasked to explain because it is an issue that was also discussed in the top management of the Ministry of Education and Sports yesterday. At the ministry level, we also took it up and raised it with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Now that it is before Parliament and that they even communicated in writing to accounting officers, it would be important for them to explain.

However, it is indeed, a necessity that we must go with whether schools are open or not.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we require the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come on Tuesday. 

MR PATRICK NSAMBA OSHABE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You may recall that this week, I raised a matter to deal with reallocation by Operation Wealth Creation officials of the Budget Parliament passed. Now, the minister is telling us that they have already received circulars on which items they deemed less important.

This matter needs to be – before all this goes on because very many important items, according to Operation Wealth Creation, are deemed unimportant. However, Parliament deemed them very important. I think it is high time the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development came back here and as Parliament, we get to know which items were written off, which items were deemed less important and which items were prioritised. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Of course, we require an explanation.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. What I am seeing is the Minister of Education and Sports running away from his responsibility of fighting for his money. 

When we talk about capitation grant, in the Universal Primary Education schools from places like Kalungu and Kaabong get just about Shs 1 million per term. Once this money is not remitted, banks will close the accounts of these schools. After five months, this will mean that these are non-performing accounts.

Last week, the honourable minister asked headteachers to withdraw Shs 30,000 to slash schools. Hon. Obua said it here. Therefore, the Minister of Education and Sports must come out clearly to defend their ministry. Why don’t they get their money? This money must be at school. Even during UPE time, when they deliver these funds late, it does not go to its intended legal use. Our interest is getting money at schools. Headteachers should be monitoring schools and put the schools back to normal state like cleaning with the little funds they are getting.

By now, the Ministry of Education and Sports should be giving us the programme they have put up. In case COVID-19 lockdown is lifted, how will children go back to schools? Shall we give them food to keep at school? Things have changed but the minister is saying it is the responsibility of the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, yet, they all sit in Cabinet. 

I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development must come and explain, first, what happened to the money and where it is.

Secondly, we would like to know what changes have been effected on the Budget, which we passed so that we can understand what the Government is doing by going behind our back to adjust the Budget without coming back here. Honourable minister, on Tuesday, we want answers to those issues.





PRESENTATION OF PETITIONS 

1. BY MEMBERS OF MATONGO LOST LAND RECOVERY FAMILIES’ ORGANISATION (MLLRFO)

THE SPEAKER: He is not here.

2. BY BODA BODA OPERATORS IN KALIRO DISTRICT

3.46
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for according me this opportunity to present a petition by the boda boda operators in Kaliro District to the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. It is presented under rule 30 of our Rules of Procedure.

Your humble petitioners are citizens of our motherland Uganda, some of whom are graduates but have failed to find jobs for which they were trained, who honestly exercise their duties and lawfully work to earn a living under the hash economic conditions; who in exercise of their constitutional rights, address their grievances to this Parliament as follows:
    1. Your humble petitioners state that they are lawful and responsible citizens – 

THE SPEAKER: Are you reading the whole petition?

MR LUBOGO: Madam Speaker, if you may grant me, they submitted 10 grounds.

THE SPEAKER: Just read the subject and the prayers.

MR LUBOGO: I may submit only on two or three.

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, we have rules.

MR LUBOGO: Okay, the very last one and then the prayer. Madam Speaker, your humble petitioners state that they have patiently and painfully observed other transporters like taxis and bicycle riders carry out their trade and start to live a fairly normal life but unfortunately, your petitioners are still locked up, hungry, stressed, falling sick, their dignity eroded and tempted into habits they must avoid.

They, therefore, submit their prayers to this House as follows;
    1. That the Government opens up the business of boda boda operation and permits your petitioners to carry passengers up to a distance of not exceeding 40 kilometres from their stations while observing applicable operating procedures.
    2. Your petitioners pray that Government takes up the interest on loans that has accrued on the loans they incurred when acquiring the motorcycles for the period from March up to the time of opening up their trade.
    3. That in the event that Government is not opening up their trade in the next seven days, Government should supply them with food to enable them feed their families and save their wives, some of whom are pregnant, and their children who are starving.
    4. That in the unfortunate situation that some bodaboda operators were tempted to breach any of the Standard Operating Procedures to avoid starvation, their motorcycles that were impounded and all cases, which were opened against them; that clemency should be extended to them to have the cases dropped and their motorcycles released.
 
Your humble petitioners shall ever pray. 

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Lubogo. Honourable members, as you heard the prayers, these are the prayers that came in from the bodaboda riders of Nansana, Kira, the city centre and country wide.

I would like to send it to the Minister of Works and Transport. He already has the other petition and he has been quiet. The other minister is here. Minister of Works and Transport, we have a number of petitions, which were sent to your ministry from this industry. I do not know if you are ready or we give you a timeline to come and respond because the country is waiting. The more you keep quiet, the more petitions come.

3.50
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I think I must thank our colleague to have brought this matter. The incident that took place recently, where a boda boda rider set himself ablaze and died, is a very serious matter. 

We have heard of boda boda riders who have been beaten and killed by Local Defence Units. You are aware, Madam Speaker, we are leaders in this country and one of the greatest challenges that the Government and the country are facing is youth unemployment. 

The boda boda has been giving opportunity for these youths to be engaged, to look after themselves and feed their families. Now, you have denied over two million youths a chance at having their daily meals. This is a very serious matter and it cuts across. 

I have very many boda boda riders in Dokolo who are asking me where they should go for posho and beans and I cannot help them.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that matter has been here many times. 

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, the issue of boda bodas is a nationwide concern. This is because almost 95 per cent of their income comes from carrying passengers. Without a passenger, a boda boda cannot operate. 
Finally, we have very many boda bodas at various posts and stations. To get out that boda boda, you have to pay more than Shs 100,000 or above Shs 50,000.

Right now, many of these boda bodas have been confiscated for not having third party and other things, yet, these people are not working. 

The earlier we do it and ensure that boda bodas are on the road, the better because they employ one million people and they have nine million dependents behind them. We need to act right now.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, last week, I read a petition here from the boda boda riders of Kira. I read another one from Nansana. I have read many others on the Floor of this House. Many of them are saying the same thing but the Minister of Works and Transport is silent. (Interjections) I know you used to be a boda boda rider. (Laughter)

3.53
DR KEEFA KIWANUKA (NRM, Kiboga East County, Kiboga): There is an element, which is not directed to the Ministry of Works and Transport, that these boda boda riders, although they were allowed to carry cargo, they are being beaten and their boda bodas are being confiscated at stages in many parts of the country. This has been a public outcry.

There is another element, which is to do with security and which, security needs to look into as to whether the police men have been given the directives to beat them even when they are just carrying cargo or when they are just parked at stages where they are supposed to be. 

That has come up as a matter of serious concern, especially from my constituency.

3.54
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I am speaking as a former boda boda rider. (Laughter) 

I remember last year, we had a motion in the House, we debated and I am sure that a committee of Parliament was established and that committee was supposed to report to the House on the plan on how to manage boda boda business/industry in this country. 

Since that time, I have not had a glimpse of any report concerning the issue of helping my friends, the boda boda men in this country. That is why you find all these problems taking place. The Government promised to bring a comprehensive plan, which plan has not been brought to this House up to now.

The committee was supposed to be comprised of the Minister of works and Transport, the Minister of Kampala Capital City Authority, the Minister of Security; and the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. All of them were supposed to be on that committee that had been established. 

I need to be helped in terms of procedure; whether we are proceeding well because the ministers promised last year, around July. We are now in July, one year down the road. They promised that they would report in six months but unfortunately, they have not come. Madam Speaker, I would like you to help us so that we sort this matter once and for all.

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from the minister quickly.

3.55
MR VICENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Madam Speaker, I would like to bring it to the attention of the House the fact that there is selective application of this policy of stopping boda bodas from carrying passengers. 

In some areas, boda bodas are carrying passengers and the police are doing nothing about it. I think there is some sort of bribing going on. 
The other issue is that amidst this COVID-19, there should be an intervention from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in a way of engaging these people in another activity. There is money. This Parliament has just passed a budget, which has gone to Microfinance Centre. Why can’t we get this money and we engage these people in doing something if boda bodas cannot operate at this time?



3.56
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague for bringing the petition. However, with the case of boda boda at the locked districts on the border, like Busia, it is a very different case; even being seen riding a motorbike seems like a crime.

Therefore, it is my prayer that it is high time. We better allow the boda bodas to work because there is no difference between sitting people in the taxi – who are almost 14 now – and a boda boda carrying a person who is well protected by a mask. Good enough, in Busia, they gave masks that are adequate for riders and passengers. 

Therefore, I urge Government to open up our locked down districts so that people can move freely and be part of Uganda. Currently, coming out of Busia is a big problem.

The boda bodas are suffering. That is why in Busia, there are demonstrations and teargas every day. People have been suffocated and they think that they have no way to express their pain. 

I, therefore, request that the boda boda riders be allowed to work. Let the taxis in the border districts also be allowed to work and let this so-called lockdown at the border districts stop so that we can be part of Uganda. 

3.58
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Madam Speaker, thank you for the opportunity. We cannot afford to ignore the issue of the boda bodas anymore. I do not know why the Ministry of Health ignored developing SOPs for boda bodas as well so that they are able to operate. 

Madam Speaker, ideally, if a boda boda is wearing a helmet and a mask and a passenger is also dressed in a similar way, it should be healthy enough for them to operate. The situation is terrible, especially in rural constituencies. Majority of families have been earning a living from the boda boda business. The crime rate is rising because these people have failed to get what to do. 

We implore the Ministry of Health to develop the SOPs as soon as possible, evaluate them and make sure that the boda bodas are also allowed to operate. If we can allow the taxis and buses, what about the boda bodas? These people are part of the society and they are our people. They are all the time calling that they have nothing to eat, their families are sick. 

Madam Speaker, this issue must be treated with the utmost urgency it deserves because it is putting the lives of many families at risk. The Ministry of Health must take up the mantle and ensure that the boda bodas are also given an opportunity to earn a living. I thank you. 

4.00
DR SAM LYOMOKI (NRM, Workers Representative, National): Madam Speaker, the boda bodas have been raising this issue for a long time. They are organised because they have a national union that organises them. They have raised this matter with the relevant authorities and they have even put in place measures and proposals under which they can operate without undermining the precautionary measures. 

From a medical point of view, my colleague has already analysed that it is possible to have these boda bodas operate without undermining the measures that were put in place. I propose that the relevant authorities, including the ministry, should immediately engage with the boda bodas. First of all, they should be able to put in place what we have been suggesting but also engage with their leadership because they are organised both nationally and locally. 

There is no reason why we should not intervene. Otherwise, we shall push them into unnecessary reactions. My prayer is that there should be engagement, immediately, with the leadership and they agree with the measures that this sector has already proposed. It is just a matter of agreeing and harmonising. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we should hear from the minister. A month ago, the Minister of Works and Transport was on the Floor of this House and he said they had started engaging. Where has the minister gone?

4.01
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As the minister comes, you guided very well when my colleague presented the petition. The petition should apply to the entire country. As I talk, my boda boda association of Amuru is organising their petition and they asked me to bring the petition next week. That means the problem of the boda bodas is countrywide. 

I also recall His Excellency the President directing hon. Gen. Katumba Wamala to give the guidelines on how the boda bodas should operate. Up to now, Gen. Katumba Wamala has never guided or mentioned anything about the operation of boda bodas. Many of the boda bodas are servicing loans; for example, many of the boda bodas in my district have loans. They have taken four or five months without working and very many of them are running away. The issue of boda bodas should be settled once and for all; it is very serious. 

THE SPEAKER: Let us have hon. Kisa and Mitooma very quickly and the minister should come and tell us what you and Gen. Wamala are doing about this issue. 

4.03
MR STEPHEN KISA (NRM, Luuka South County, Luuka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am speaking about something nasty, which happened on Monday. Two boda boda men were riding with passengers and immediately they saw the police patrol, they tried to speed off in order to avoid them. However, the police patrol followed them. Eventually, these people got into a very nasty accident because they were afraid of the police who were chasing after them yet they were trying to look for means of survival. 

I think that in the interest of this country and this particular group of people, who are looking for survival, the Government should do everything possible in the right time to ensure that these people are allowed to operate. Some of them, as you have heard, are committing suicide. People are dying in accidents because they want to escape from the police. I support the petition in its totality so that the issues of the boda bodas are addressed. Thank you. 

4.04
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also join my colleagues in commending the petition. It is really timely. A lot has been said. Most of these boda bodas just earn a little money for the day and they have families. When the Government, after understanding their situation, undertook to distribute food, we thought they were going to reach all of them but this was not the case. 

Since there are no standard operating procedures, some of them in the villages are actually carrying people. You will find them carrying two or three people. If there were standard operating procedures - for example, that they are required to carry one person and wear facemasks, I am sure they would be able to behave because they surely need a living. 

Madam Speaker, let me also say that putting them on halt has been very necessary. We would like to say thank you to His Excellency the President because this saved us from having COVID-19 spread into the communities. The other day I was discussing with my people and they said that some of these boda bodas can go through panyas and cross borders and it would have been easy to import the disease through them. 

However, now we have more understanding of how this disease moves and how we can control it. Therefore, there is no more justification now for making these boda bodas go without a livelihood. Therefore, I join my colleagues –(Interjections) – Can I receive information? 

THE SPEAKER: No. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Therefore, I join my colleagues in urging the Government to – yes, we need standard operating procedures. We do not want to say that they should be allowed to operate en masse. Let the standard operating procedures be put in place and let them be regulated but let them be allowed to work because they need to make a living. Thank you. 

4.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Ms Joy Kabatsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There was one question that we have all failed to understand, to try and see what we can do about it: the question of a boda boda picking someone who is infected and taking them deep inside the communities anywhere. The boda bodas are the only means of transport that can reach anywhere in the communities, where a motor vehicle cannot reach and where a person cannot walk. A boda boda will take somebody and get them deep inside the communities and we are looking at preventing infection into the communities.

So, that question was put before us but we are trying to look for answers. Madam Speaker, the President put this question before us but we are looking for the answers. Members, come with the answers [HON. MEMBERS: “Order.”] do not put me to order. Just give me a way forward – 

THE SPEAKER: No. Take the point of order. 

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Minister of Works and Transport has stated before this House that the boda bodas are the only means of transport that can reach deep inside the countryside. Madam Speaker, we know that people are travelling using taxis and other means. They reach their destinations and find other means of transport including bicycles. People are walking distances and you cannot stop them from walking those distances. 

There are very few places in Uganda, where a taxi drops someone in a distance that they cannot walk. Most of them are accessible places, where someone can walk. There is nothing for the minister to advance and say that the boda bodas are the only means of transport that get people to their destinations.

Bearing in mind that bicycle riders, taxis and other commercial vehicles are operating, is the minister in order to state that boda bodas are the only means of transport that take people deep into the country and yet people can walk and reach their homes. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think the Government should find better reasons. The reasons you are giving are no longer relevant. I do not know whether you are aware that when the lockdown started, people walked from Kampala to their homes. Maybe you are not aware. 

Honourable minister, in fact, in other countries where they have done that kind of lockdown, they have provided food. What have you provided to the boda bodas? You are sitting and deciding but what have you provided for the boda bodas? Do you ever think how their families live, eat and what happens to them? Do you know? 

Honourable minister, you are required to come here with the action taken report under rule 17. Your minister was here one month ago and said he had started engaging. We now want answers about the standard operating procedures. Call item four. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE EVALUATION OF GOVERNMENT’S RESPONSE TO THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Health. They have all disappeared. Item five. 

RESPONSE BY MINISTER TO THE ISSUES RAISED ON THE MANAGEMENT OF FLOODS IN KASESE AND BUNDIBUGYO DISTRICTS AND IN OTHER PARTS OF THE COUNTRY

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Internal Affairs - 

RESPONSES BY MINISTERS TO THE ISSUES RAISED ON THE

    a. NON-PAYMENT OF RISK ALLOWANCES TO POLICE PERSONNEL AT THE FOREFRONT OF ENFORCEMENT OF ADHERENCE TO PRESIDENTIAL DIRECTIVES DURING THE ON-GOING COVID-19 LOCKDOWN

    b. (i) THE DEATH OF A THIRD YEAR STUDENT OF VETERINARY MEDICINE AT MAKERERE UNIVERSITY, MR. TEGU EMMANUEL, AND ACTIONS TAKEN ON ERRANT LDU PERSONNEL IMPLICATED IN VARIOUS TRANSGRESSIONS

    ii) THE DEPLORABLE CONDITION OF NSAMBYA POLICE BARRACKS.

THE SPEAKER: They are not here. Next.


RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS ON THE ESCALATION OF VIOLENT LAND CONFLICTS INVOLVING THE JONAM PEOPLE IN OBIRA VILLAGE, NWOYA DISTRICT, PERPETUATED BY SOME UPDF SOLDIERS

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs is not here. 

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF HEALTH ON THE NEED FOR THE MINISTRY OF HEALTH TO CONSIDER UPGRADING ONE OF THE TWO EXISTING HEALTH CENTRE IV’S IN KALANGALA DISTRICT TO DISTRICT HOSPITAL STATUS 

THE SPEAKER: Go to the next item. 

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS; AND THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS ON THE NEED FOR THE REPATRIATION OF 124 UGANDANS INCLUDING MR SAM MUGUMYA, INCARCERATED AT THE COVID-19 AFFLICTED NDOLO PRISON IN KINSHASA, DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO

THE SPEAKER: They are not here. 

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AD ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ON THE –

    I. INTENTIONS OF GOVERNMENT TO MEET ITS DEBT OBLIGATIONS TO NATIONAL WATER AND SEWERAGE CORPORATION (NWSC) AND;

    II. THE SALARY ENHANCEMENT FOR NON-TEACHING STAFF OF PUBLIC UNIVERSITIES

THE SPEAKER: They are not here.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT ON THE ISSUE RAISE ON THE –

    I. STATUS OF POLLUTION AND DISPOSAL OF WASTE IN RIVER KAFU AND IN SUGAR PLANTATIONS BY PREMIER DISTILLERS LIMITED FACTORY, KYANKWANZI DISTRICT;

    II. ONGOING DISCONNECTION BY THE NATIONAL WATER AND SEWERAGE CORPORATION OF CLIENTS IN THE KAMPALA AREA WITH OUTSTANDING WATER BILLS CONTRARY TO AN EARLIER PARLIAMENTARY RESOLUTION URGING GOVERNMENT TO STAY SUCH DISCONNECTIONS GIVEN THE VITALITY OF WATER IN COMBATING THE EXISTENTIAL THREAT OF COVID-19;

    III. BRUTAL EVICTIONS, EXTORTIONS AND DISPLACEMENT OF LOCAL COMMUNITIES IN SOME FOREST RESERVES IN GOMBA DISTRICT BY THE NATIONAL FORESTRY AUTHORITY.

THE SPEAKER: Are they here?

    I. RESPONSE FROM THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT ON THE –
    II. NEED FOR THE URGENT RECTIFICATION OF ACCIDENT-PRONE BLACK SPOTS ALONG THE KABALE-KISORO HIGHWAY;

    III. REMOVAL OF A ROUNDABOUT ON THE NEWLY CONSTRUCTED MUBENDE-KAKUMIRO-KIBAALE-KAGADI ROAD THAT HAD LED TO A SPIKE IN ROAD ACCIDENTS AND ATTENDANT LOSS OF LIVES;

    IV. REPORT ON THE FATAL BOAT ACCIDENT OF 24TH NOVEMBER 2018 ON LAKE VICTORIA, INVOLVING THE VESSEL, MV TEMPLAR.

THE SPEAKER: We need to answer the questions raised by Members. Answer quickly since we are running out of time. Let us get answers from the Minister of Works and Transport. Take the podium. 

Honourable members, sometime back, I asked the Prime Minister to print a new chart so that we know which ministers have gone where but it has not come. 

4.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr Peter Lokeris): Madam Speaker, I have three questions to be responded to here. In my presentation, they will follow each other. 

First of all, I would like to respond to the question raised by hon. James Buturo on the need for urgent rectification of accident-prone black spots along the Kabale-Kisoro Highway. I am presenting this statement to inform Parliament of the assessment of the black spot at Kanaba on Kabale-Kisoro Road. 

A technical team from the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) was commissioned to undertake a road safety assessment for the black spot, following reports of repeated fatal crashes occurring at Kanaba along the Kabale-Kisoro Road. The site assessment was conducted from 2nd to 3rd July 2020. 

The objective of the assessment was to identify the safety concerns so that measures can be put in place to prevent similar occurrences of crashes in future.

Findings
The black spot is located in Kanaba Sub-County, Kagano Village, which is approximately 65 kilometers from Kabale town along the Kabale-Kisoro Road. 

The following measures are going to be implemented –some of them are being done - at the Kanaba black spot to prevent accidents:

    a) The curve will be clearly delineated with adequate warning and chevron signs; and markings including cat's eyes to alert motorists of the tight curve;
    b) Rumble strips will be installed on the approach lane to slow down traffic as it approaches the curve;
    c) The damaged guardrail will be replaced with a heavy duty guardrail that will be able to restrain any vehicles that may veer off the road; and
    d) Speed limit signs of 50KPH shall be installed 100 meters ahead of the curve on either approach to the tight curve. Traffic police will be advised to enforce the speed limit regularly by stationing their officers at the tight curve.
    e) The super elevation of the horizontal curve will be improved during periodic maintenance or rehabilitation of the road to ensure that the centrifugal forces at the curve are adequately counteracted.
In conclusion, the crashes that were received from the Officer in Charge Kisoro Police Post indicates that 20 lives have been lost since 2017 at the same spot out of which, five were lost in June. 
The findings from the site visit indicate that the motorists involved in the crashes usually fail to safely negotiate the curve. The curve is very constricted and is located after a slope from which motorists that come speeding swerve off the road and eventually crash. 

The road geometry of having a vertical curve that leads into a horizontal curve within the same location as it was dictated by hilly terrain of the area. The road curves so much and a lot is being done and people are on site now, as I speak. 

The second one is a question about the roundabouts-

THE SPEAKER: Is hon. Nsaba Buturo here? Do we have a supplementary? No supplementary. Okay go to the next one.

MR PETER LOKERIS: Madam Speaker, on the eighth sitting of the first meeting of the fifth session of the Tenth Parliament of Uganda held on 24 June 2020, hon. Kisembo Basemera Member of Parliament for Kibaale District, raised concern over the removal of roundabouts on the newly constructed Mubende-Kakumiro-Kibaale-Kagadi Road that had led to a spike in road accidents and attendant loss of lives. 

Madam Speaker, the upgrading of Mubende-Kakumro–Kagadi Road from gravel to a bituminous paved road by a design and build contract is part of the National Roads Development and Maintenance Programme. The project is being funded by the Government of Uganda. 

The Mubende-Kakumiro-Kagadi Road that is 107 kilometres was previously a gravel road except for a highly patched tarmac road on the first 3.4km in Mubende Municipality. It starts from Mubende-District through Kakumiro and Kibaale districts and to Kagadi Town where it joins Kyenjojo-Kabwoya-Kigumba Road. This road is also an alternative route from Kampala to the Albertine graben. 

The road has been upgraded to Class II Asphalt Concrete carriage way of 3.5 meters wide lanes plus 1.5 meters wide Surface dressed shoulders. The road has been widened in towns with wider shoulders of 2 meters. Major towns of Mubende, Kakumiro, Kibaale and Kagadi have been provided with extra parking space on both sides of the road. 

Major Junctions
The road has five major junctions namely Mubende-Kakumiro-Fort Portal road junction, Mubende roundabout, Kakumiro town to Buhimba Nyalweyo road Junction – 

THE SPEAKER: May be just name the road and tell us what you have done. 

MR LOKERIS: Okay, they are all here. We have named the roads and we shall be informing the Speaker what we have done. We are now saying that these roads, which we have named are;
    1) Mubende-Kakumiro Road and; 
    2) Mubende- Fort Portal Road Junction. 

This was previously a T-Junction with a small island for traffic separation. The junction was narrow making it difficult for heavy and long vehicles to turn off from the Fort Portal Road to Kakumiro Road. It is now being widened to improve maneuverability of these vehicles. Therefore it is becoming bigger. 

The current design is a T-junction with a separator island to direct traffic turning off Fort portal Road. The design of junction was done in accordance with technical specification to limit inherent hazard and maintain acceptable traffic capacity. The layout and operation of the junction shall be completed with ability to aid the drivers with good visibility between conflicting movements. 

Mubende Roundabout
This junction was previously a roundabout with a smaller turning radius making maneuverability for bigger trucks and long vehicles very difficult. The roundabout has been upgraded and widened with a bigger turning radius that controls traffic on Mubende-Kakumiro Road, Main Street and Nakayima way. Standard traffic signs will also be installed in addition to other speed calming measures like speed humps and rumble strips. This will be completed by end of September 2020. 

Karuguuza Roundabout
The junction was previously a Y-junction with several turnoffs to Karuguuza Town, Kibaale Bypass and access to Bujuni Church. Traffic control and maneuverability by long vehicles and trucks was difficult on this junction. It has been improved by turning it into a roundabout with a connection to Karuguuza Road, Kibaale Bypass and main road. 

The south bound traffic from Kibaale has been provided with a dedicated left lane for easy maneuverability. The Bujuni Church road was also connected to the main road on the outer side of the curve which has better visibility. The roundabout was essential in order to control speed at the section due to connection to Karuguuza, Bujuni Church and the main road. 

Kibaale District Headquarters Junction
The junction was previously a small roundabout with very steep grade approach of 8 per cent from Kakumiro side while the Kibaale District Headquarters to Kagadi Road was on flatter longitudinal grade. The heavy trucks from Kakumiro side would fail to re-start if they stopped at the top and would roll backwards making this junction dangerous. 

The junction has been constructed as Y-junction with channelized priority intersection at junction to Kibaale District Headquarters. The south approach to the junction is designed with a 7.5 per cent slope making maneuverability easy. The traffic from Kakumiro heading towards Kagadi or Kibaale District Headquarters will be given priority against Kagadi to Kibaale District. 

Therefore, the traffic from Kagadi to Kibaale District Headquarters or Kagadi to Kakumiro shall give way to all traffic from Kakumiro. 

Traffic from district headquarters shall give way to the traffic from Kagadi towards Kakumiro as well as traffic from Kakumiro. Channelization will be done to ensure the turning traffic are staying on their lanes. 

Sunga Junction
This junction was previously a Y-junction with narrow approaches and a steep grade from Kibaale Road. It has been upgraded to a three leg channelized priority intersection at the existing Y-junction.

The Kibaale-Sunga-Kakumiro bound traffic will have priority against the Sunga village road. It will be complete with traffic calming signs and speed humps to control speeds at the approach. 

Safety considerations:
A road safety audit was carried out for the whole road and the major junction at Kibaale District Headquarters. However, due to excitement of the motorists, the speed on the road has increased as the section from Mubende-Kagadi is now complete with asphalt. 

The construction of speed calming measures like safety humps and reflective road signs is ongoing including provision of splinter islands to allow smooth maneuvering by motorists. Speeds will be limited to 50 kilometres per hour in the towns and villages by providing the speed control mechanisms of speed humps, signs and raised pedestrian crossings. 

We believe with these measures fully completed and functional by end of September 2020, the road will be much safer for all motorists. 


The proposed roundabout at Mubende and Karuguuza and priority junctions at Kibaale and Sunga will be able to serve wide and long vehicles plus smaller vehicles without excessive encroachment to the shoulders or opposing lanes and minimum turning effort.

Furthermore, the current design is in compliance with the Ministry of Works and Transport Road Design Manual of 2010. The junctions, therefore, have been designed in accordance with the Design Specifications. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Basemera, any supplementary question? Make just one supplementary. Thank you honourable minister for this elaborate information. 

4.31
MS NOELINE KISEMBO BASEMERA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker for the opportunity. Allow me to lower the mask a bit so that I am be able to speak properly. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if we allow you to speak without a mask, the public is watching.

MS BASEMERA: I would like to thank the minister for the statement. However, I have issues. The junction that we particularly brought on this Floor is the Kibaale Headquarters Junction. The minister, in his statement, agreed with what I submitted here that it is a Y-junction and extremely difficult to negotiate. 

Last Friday, another accident happened there. Our army officer, the head of Bubango Detach got an accident at the same spot and both legs are broken. Right now, he is in hospital. This continues to show that it is a terrible junction and if nothing is done, there will be a problem. 

Madam Speaker, when this issue was presented, you directed that the minister and his team visit the spot, assess the situation and report back. Our prayer was that we reintroduce a roundabout at this spot given that it is prone to accidents. I have a letter that was written by the area Member of Parliament for Buyanja who is the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development; hon. Matia Kasaija. It is dated 11 April 2018. He was still talking about this junction. 

Madam Speaker, if you allow me, I will read just three paragraphs verbatim so that I can show the gravity of the problem so that we do not underrate it because it is posing a risk to all Ugandans who are going to be using this road –

THE SPEAKER: Must you read it? 

MS BASEMERA: I will lay it on the Table. In this letter, the honourable minister and area Member of Parliament was proposing that given the twists and turns on that junction, we would divert traffic and create – there is a road between Katerere and Kikonge. That would avoid all the other corners and make it a straight path for drivers to continue without having all those issues. This was not attended to. 

My prayer is that since the minister has not told us whether it is not possible to re-introduce the round-about but only described the design that is on the ground at the moment, I pray that they re-consider the round-about. Also, we are giving them another option. They can consider making around 2.5 kilometres from Karuguuza Round-about, which you mentioned; move straight from that Katerere to Kikonge. We will avoid all those turns. 

Otherwise, we have two accidents in a span of two weeks. We cannot underrate this and I think it is posing a risk to all Ugandans who are going to be users of this road. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Basemera, does the minister’s letter include a request for a round-about and alternative route? 

MS BASEMERA: Yes. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Lay them on the Table and the Clerk will formally send them to the Minister of Works and Transport. 

MS BASEMERA: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are you also dealing with the accident on the water? 

MR PETER LOKERIS: Yes. 

THE SPEAKER: Please, summarise. 

4.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr Peter Lokeris): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Some of these things are a bit factual. It is not easy to summarise. Allow me to talk about the investigations without addressing the one who brought it. 

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Works and Transport conducted an investigation into the incident of MV Templar, which was completed on 08 February 2019. 

The Ministry of Works and Transport is aware of the delay to submit the final report of findings of the investigation. We waited for the appropriate moment to present the update because people were still looking at problems bringing this about. 

We beg your indulgence that even if we delayed, we were doing something tangible. 

Findings 
MV Templar sunk at latitude zero degree at 11’30.0”N, Longitude 32 degrees by 40’00.0”E. 

MV Templar sunk rapidly at 20:00 hours on 24 November 2018 when water entered into its lower deck holds. The rapid nature of the sinking was worsened by a shift in the passengers on board as the vessel listed beyond 30 degrees angle of stability. The modifications made to the hull of the vessel were carried out at an improvised slipway besides the beach without professional supervision. The hull had visible patches of metallic plates replaced by welding.

MV Templar main deck floor had a concrete finish of 60 millimetres thick with an estimated surface area of 55 square metres. This material is not used anywhere in the world for vessel construction or maintenance. Therefore, the owner modified it.

MV Templar did not have any functioning communication system to make a distress alert call to facilitate timely and co-ordinated rescue operations. The main engine rated at 154 Kilowatt(kw) or 206 horse power(hp) and propulsion system were non-functional and the modification improvised were by attaching two outboard engines at the stern with a disproportional rating of the engines - that is 115hp and 90hp respectively.

The skipper's decision-making process was influenced by the owner's personal determination to succeed hence the skipper abandoning the vessel. The owner then opted for an inexperienced boat operator to act as skipper. The driver said this is bad and the owner opted for another one.

There was no qualified crewmember(s) on board the vessel so there was no possibility to organise the operation for abandonment from the vessel.

MV Templar was under manned with just one crew member on board hence inadequately prepared to deal with emergencies. One crew member could not control the crowds of over 50 persons who were running around when they saw danger.

Inspection and survey of the vessel 
The vessel was operated without inspection and survey by the Ministry of Works and Transport. The modifications carried out were not approved by the flag state (Ministry of Works and Transport).

MV Templar lacked life saving appliances for the passengers it had on board at the time of incident. This increased the severity of the incident as there were no personal floating devices.

Madam Speaker, it should be noted that the conclusions drawn in this report aim to identify the different factors, which contributed to the incident. They are not intended to apportion blame.

MV Templar's modifications were done without taking into account any quality, safety, stability, standard maritime laws or good seamanship practice that caused the vessel's stability and buoyancy to be compromised and when water started to ingress through the hull’s holding spaces, it caused the vessel to sink fast.

The Ministry of Works and Transport recommends that we should fast track enactment of the Inland Water Transport Bill, 2020. The Ministry of Works and Transport is to ensure that where major alterations or repairs that modify the structural soundness or characteristics of a vessel are made, the vessel shall comply with the Lake Victoria Transport Act, 2007. This will be done by conducting regular inspections and surveys and issuing relevant certificates like seaworthiness certificate and manning certificates. Ministry of Works and Transport to conduct scoping exercise to identify safety issues pertaining to passenger/cruise ships on domestic voyages in Uganda and address them accordingly.

Ministry of Works and Transport should set up a Maritime Training Institute. At the moment, we are looking for money to establish a campus at Namasagali, which is an affiliate to Busitema University so that we get skilled people in future.

All vessels transporting more than 12 persons must be equipped with communication system and lifesaving appliances equivalent to the number of people on board, including the crew.

The Government of Uganda should acquire rapid response equipment for search and rescue including oil spill clean-up equipment since we are thinking of oil in future.

The joint search and rescue committee should be revitalised to ensure a coordinated search and rescue exercise for the future occurrences.

The Ministry of Works and Transport should strengthen the Department of Maritime Administration by providing adequate financial resources in order to enhance functions of inspection, registration and licensing regime along with safety awareness programmes. This has taught us that we should follow the law to the letter. 

The ministry, as a matter of policy, should address the issue of counterfeit jackets. Some life jackets are not up the standard that even water can go through them.
 
The ministry should also get police to monitor overloading.

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Works and Transport is doing the following measures:

The Inland Water Transport Bill, 2020 was cleared by Cabinet to be put in the Gazette. Thereafter, we shall bring it to Parliament for debate and endorsement.

We must assent to International Maritime Conventions. The Government has already assented to eight. 

I think I can leave the memorandum of understanding, which we shall be doing.

Madam Speaker, the training institute should be funded so that we start. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Kalwanga, do you have any supplementary question? Honourable minister, I would like to assure you that during this budgeting process, money was appropriated for that marine institute. Therefore, it is up to you to move because the money is there. I can confirm that it is there.

4.45
MR DAVID KALWANGA (Independent, Busujju County, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is quite unfortunate that we are getting such statements that seem not to be working for the people that are concerned. Whatever the minister has said is quite unfair because you cannot come and say that you are now going to start when people have lost their lives.

Madam Speaker, my questions were very clear. I asked, if it is true that the ministry licensed this boat and these people died, is the ministry ready to compensate those families that lost their loved ones?

Secondly, despite the report they are giving us, we are getting other information. We just wanted to balance that of the ministry and that of other people. First of all, the owner died. Right now, you are not even mentioning the exact number of people that died on that boat. It means you sat down, got us a mango tree report and for us, we take it! We should not pretend as if we are from heaven. Let us come out with clear information of whatever happened. We lost our people and we want to know what exactly was behind it.

Madam Speaker, I am not contented with this report. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. We shall have to think further and see what else can be done. Honourable members, we have used more than one hour of the private members time, let us go back to the National Coffee Bill.

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NATIONAL COFFEE BILL, 2018

Clause 22
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 22 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22 agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yesterday, when we adjourned, we asked the minister, the chairperson and the stakeholders to meet and see how we can organise the composition of the board of the authority. No, it was not clause 22; it was the composition of the board, which is clause 14.

MS OKORI-MOE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. As you guided yesterday, we were able to sit with the ministers and we agreed that the board composition should be nine members so that we delete Ministry of Local Government representatives, we delete Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries representatives, and we also delete one farmer representative. We now remain with the chairman, representative of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, representative of Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, representative of National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO) because NARO is very important for research, and coffee production is all about research. We also have one representative of coffee farmers, one representative of coffee processors, one representative of coffee exporters, one representative of coffee roasters and the managing director UCDA. I beg to move. 

MS WEKOMBA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Yesterday, we advised the Chairperson of the committee that a third of the representatives of the board should include the women. We wanted the women to be on the board but we concede that in clause 3 of the Bill, we insert the following words after the word “women drawn from a recognised women coffee association.” 

I beg to submit, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, supposing the representative from trade is a woman, does she fall here or not? If you are just talking about the unions, the may – 

MS WEKOMBA: Madam Chairperson, it is for technicality because we wanted a woman who at least, has been in this business and has the technical capacity. That is why we would prefer that be drawn from a recognised women coffee association.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, what you could say, “at least one third of members of the board shall be women, including one from a recognised coffee association” instead of saying all of them should come from the coffee association.

MS WEKOMBA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us see whether the minister or the chairperson agrees with that proposal before you come. Chairperson, do you agree with what we have also amended? Maybe you are still consulting.

MS OKORI-MOE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Initially, what has been happening is that from these constituencies, which I could call Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development whenever names are sourced, they request for a name of one male and one female; so is for NARO and Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and even the farmers.

That is where they have been getting the one third from. If we say, we get if from a women organisation, I am not so sure which one specifically we should bring on board. Therefore, I beg that we support this position unless if the minister has advised –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. We would like to thank the minister for conceding to nine. That is a good idea that we are moving to cut costs. Having said that, the categories have been clearly stated: one representative of farmers, one representative of roasters, one representative of processors and one representative of coffee exporters. 

Now, usually coffee exporters are companies. Processors are companies or associations and roasters are the same. I am getting worried if we want to be clear about women, shouldn’t it be that either we put a group of coffee farmers who are women or if we don’t do that, then the minister should really agree with us to find out how he will be managing the process of women. If you say, should come from an organisation of women but the organisations of coffee have been clearly stated - So, why should you really do that?

Secondly, if you are aware the managing director reports to the board. Now, you want to make a managing director a board member. If a managing director is reporting to the board, he who is representing management of the authority for good governance, he comes representing the management. He reports to the board what management has done. 
Now, if you make him part of the board, he will make decisions, which he will go and implement by him/herself. Can’t you see governance problems there?   

What I am trying to put across is that since the managing director is represented, he comes to the board to report on management, why then, should the MD be a board member? That is what I want to put across so that you answer both of them at a go.

THE CHAIRPERSON: May be, we give the honourable minister time to think.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, maybe before the minister comes in – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: On which one?

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: On the issue of women. When you look at clause 14(3) it says that at least one third of the members of the board shall be women. I think the intention was to take care of that need. So, out of the nine, one third shall be women according to clause 14(3). Therefore, there is no need to create another category trying to take care – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable member. Suppose you find that the person is from the Government. The lady from trade is from Government, the lady from finance is from Government, the lady from NARO is from Government. Who is going to speak for the female coffee farmers? That is the issue which hon. Wekomba was talking about. Who is speaking for the women coffee farmers? That is what we have to work on?

MS WEKOMBA: Thank you, Madam Chair for that clarity. I think that is what we should do as women. And that is why I also want women to be part of this board. They have the technical capacity to represent women where they are, down in the villages. Thank you.

MR WOBOYA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to clarify something.

THE CHAIRPERSON: On the women?

MR WOBOYA:  Yes, on the issue of women. You know this Bill had been with us, and we had done a lot of research all over the country. And we never interfaced with any women’s coffee farmers associations. In fact, wherever we went, we found farmers who were both men and women. 

I am wondering where these associations are coming from now. When we went to Mbale, we talked to people of Bugisu Cooperative Union. There were both women and men. When we went to the west, we interacted with the people of cooperative societies. They were both men and women. So, I do not know of specific women’s associations that my sister is referring to here. I do not think we should lose focus on the point.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us do this. We had stood over this, so you be thinking as we go to clause 23. Let us go to clause 23. You be thinking about it. 

MS OKORI-MOE: Did you say clause 22?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Clause 23. We had left 22, we had made a small change there. Now let us discuss clause 23. Is there anything on clause 23? 

MS BASEMERA: Madam Chairperson, on clause 23 subsection (3) on the second line, I would like to move that we replace “is” with “shall be” to read as follows: “Subject to this Act, and to the general supervision and control of the board, the managing director shall be responsible for…”, instead of “is responsible for”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay honourable members that is a small amendment. I hope it is not offending anybody. I now put the question to clause 23 as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23, as amended, agreed to.




Clause 24
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, clause 24 is introducing a board secretary. I have looked at the Company Act which talks about secretaries to the board and company secretaries, and which I want to quote verbatim. 

Madam Chairperson, why I am rising on this is that a board secretary in this context is being given only responsibilities but we are not defining the qualifications of a board secretary. 

In the current laws, the board secretary is the one who keeps the company seal. The board secretary, if I can copy from the Companies Act, it says in Section 190 of the Companies’ Act, “A secretary of a public company must be an advocate of the high court. A person who by virtue of his or her holding or having held another position or his being a member of any other body appears to the directors to be capable of discharging this function, and should be a member or is qualified to be a member of the Institute of the Chartered Public Accountants in Uganda or the Institute of Chartered Secretaries and Administrators.” 

Now, Madam Chairperson, in this current state, we are saying that “There shall be a board secretary -”, but we are not prescribing the qualifications of the board secretary. 

I would like to move an amendment to this that first, “There shall be a board secretary who shall conform to section 190 of the Companies Act.” The justification is that we must get a secretary who has a legal background and can advise the board in a better way about the management of the authority.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister, what is your view?

MS OKORI-MOE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. According to the Companies Act, a board secretary is supposed to be an advocate. And when you read clause 1(d), he is supposed to be providing legal advice on all activities of the authority. 

To give an example, Madam Chairperson, I was a board member in Uganda Wildlife Authority from 2012 to 2015, and the board secretary was the legal counsel to the Wildlife Authority. 

Therefore, I really do not see why my brother should disagree with the proposition of the committee.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable member, you are now supporting him. He said he wants to see the qualifications of the secretary to the board, and you are also saying that indeed part of the work he does is the legal work. You are supporting him.

MS OKORI-MOE: Oh, sorry. Sometimes he is a bad neighbour. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Did you actually state your proposal?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to state: “(1) There shall be a secretary to the board. (2) The person to be appointed secretary to the board shall be a qualified person as per the Companies Act, section 190.”  

The justification is that we bring the whole section 190, but we can define it. We can say, “For a person to be appointed a board secretary, shall be a person qualified under Section 190 of the Companies Act and must be-
    a) an advocate of the high court;
    b) a person who, by virtual of his or her holding or having held any other position, or his or her being a member of any other body, appears to the director to be capable of discharging those functions;
    c) (c) a member of or is qualified to be a member of the Institute of Chartered Public Accountants of Uganda or Institute of Chartered Secretaries and Administrators.”

The justification is that this is to ensure that we really get a person who has a legal background and is capable of representing the board at any particular time if legal matters arise.

THE CHAIRPERSON: If the secretary is defined under Section 190 of the Companies Act, why don’t we just say “… as provided for under Section 190 of the Companies Act”?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, “as provided for under Section 190 of the Companies Act”. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Chairperson, the language itself – let us have one sentence. I accept to have one sentence to read as “There shall be a secretary to the board appointed according to the Companies Act.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: “… appointed by the board…”

MR SSEMPIJJA: “… appointed by the board in accordance with the Companies Act.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. “… according to Section 190 of the Companies Act.” Okay, honourable members, I put the question that clause 24 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26
MS OKORI-MOE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. On clause 26, the committee proposes that we amend it by deleting the words “and licensing” appearing at caption of Part IV. The justification is that registration and licensing should appear in separate parts, for clarity. I beg to move.

MS KABANDA: Madam Chairperson, I also have a proposal to delete sub-clause (2)(b). The justification is that sub-clause (2)(b) is not practical since UCDA has no capacity to do a timely evaluation, which will cause delay on the works of the farmers. It may even create shortage. 

Secondly, the provision does not put into account the fact that land can be improved to make it suitable for growing coffee; and three it has an effect of taking away the right of the person to use the land as the person wishes.

I also have another proposal on clause 26, that we insert a new sub-clause, immediately after sub-section (2), to read as follows: “Where a person is registered as a coffee farmer in sub-clause (1), if that person is married, the registration of that person as a coffee farmer shall extend to that person’s spouse.” 

The requirement to extend the registration of a farmer to his or her spouse is to recognise women’s right and to ensure equitable sharing of resources and decision-making. I beg to move. 

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, I associate myself with the amendment by hon. Mary Kabanda of deleting sub-clause (2)(b). The ministry, and even UCDA, cannot require farmers to do soil evaluation when we know that, in this country, we have only two laboratories that can do that work. Therefore, that should be deleted. Farmers will be discouraged. We want them to do registration but once we bring up complicated registration processes, it will be hard.

On sub-clause (2)(a), there is a requirement to even register those who are intending. You cannot register people who are just intending to grow coffee. 

So, we have a challenge in sub-clause (2)(a) and I propose that we delete the part that says “or shall have proof of his or her intention to commence growing coffee within a period of six months.” Let us leave it to state that registration is for coffee farmers. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, what do you say about the proposal to delete clause 26(2)(b), which I also think would be a deterrent because it means if one has no certificate that you have cleared them, they cannot grow coffee. 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Chairperson, first of all, I would like to agree with the committee chairperson on the issue of deleting the words, “and licensing.” That will mean registration is done first and licensing is done somewhere else because it is not for the farmers to do that.

Secondly, we can delete sub-clause (2)(b); I accept –(Interjections) – come again. There is a provision in the Bill that says that the minister will make regulations on the type, varieties and areas where coffee should be grown. That one will cater for this.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What about the proposal that the registration of the farmer should include the spouse?

MR SSEMPIJJA: We are going into areas which are not really part of this law – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, let me give the minister information. It is not only the spouse. Take the example of when your father gives you a coffee plantation and he was a registered farmer. It should also apply to inheritance and where someone – for example, I come and buy your coffee farm, I should have the certificate showing that I am a registered coffee farmer. Therefore, it is not only the spouse. 

I also agree with the proposal to delete the proof that you are going to grow coffee. I also agree to the idea of catering for those who inherit the coffee plantations, the spouses and those who buy or who are donated to. 

The justification is that if I have got a farm already existing, then I automatically become a registered farmer. There is no need for me to start applying. Therefore, Mr Minister, what we are trying to say – (Interruption)

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Chairperson, I think that is convincing in as far as registration is concerned. Why should we take one person in a family? I think this is what hon. Kabanda wants to cure. Will that go to 27?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there was a proposal that clause 26 (2) (a) be amended by removing all the words after the word “registration”. I do not know what the minister says about that.

MR SSEMPIJJA: “…he or she shall either be growing coffee at the time of registration”. We stop there.

THE CHAIRPERSON: “…shall be growing coffee at the time of registration.”

MR SSEMPIJJA: Yes, “…shall be growing coffee at the time of registration.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, we remove the word “either” and all the words after “registration”. Is that okay?

MR SSEMPIJJA: That is okay, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Finally, there is the issue of the spouse and spouses. You will draft that and come back. 

I put the question that clause 26 be amended as proposed.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we have to delete subclause (b).

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have deleted it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Have you deleted it?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes. We deleted subclause (b) and the other parts.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: So, the drafting will be to add the spouse and buyers. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have deleted clause 26 (2) (b) entirely. Under clause 26 (2) (a), we have removed the word “either” and everything from “or shall have”. All those have been deleted. In the meantime, we await the final drafting on the issue of the spouses. Let us stand over that and go to clause 27.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, I would like to make a comment on that particular aspect of spouses. I think the best way to treat it is to create a clear provision for what hon. Nandala-Mafabi is trying to introduce.

The intended amendment by hon. Mary Kabanda should stand the way it is and we approve it. If we want anything on transfer of ownership, it should be a standalone provision. That is my suggestion.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The transfers are governed by the law of succession; isn’t it?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Chairperson, this was to do with registration. It seems you register one person in the family. How will the wife then come in, or the person inheriting the property? I think that is what hon. Kabanda had in mind.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think hon. Kabanda was worried that if the main registered person dies, the others lose their rights since they are not registered. That was her worry.

MS AOGON: Madam Chairperson, I understood what she brought on board. However, the issue is about sharing. There was a complaint that after working in the garden, at the time of sale, you find that the men have an opportunity to access the money but they leave the women behind. This is why I am saying you should extend registration to the spouse so that at the time of sharing, she is on board. That is the issue. It is about sharing of resources.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Suppose the children want to share? Honourable minister, what was the rationale for -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, hon. Aogon is confusing us - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, what was the rationale for registration so that we can understand how to move?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Chairperson, the rationale behind registration is traceability. Traceability is actually becoming a very important aspect in all enterprises. Consumers want to know where the coffee, fish or sim sim comes from and the variety they produce. Sometimes they even want to know the producers. This is where the producers come in.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, do they register the farmers or the farm, since the farm is the source?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Chairperson, farms are not registered in our setting. As you know, it is the farmer. We actually want to bring on board the farmers. As we talk, for coffee especially, buyers all over the world want to buy from the farmer. There are many buyers who want to skip the middlemen and buy from farmers. Therefore, this is the starting point in trying to get our farmers known officially. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The information I would like to give to the minister is that some of us deal in organic coffee. When you are certified as an organic farmer, the coffee that leaves your farm for the market will have your name tagged to it and the area it comes from. What the minister is trying to say is that during the time of registration, they also register that you have two acres of coffee, for example. When you produce your coffee, it is tagged. This is basically for the organic farmers.

I have a number of worries with registering a farmer. During the time of graduated tax, they would come and count the number of coffee trees, which would then translate into the amount of the graduated tax the farmer must pay. I am not sure if here you are targeting to tax people according to – 

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, you raised a very important matter   and I thought the minister should consider it. The Government is advising farmers to do farming as a business. In their little way, farmers are starting to think about registering their farms as a business. If I register it as a business, then my farm stops being in my name. There are farmers of that nature.

Madam Chairperson, you have raised a very important question; should we focus this registration or tag it to the name of the farmer or the farm? Our opinion is - (Interruption)

 MR OTHIENO: Thank you, hon. Nsamba, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that the details of what is registered is extensively covered under clause 27. Clause 26 is simply a principle that a farmer shall be registered. The details of who is registered can be refined when we come to clause 27.

Madam Chairperson, I propose that as we look at those details, we should handle them under clause 27. Otherwise, clause 26 basically handles the principle that a framer will be registered. Now, who this farmer is, is dealt with in clause 27 where we can look at the details. At that stage, the House is at liberty to prescribe who can be registered. That is the information I would like to give to the House.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We had already stood over clause 26 so that we get the drafting. We are now on clause 27. 

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, I gave way to hon. Othieno to give information but he is trying to confuse us. The clause 27(3) that he is talking about contains particulars of each coffee farmer and not each coffee farm. We should focus on the farm. In Mubende, we have Kaweri Coffee, which is a company that can change directors but the farm remains Kaweri Coffee. So, if we focus on the farm, they might get whatever they want.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Most of our coffee farmers, Madam Chairperson, are simple and small-

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, can you separate yourselves.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Do not fight; the Chair has ruled. (Laughter) Madam Chairperson, in our setting, in the coffee subsector, 80 or 90 per cent of the farmers are smallholders; they are not companies like Kaweri. This law is giving a chance to these small farmers to also come on board. This is the gist of this matter.

Hon. Nandala-Mafabi and my chairperson here are aware that in some of these countries, an individual can sell or auction their coffee on the internet. They can say they have over 50 kilogrammes of coffee and they explain how they looked after it and handled it and they say “I want this much” and they sell it online. Therefore, this is why we are bringing in this. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can I invite the chairperson to move the amendments under clause 27.

MS OKORI-MOE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Under clause 27, the committee proposes that we amend the provisions as follows: 
(a) Amend subclause (3) (c) by inserting the words “sub-county, parish” and replacing “or” with “and”, and redraft the provision to read as follows: “(c) the name of the district, sub-county, parish and village in which the coffee farm is located.” 

The justification is: to be all inclusive and for easy traceability.

(b) Insert a new subclause (6) to read as follows: “(6) for avoidance of doubt, registration of farmers shall be on a continuous basis.” 
The justification is that registration of farmers should be carried out all the time in order to allow new farmers to come on board at any time. I beg to move.

MR NANDALA-MAFAABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to give a practical example concerning these new villages and subcounties. There were farmers who were registered in certain villages, subcounties and parishes. When the names changed and they took their coffee, it was rejected on basis that that was no longer their village or parish.

As you may be aware, villages and subcounties change every day; how do you intend to cure the changing of names? Can we say that the village, for the purposes of this law, will be the village existing at the time of registration? We want to cure that to avoid farmers having a problem.

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, as registration goes on, the updating will also be taking place. Therefore, I do not see any problem there.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, also once the names of the places change, the Minister for Local Government informs us. So, it is not a big issue.

MS BASEMERA: Madam Chairperson, I beg that we delete subclause (3) (e) following the clause that we already deleted.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, because we do not want those who are intending; we want those who are -

MS BASEMERA: We are considering only coffee farmers.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Delete clause 27(3)(e). I put the question that clause 27 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 27, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 28
MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to amend the provisions under clause 28 by substituting subclause (1) with the following: 
“(1) Where a farmer –
(a) grows varieties of coffee contrary to the recommendation of the Authority;
(b) neglects a coffee farm; or 
(c) adulterates coffee 
the authority may, after considering the report of the extension officer, and for the purposes of controlling the spread of pests and diseases, and quality control, order that such coffee be uprooted or destroyed.

(2) Notwithstanding the provision of subsection (1), the Authority may direct that a farmer, whose coffee trees have been uprooted, be deregistered.” 

Justification: to act as a measure of controlling the spread of pests and diseases; and for quality control and to provide clear terms and conditions for deregistration, which is lacking in the Bill. I beg to move.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we have no problem with deregistering a farmer who has a bad farm. We must agree that we have no problem with that. 

Secondly, pests which attack coffee do not only come from coffee farms. I hope the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is listening. Neighbouring farms of matooke, for example, which are bad and bushy will have pests that can attack a coffee farm and you know why.

Thirdly, the coffee extension officer you are talking about is not in the village. The person who can justify why we should deregister somebody should be in the village. That is why those years we had the Mutala chief and his job was to ensure that gardens were clean. If they got your garden of matooke or coffee not clean, they would arrest you.

Therefore, Madam Chairperson, the amendment I would like to move, and I request the chairperson and the minister to agree, is that first we must establish tribunals. Since you have mentioned in clause 27 that there will be a village, parish and subcounty, I would like us to establish village tribunals, parish tribunals and subcounty tribunals where we will be determining the cases of farmers to be deregistered. This is because they are the ones who work with farmers on a day-to-day basis.

Madam Chairperson, after we establish the tribunal, then the LCI chairperson of an area, who may be the chairperson of that tribunal, will ensure that not only the coffee gardens are cleaned but also the neighbouring gardens in the farm area are cleaned to avoid pests from attacking the coffee.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not know whether that does not create new bodies and offend Article 93 of the Constitution. If you are to have a tribunal in each village, that will be over 68,000 tribunals, and then you have tribunals at the parishes and subcounties.

MR SSEMPIJJA: On the other hand, Madam Chairperson, there is a technical matter; how long will it take to train these tribunals to the level of experts? The extension officer is the one who knows the diseases, pests and the agronomy in general and they are in a better position to stand before court to talk about this. Therefore, Madam Chairperson, I think that the amendment by the committee is fine.

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, under clause 28, we have a new provision. The committee proposes that we insert a new provision after the clause to read as follows:

“Re-registration 
Any person who was registered as a coffee farmer and subsequently de-registered by the Authority may, at any time, be re-registered with additional terms and conditions as the Authority may specify.”

The justification is: to give farmers a chance to be put back into the register in case their appeal is successful. I beg to move.

Mr PATRICK nsamba: Madam Chairperson, I have a problem with subclause (2), which states thus: “A coffee farmer aggrieved by the decision of the Authority made under subsection (1) may appeal to the Minister.” That is too far for a farmer. 

I think that informs hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s proposal of creating tribunals. If the minister is suggesting that creating tribunals is a difficult proposal, we need a solution. The extension workers are going to become kings and they will treat farmers in any way they want because they will say, “I will de-register you.” Until we have an appeal process, asking the farmer to look for a minister is a very tall order.

Therefore, we need a situation where we can have an appeal process. I think that is why hon. Nandala-Mafabi was proposing creation of tribunals. In the absence of these, the minister should tell us how it should be handled.

The Chairperson: I will not forget that in the Seventh Parliament under the Land Act, we created tribunals for the whole country but they never took off. I am mindful of that - Even that gold must be looked after with other money.

Mr ssempijja: Honourable members, in practice, normally these functions are delegated by the minister. You can include all –(Interjections)- okay, let us add a sentence so that we include delegation. 

The Chairperson: Honourable members, let us first deal with the proposals by the chairperson if there are new ones. She made some proposals under the existing clause 28. She proposes an additional clause under it. 

I put the question that clause 28 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the clause on re-registration is a new clause after clause 28. I beg to move.

The Chairperson: But you mentioned it as (3). To me, the presumption is that there is now clause 28 (1), (2) and (3).

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, it is another clause. I think it was just a typing error. 

The Chairperson: I was saying that we have now added a new subclause under clause 28, which is (3) that you have read.

Mr PATRICK nsamba: Madam Chairperson, the reference to the minister in clause 28(2) creates a big problem. We need to find a solution.

The Chairperson: Can you propose? Would you like them to appeal to the extension worker, region or otherwise?

Mr othieno: I would like to propose a way forward. Ideally, when an act has been committed by the authority, you cannot appeal to the same authority. It will require you to go to a higher authority.

Madam Chairperson, you have correctly guided. The way forward I am proposing is that let this matter be delegated to the minister to come up with regulations to guide on how the appeal process can be conducted.

The Chairperson: Let us hear from another coffee farmer, hon. Katushabe.

Ms katushabe: Madam Chairperson, this issue we are dealing with is very important. Coffee is not like beans or maize that you can uproot today, plant and harvest it in just a few months. It is a crop that takes more than four years to yield. When someone comes and uproots your coffee, it means that it will take another four years for you to get an income from such a crop.

When we are dealing with this law, we need to be realistic. Therefore, I agree with hon. Nandala-Mafabi that before you take a step to uproot someone’s coffee, if you are a technical officer, at least you should call the LC chairperson and all the leaders of the village to warn the coffee farmer at least three times. However, if you leave our farmers in the hands of technical officers, it will not be fair to them.

The Chairperson: Honourable members, I know that coffee farmers have big issues but let us focus. This is an appeal against the decision of the Authority. Where do you want to go? We are looking at clause 28.

Ms katushabe: I propose that the appeal process starts from the village up to the national level. There is a farmer who cannot go to the subcounty but they are growing coffee.

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, we are making a law and some of these things are going to be captured under regulations. The processes of registration –(Interjections)- yes.

Ms katushabe: Madam Chairperson, the law should be clear from the start. This is a very important sector.

The Chairperson: Honourable members, let us focus. We are dealing with de-registration, not uprooting coffee. Look at clause 28 whose headnote is “De-registration of a coffee farmer.” It is the Authority that may de-register after being satisfied. Therefore, if you are aggrieved with the Authority, where do you go? Would you like to go to the village?

Ms alum: Madam Chairperson, you have rightly guided. This is a situation where it is the Authority dealing with this de-registration. The next person up there is the minister.

Earlier on, we were given a provision on re-registration. This will cater for the fear of honourable members. If you were de-registered because of a, b, c, d, there is still another opportunity for you to re-register. Otherwise, I do not know where our colleagues want to go after dealing with the Authority.

The Chairperson: Honourable members, I think you need time to look at the uprooting of the crops and the de-registration.
	
MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Chairperson, we have been building this law based on where we came from. The authority will not go to every farm to deregister. Somebody will have taken steps, for example the extension officers and the local councils. Therefore, by the time, you reach the authority - it is not the extension officer who is going to start uprooting. The issue will eventually go to the authority. Now, if somebody is not satisfied with the authority at that level, which other level is there - (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Honourable minister, you have been part of cooperatives and you know that one of the reasons cooperative societies had problems is that if you did not give the people who came come from the centre money, they would not – A farmer plants coffee for five years and when they are about to make money or they are making money, someone comes and says, “I am going to deregister you” because the law says he can deregister and when he deregisters, his word is final. 

Coffee is not like maize from which one makes posho for eating; it is not a one-year crop. Therefore, what we are trying to say is that before you deregister a farmer - If you deregister a coffee farmer, it means that coffee – (Interruption)

MR SSEMPIJJA: The man is not the authority. The authority is comprised of very senior officers not just a man.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Honourable minister, I am trying to help you. If you looked at the colonial law, a person would start from the Mutala chief to the parish chief and the final person was the county chief, and what the county chief would determine would be the law. In this case, if you deregister a farmer in my village in Busamaga, the only place he can go to is the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries headquarters in Entebbe. However, he has never even been to Mbale town, Kampala, or Entebbe, yet he has to file an appeal with hon. Ssempijja at the ministry headquarters in Entebbe.

Madam Chairperson, we seek your guidance on how to help this village person at the local level so by the time the extension worker has to do it, the village must be convinced – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I asked the minister to move the House to resume so that we get time to understand the uprooting, the village chief and the authority.


MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME
 
5.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The National Coffee Bill, 2018” and passed clauses 23, 24, 25, clause 26 which was stood over and a section was deleted, and clause 27 which was also stood over for further consultation. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE
5.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it seems this is a very interesting area. Therefore, I think you should give yourselves time to look at what we have passed. If there are proposals which have been circulated, please study them and share them with the minister and the committee chairperson. House adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.52 p.m. and adjourned until 21 July 2020 at 2.00 p.m.)



