Wednesday 14th July, 1999

Parliament met at 2.20 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

(The House was called to order)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, you recall that yesterday, arising from the observation made by hon. Pinto about the inadequacy of facilities for the Committees, we concluded the subsequent debate by directing that the Prime Minister, in consultation with the relevant Ministers, should make a statement today at 2.00 p.m.  However, arising from that, there was some other discussions held outside Parliament, and it was agreed that the Prime Minister, hon. Ruhakana-Rugunda and other Ministers, including the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs, will meet the Business and Welfare Committee where all Chairmen of our  Sessional and Standing Committees are members so that this matter is discussed; and I believe after this discussion, a statement will be made to Parliament tomorrow.

MR. AWORI:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank you for your comments throwing more light on a matter which is very relevant to our procedure here.  Mr. Speaker, I will also seek guidance from the Chair on a matter of the use of this Chamber.  For some of us, we take it that no business can be transacted in this Chamber unless the Speaker is presiding over it; and I note with concern that this tradition is being violated.  I wish to know, Mr. Speaker, whether it is with your knowledge and permission or have you condoned this irregular manner of the use of this holy and august House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, I think hon. Aggrey Awori is right in his observation, but then you have to take into account the circumstances under which some Committees operated under mango trees and this is not acceptable. I mean, as you pointed out yesterday, if this happened, it must have been caused by inadequacies of facilities, but I think this will end as soon as we leave the meeting with the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister and other Ministers today.  But you are right, I mean, your observation is taken but it is because of the circumstances. In some vernaculars we have a proverbial to the effect that when you are moving on a very shoddy river, you may even touch trees with thorns not because you want to, but because of circumstances that may force you to do that.  So, if this happened, it must have been caused by those circumstances, but I think it will not continue.  I thank you.

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT TO PARLIAMENT ON WEDNESDAY 2ND JUNE, 1999.

(Debate continued)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Ya, hon. Nsubuga Mayanja - but before you start, as you know, yesterday your contribution took 50 minutes and I am inclined now to give you only 10 minutes to wind up, not more than that. You may take 3 minutes but not more than 10 minutes so that we can get the Seconder and then the debate proceeds.

MR. NSUBUGA MAYANJA (Ntenjeru North, Mukono):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I will just be very brief because of the time factor which has been mentioned by the hon. Speaker.  Hon. Members, I want to aim on three important issues, and the first one is that of security.  I said that the importance of this matter is evidenced by the number of pledges which His Excellency the President committed to this -(Interruption)

MR. NYAI:  Mr. Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure on which I would be very grateful to be enlightened.  Mr. Speaker, when His Excellency gives his State of the Nation Address, it is my conviction that that is a policy statement which is fully supported by his Cabinet.  Therefore, Mr. Speaker, and going by tradition, it has normally been the Rt. hon. Prime Minister who moves the Vote of Thanks.  How do we begin to make a Backbencher Motion as if it is a Government Motion in this House, Mr. Speaker, without seeking leave of this House?  Is it in order, Mr. Speaker?  That is the guidance I am seeking from you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Well, I do not know whether there is anything wrong.  I know, as you said, normally it has been the Prime Minister or his deputy and so forth but it should be appreciated that when the President makes a State of the Nation Address, he is communicating a policy from the Executive. And I believe when His Excellency the President is preparing that Address, he gets a feedback from various Ministries because he is talking for the Government. And I believe the Prime Minister must contribute because a Leader of Government Business must contribute a lot of material for that statement.  

That being the case, it may be understandable that maybe a person who has contributed to a speech by the President, stands up to praise the speech which he wrote or contributed to writing. So, I think it is rather that a person who did not contribute praises the speech because here we are thanking the President for the speech and, therefore, it is better that a person who did not contribute makes - so, I see technically nothing wrong for this.  So, I think let us proceed because I will not now invite the Prime Minister to move the Motion because they did it. Let the Members contribute and then wind up this matter. As I said, we are spending three days on it. 

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In the days of the NRC, it was normal practice that a Government Minister moved the Motion of a vote of thanks on the President's speech.  However, as the Speaker has suggested, it was found rather odd that Government praises itself for what it has done. Therefore, it was during those days, Mr. Speaker, that the tradition actually changed and I remember very vividly -(Interruption)

MR. NYAI:  Mr. Speaker, is the hon. Minister in order to say that the tradition changed from the NRC to this Parliament whereas in the past two occasions the vote of thanks has been moved by a very senior Minister, in fact, normally the Rt. hon. Prime Minister? And, Mr. Speaker, whereas I agree with your interpretation and ruling in first matter, it also follows from your speech that since these matters include policy matters, the Mover of the Motion should be in a position to answer on behalf of the Executive.  Now, I do not see a Backbencher answering on behalf of the Executive, Mr. Speaker!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, I think this is really a general debate.  It is really a general debate of Government Policy.  Maybe the Motion is put in such a way that you have to thank but, maybe at the end of the day you may end up by not thanking, I do not know.  So, why do you not contribute as much as you can and then the Government side will come in if they think you are tearing the President's speech, because it is a Motion.  The Motion may be lost, I do not know.  So, why don't we proceed with the debate, we have a limited time.  Yes, hon. Aggrey Awori - but that is the last observation on this matter.

MR. AWORI:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Yesterday, I had great difficulty in contributing or making some remarks towards my hon. Colleague's contribution; I do not know how to call it, contribution, critique, praise - I think it is praise.  Now, Mr. Speaker, my difficulty was, do I criticise him or do I criticise the one he is praising?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, the subject of the debate is the address which was made by the President on 2nd June and I believe each one of you has a copy and has studied this speech. Therefore, you may disagree with the Mover and say," but for me, I think this is not this and the other", that is the purpose of this general debate.  You are not restricted, you are not bound to support the Mover. You may actually take your debate on differently.  So, I do not see the problem. Let us proceed but you have only 10 minutes.

MR. NSUBUGA MAYANJA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the guidance.  Hon. Members and Mr. Speaker, I wanted to address the issue of security as addressed by the President; and I thank him for his contribution and his communication to us in his address.  

In detail, the President talked about what our security is; the problems we have and why we have the problems.  At the end of it, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, the President ended on a very good note by saying that even if people have been fighting him for some time, and even if people had been confused for sometime, he was ready to talk with them, he was ready to forgive and he was ready to support that Amnesty Bill which would come here. And I request Members to support that Bill when it comes here because Uganda has suffered because of these wars and we need peace.  So, I thank the President for the olive branch of saying that he has forgiven the people who are fighting him and by saying that the Amnesty Bill should come and we have peace in Uganda.

Mr. Speaker, I want to address another issue and that is the issue of environment. The President commented about the environment, and I thank him for his comments because he said that the environment, as a major means of our people, must not be mishandled and must be protected.  I am sure, hon. Members, all of you and those who are not in the House here, agree that the issue of the environment is very important, and that is why I was very happy when hon. Karuhanga the other day moved the Motion. The Prime Minister and all of us really contributed very much and said no, we must protect our environment.  So, we must indeed protect our environment because it is not only the area the President, for example, mentioned, that is in Arua and the rest of it, but also places like Masaka.  

In Masaka, for example, we have water being drawn from the north west of the town of Masaka, at the same time, in the south west where the river turns back, they are disposing sewerage and the end result is that of contamination of Masaka town water. Even in Kasese, we have a similar problem. The effluent from the mines is already causing a problem to the National Park, the town of Kasese and the rest of it.  So, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, I would just want to thank the President and continue advising and urging Members to take it very seriously that our environment is at threat and we must indeed try to protect it.  

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. Saziri for giving way. Mr. Speaker, the clarification I am seeking is on issue related to the environment. Is the speaker holding the Floor serious when he says the President was indeed supporting efforts to protect the environment, when it is the President himself last year who was behind the destruction of the great Namanve forest?  

MR. NSUBUGA MAYANJA:  Mr. Speaker, I believe that the hon. Member was part of that group which went to meet the President regarding this issue and I understand he was very convinced and supported the President in the way the President was dealing with the Namanve issue.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I happen to be a member of the Natural Resources Committee on Environment.  It is on record that two years ago, I was one of the committee members then invited by His Excellency the President at Nakasero to discuss the fate of Namanve.  It is also on record that I single handedly came out in the open to oppose my group's position regarding the sale of Namanve to investors.  

Is the speaker holding the Floor in order to allege that I was one of those people who gave away Namanve or supported the destruction of Namanve when I am globally known to be a protector of this great environment -(Laughter)- when I have also got a global award in respect of my efforts to protect -(Interruption)- the Eastern Africa Environmental Leadership Award 1997?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  You see, the problem we have with the two hon. Members is a question of credibility; whom to believe, whom not to believe.  Hon. Lukyamuzi has referred us to records but since I do not have the record, I may not be in position to concert it and to rule one way or the other.  So, I say he proceeds.   

DR. KEZIMBIRA MIYINGO:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I want to inform hon. Lukyamuzi and the House at large that the environment is to be protected and managed by us.  There will be instances where we shall use some of our natural resources in the course of management of the environment for the good of the people of Uganda.  We are not just going to protect everything without logically using the environment.  So, when we use a resource of the environment to the benefit of the people sustainably, that is acceptable in environmental affairs.  Thank you.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Please wind up.

MR. NSUBUGA MAYANJA:  Thank you, hon. Minister.  Hon. Members, I want also to just look at the issue of corruption as addressed by the President. The President, from the beginning of his address up to the end, was seriously concerned with the issue of corruption.  This was not the beginning of his concern against corruption, but it was just another point in time that the President has come up and told the people of Uganda that corruption is an evil, corruption must be fought and corruption must be eliminated.  Indeed, he went a step further in his address to request Members to identify people of integrity and recommend them for appointment positions where they think corruption can be fought from, and the Judicial inquiry taking place regarding The Police is one testimony to show that the President is actually committed to not only talking about corruption, but also to eliminate corruption. 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank His Excellency, the President for his consistent and persistent concern for education of the people of Uganda.

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I thank hon. Saziri Nsubuga for giving way.  He mentioned that an example of the President's concern over corruption is the appointment of the ongoing Judicial Commission of Inquiry into the Police.  The President is on record as having said that he is aware the Police is thoroughly rotten.  Now, if the President is aware that the Police is rotten, what is the use of the Judicial Commission of Inquiry into something which is already rotten?  Can the hon. Member clarify on this matter?  It is already concluded that the Police is rotten and a whole head of state has said that the Police is rotten, is the hon. Justice Ssebutinde whom the President calls the 'girl' simply going to ratify and come up with the conclusion that the Police is rotten?  Thank you.

MR. SAZIRI MAYANJA:  Thank you, hon. Omara Atubo.  The question he is raising is very important and the clarification I want to give is that the President has complained about corruption and he is trying to find out the sources of corruption.  He is also trying to give solutions to corruption.  There is no way the President could have made this decision without setting up such inquiries as that one.  He now knows more about the Police than he knew before - (interruption).

MR. KARUHANGA:   We have been reading in the press recently that the Minister of State for Internal Affairs, hon. Sarah Kibirige from Rakai and hon. Miria Matembe took the judge to a four hour grilling into stopping her from performing her normal duties. The public and we Members of Parliament are concerned. Although we have seen some kind of explanation from one Minister, we have not seen another explanation from another Minister. Hon. Matembe has said what she has said but one of the Ministers in charge of the Police has been very quiet.  So, we do not know whether the judge is affected or not.  Could the Member holding the Floor in charge of this debate confirm or deny whether this has -  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I think, hon. Minister, you may want to respond now.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Actually, I would like her to respond.

MS. KIYINGI NAMUSOKE:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker and Mr. Speaker, may I first of all inform hon. Karuhanga that my name is Sarah Namusoke and I have no other name, especially not Kibirige and when I finally change my name, this House will be informed.  

Mr. Speaker, in reference to the question at hand, the statement that was issued by the hon. Minister for Integrity was issued on behalf of both of us.  It is only because I could not be around because I was invited to be guest of honour at a function, I had to go but it was issued on behalf of both of us, and we both contributed to that statement.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. SAZIRI MAYANJA:  Mr. Speaker, I said I just wanted to contribute on the UPE and the President, in as far as his State of nation address was concerned.  Mr. Speaker, I want to say that,  as early as 1776, a philosopher and economist by the names of Adam Smith - (interruption) -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, I thought  you had contributed on UPE yesterday?

MR. SAZIRI MAYANJA:  I just want to affirm what I said that I thank the President for his commitment on this issue and just call upon Members to actually support the President's endeavour in trying to promote Universal Primary Education and I am very sure from what I have seen and heard from Members that they also thank the President for that endeavour to promote Universal Education in our country.  So, Mr. Speaker, for the time being, I beg to move.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MS. EGUNYU ASEMO  (Ngora County, Soroti):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise to second the Motion and to commend His Excellency the President for the clear and precise exposition of Government policy that has not only properly articulated development needs of this country, but also unveiled strategic programmes to ensure national development. Mr. Speaker, permit me to make a few comments and remarks about key areas that were touched by His Excellency.  I would like to begin by addressing the economic growth.  

According to his Excellency, the economic growth stands at 7.8 per cent, albeit hon. Members will agree that there has been marked industrial growth - there has been growth in the construction industry and general economic growth throughout the country.  However, hon. Members, many critics will jump and say, this economic growth is not reflected in the rural countryside, and indeed in some areas, it has not been so apparent but -  Mr. Speaker, protect me from hon. Ben Wacha.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Please allow the hon. Member to make her contribution.

MS. EGUNYU ASEMO:  I am sure that hon. Members will agree that Government has tried to address the poorest of the poor, especially women.  There is no Government programme which does not have a gender component and I think Government is trying to see that the rural poor are addressed.  Right now, in the Presidential address, you will notice that there are certain specific programmes and policies which are intended to address rural poverty and I think that should be commended.  

For example, restocking, the provision of agricultural implements to people in conflict areas, the operationalisation of the university  fund which is intended to address the unemployment among the youth;  these are all commendable measures.  There is the policy that now the women Councils should have a specific allocation from Entandikwa funds.  I think we should all uphold this and say this is some remarkable effort on the part of Government and see what we can do to support it.  I therefore, would like to commend Government for now coming out to address the issue of rural poverty.  Of course when I am thanking the Government, the President is part of the Government and I think when he speaks, he speaks on behalf of the Government.  

Hon. Speaker, I now turn to Government's fiscal policy.  You will no doubt agree with me that any country that manages to control inflation must be having remarkable fiscal policies and I do agree that our fiscal policies have been commendable however, when you reach the Banking sector, as you note, His Excellency in his address lamented that despite the fact that the inflation stands below 10 per cent, there are still problems within the banking sector which His Excellency attributed to corruption.  Indeed, corruption in the banking sector is undermining positive developments in the country, and I would like us to look at this corruption in the banking sector.  

You will notice that the corruption takes the form of inside lending or insider lending or insider related lending and other malpractice which are enhanced by the nature of ownership and management of some of these Commercial Banks and this has been coupled with lack of proper supervision on the part of Bank of Uganda.  It is, therefore, imperative that in this 4th Session of Parliament, Government should table a Bill reviewing the banking laws and Parliament should come to enact a reviewed law addressing these problems within the banking sector because a good banking sector is very crucial to the development of this country.  However, be that as it may, Government should be commended for coming out and taking very hard decisions - they are very hard decisions because if you look at the closure of some of these banks, it was very necessary but at the same time, it affected the business community and the general citizens of this country.  

I would like to say that I commend Government for closing the dead banks, as the President put it, because the issue of insider lending is really because of the owners of these banks trying to use the Banking sector to recapitalise their own businesses and if the Government did not step in to close them, the country would have suffered more.  So, I commend.  Thank you.

MR. AWORI:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker and I would also like to thank the hon. Member for giving a way the Floor.  I would like to know from the hon. Member speaking on behalf of the Government and supporting the Government policy, can she confirm factually that the Cooperative Bank was closed because of inside lending, and that the managers misused the depositors' money?  Can she confirm that in this House, instead of lumping things together for the sake of the President?  Can you confirm, Madam speaker, that Cooperative Bank was closed because of inside lending by the owners?

MR. LUKYAMUZI:   Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker and I thank the speaker holding the Floor for giving way.  The clarification I am seeking is with reference to the banks the speaker has alluded to.  It is evident with reference to the report of the National Economy Committee in Parliament that part of the blame for the bad banking policies in the country is attributed to the Central Bank - Bank of Uganda - which never warned these banks in time to correct their mistakes. Now, aware of the fact that the Central Bank is part of Government policy in banking, is that not a contradiction for you to blame the banks while you praise the sources of bad policy?  A clarification.

MS. EGUNYU ASEMO:  Thank you, hon. Awori and hon. Ken Lukyamuzi.  If you had been more attentive, hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, you should have heard that I said part of the problems with the banking system is lack of proper supervision by Bank of Uganda and it is on record hon. Ken Lukyamuzi.  

Now, turning to hon. Aggrey Awori, it is true that I did say that there are problems related to insider lending but I also did say that there are problems which can be attributed to Bank of Uganda and as regards the Co-operative Bank, right now the issue is being investigated and there is a Committee of Parliament sitting but I would like to observe that the supervisory role of Bank of Uganda specifically with reference to the Co-operative Bank was lacking and I was going to address the issue of the Cooperative Bank at a later stage in my presentation.  However, I would like to address it now since part of what I wanted to talk about was relating to the move now to sale off the bank and I was saying that - (interruption) 

MR. WACHA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, thank you hon. Egunyu for giving way.  Mr. Speaker, hon. Egunyu has raised a very important matter in respect to banking.  Since she is supporting this exposition of Government policies, can she tell me whether there is, as a matter of Government policy, a new banking law in the offing?

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to give two pieces of information.

MR. NYAI:  Mr. Speaker, I believe in Parliamentary practice it is traditional that the hon. Member who gives way answers the question raised by any hon. Member following.  The question was not directed to any Minister in this House, Mr. Speaker.  Are we now going to mess up our procedure because of this? 

MS. EGUNYU:  Hon. Speaker , I would like to say that I am well aware that Government is currently reviewing the laws on banking and I was reliably informed of this before I mentioned that matter. And now that the Minister wanted to give information, I yield the Floor to the hon. Minister.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE:  Thank you very much, hon. Egunyu.  Mr. Speaker, I want to give two pieces of information.  One is that, it is true that the Cooperative Bank did not have as many problems in terms of inside lending as Greenland Bank but certainly, it is not only inside lending that causes the  collapse of a bank.  In fact, the major part that causes a bank to collapse is insolvency because inside lending per se may not necessarily collapse the bank but if it gets to a certain extent that you make it illiquid, then the bank collapses and the Cooperative Bank had a problem of insolvency, and therefore, it could not continue.  In the long run, it could have created more problems for the rest of the economy. 

Secondly, on the question of the new law on banking, proposals for amending the Financial Institutions Statute are being made to strengthen the banking sector to increase the capital requirements and to also put in elements of control in order to be able to deal with managers that actually mismanage both in the short and in the long run.  Thank you. 

DR. OKULO-EPAK: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now that the hon. Minister responsible for Finances has spoken, I am seeking clarification from him on what happened to the 3,000,631,000 shillings which Government collected during the currency change as 30 per cent surcharge.  What happened to that money?  Where was it used?  When was it accounted for?

MR. WANGUBO:  Further clarification.

THE SPEAKER:  Is it to the Minister?

MR. WANGUBO:  Yes!  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Following the explanation the Minister has given and the opening up of hon. Egunyu, can we get clarification as to what policy Government has about domestic arrears, if the policy of Government is to close banks when they get insolvent, and yet it is the same Government that owes most of the borrowers billions of shillings from the same banks that have been closed, what Policy has Government got?  Secondly, Mr. Speaker, if the closure is a result of insolvency, why is the Government refusing the re-capitalization of Co-operative Bank that has been offered by many investors?  Thank you.

MR. AWORI:  Mr. Speaker, the hon. Egunyu and her Colleague the Minister of Privatisation have alluded to poor supervisory work on the part of Bank of Uganda.  Could they inform this House whether the Bank of Uganda is properly constituted in numbers and quality of the directors?  Two, Mr. Speaker, on the matter of the Co-operative Bank, could they confirm to this House that this Bank has not yet been sold to certain bidders?  And finally, Mr. Speaker, maybe I will seek your guidance.  Is it true that the Attorney General has advised the Governor of the Bank of Uganda to disobey this House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  But you know, hon. Members, you will be given opportunity to make your contribution, criticism and what not.  Why do you not keep some of these matters so that we restrict these clarifications?

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, in 1987, May 17th, there was a currency exchange.  At that time, the total of money supply was approaching approximately 1.4 trillion and the idea was to reduce the amount of currency in circulation.  The only way to do it was to issue new currency against the old currency.   Although 10,000 shillings was to be equal to the then one million at exchange, there was a conversion rate of 30 percent.  That conversion rate was not going to Government, it was a monitory instrument to control currency in circulation and to be able to create a situation of monitory frugality and stability.  

Mr. Speaker, on the question of domestic arrears, Government has got a programme to pay all the domestic arrears which you have already seen in the Budget.  The domestic arrears which come to about 261 billion shillings will be paid over a period of three years.  In the first year, which is this financial year, the provision is 120 billion shillings, and with immediate effect, all accounting officers have been instructed not to contract any further domestic arrears and to only deal in cash.  And we encourage you as Members of Parliament to encourage everybody and  to ensure that they do not supply credit, or give credit facilities to Government so that we may contain the domestic arrears problem.  The best way to contain domestic arrears is to ensure that each Ministry that buys from you opens a letter of credit irrevocable with the Central Bank so that you are assured of being paid at the end of your supply period. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I think that if you have any clarification, you should wait for him to complete whatever he wants to say, then you can seek a clarification.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE:  Mr. Speaker, I also want to comment that the Central Bank is being strengthened to increase its supervisory capacity and sooner than later, everything will be fine because if there was a lapse in supervision, it is being addressed very seriously. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. LWANGA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I seek clarification from the Minister concerning what he is saying.  He has told us that Government, over the next three years, is planning on paying the domestic arrears. I believe that the business community has been forced to lend money to Government and  I believe that this same business community owes these banks which are collapsing a lot of money.  Can you clarify how you plan on ensuring that the whole being of the business community is going to be maintained when the money belonging to the business community has been rustled away from them?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Please, I will give you an opportunity to contribute.  Would you answer hon. Minister?

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Thank you very much, and I thank the hon. Minister for accepting.  Indeed, the people I represent from Rubaga South have long sent me to inquire on an issue which Dr. Okulo Epak raised, the 30 percent.  You have only explained to us what you did. We would like you to tell us where the money went, and what it did?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Minister, please answer, then we will proceed with the contribution.  I thought hon. Tim Lwanga sought a clarification from you, ?

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE:   Mr. Speaker, I have said that on domestic arrears we are going to pay them over a period of three years but it is not quite true to say that all the domestic arrears are owed to the business community.  In fact, the major part of it is actually to parastatal organisations.  

You may also be aware that the parastatal organisations have a problem with having domestic arrears with government.  Nevertheless, if you look at the indebtedness of these parastatal bodies to Government, they are actually quite  high.  I will give you an example: Uganda Railways owes Government 360 billion shillings, but Government also owes it some money.  So, in the long run, really, the Government is not owing anything to Uganda Railways, if Uganda Railways had to pay what it owes.  Nearly all of  the business community is going to be paid this year so that we do not stifle and get them stunted but in the other cases, we are going to see how it can be done in order not to create a situation that - because we cannot pay what we do not have.  And we want to encourage people to stop giving credit to Government.  Thank you.

MS. EGUNYU:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, while continuing to debate this Motion, and it is seconded, I would like to briefly reply to hon. Aggrey Awori who raised the issue of the quality of the directors and their composition with regard to Bank of Uganda.  I would like to say that unless the contrary is proved, we take it that the directors are persons of the requisite quality to discharge the functions.  Mr. Speaker, I would also like to address the issue of the depositors of these closed banks.  

You will notice that His Excellency in his address, according to me, correctly assessed the situation and came to the rescue of those depositors and mainly the business community who had their monies closed in these banks by asserting that the depositors should get all their money.  Some critics are, no doubt, questioning the legality of the proposed payments.  Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, I wish to re-assure you and this nation that Government is acting within the law in directing that the depositors of the closed banks be paid their money.  

The Financial Institutions Statute, 1993 Clause 36 empowers the Minister of Finance to determine the amount of money to be covered by insurance.  Presently, the insured amount is three million.  However, there is no law that specifically limits the amount of money Bank of Uganda should pay the depositors upon liquidation.  Moreover, should the capital of Bank of Uganda be impaired in the course of making such payments, then under the Bank of Uganda Act, Government can make good the financial position of the bank.  So I think it is commendable that Government has seen that it has to come out to assert that these people who were depositors in these closed banks should be paid their money.  

Mr. Speaker, I now turn to corruption.  I call upon this august House to commend His Excellency and the Government for their commitment to fight corruption which has also enabled the hon. Members in this House to make their contribution.  Mr. Speaker, the appointment of the Judicial Commission of Inquiry into the CID has restored the people's faith in Government's commitment to fight corruption and also enhance the Movement image.  Hon. Members, once those entrusted with investigating corruption and other criminal acts and those ensured to secure the enforcement of law and order are clean and held accountable, then and only then can this country be assured that the corrupt will face the full force of the Law.  Therefore, I call upon Members of Parliament and this nation to support this Commission.  

I would like, at this moment, to lament what I read in the papers that the hon. Minister of State for Internal Affairs and the Minister for Integrity had decried the methods being used by the Ssebutinde Commission.  Of course the hon. Ministers have come out to deny it but I think in order to allay all suspicion, once a Commission of Inquiry has been set up, we should not be seen going to direct them how they should conduct their business.  

MR. TIM LWANGA: Mr. Speaker, we all read newspapers and we  read a lot of things in news papers which are written by journalists  but we as leaders are expected to filter the information we read and try to understand and value that information. So, is the hon. Member in order to come to this august House and accuse Ministers on the basis of newspaper stories?  Is she in order?  Also, Mr. Speaker, number 57 of our rules says:  "A Member shall not read his or her speech, but may read extracts from written or printed documents in support of his or her argument, and may refresh his or her memory by reference to notes."   Is she in order to read here?

THE SPEAKER: With regard to the first matter, hon. Member, you should recall that earlier, before she made her contribution, this matter was alluded to by the Minister concerned and she said, she has already made a statement refuting it.  So, I see nothing wrong with her referring to a matter which was in the newspapers which the Minister has come in to deny. As regards her reading her speech, I quite agree with you but I have not seen her reading. Maybe she is just looking at a paper with notes and therefore, can proceed.

MS EGUNYU:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker for that wise ruling.  I would like to assure the House that if I was reading a speech, I would have about twenty pages, but I am not.  I am reading extracts where I find them necessary.  

I would like now to address the policy of privatisation. Hon. Members, I believe the policy of privatisation is good, but the problems that it has experienced have been in the area of implementation.  I believe that if these shortcomings in implementation are addressed, then the benefits accruing to the country would be remarkable.  The positive side of privatisation has been referred to by His Excellency in his address when he pointed out that Pepsi Cola today pays 12 billion in taxes per annum.  However, when you look at the experiences that this Parliament and the country has had from the privatisation of UCB, I would like to say that this experience should be a learning experience, and that we should not hurry off to dispose of Co-operative Bank.  I think this will be in the interest of hon. Aggrey since hitherto he was - so we should not hurry with disposing of Co-operative Bank.  

I would also like to note that the weaknesses in the privatisation process have been mainly in the area of contract negotiations, the preemptive clauses and clauses where Government is required to execute guarantees.  I believe that this should be revised to secure and reflect the national interest.  And, in the implementation of these policies Government is usually guided also by Parliament so, Parliament should make its input through providing the appropriate legislative framework and also monitoring to see how these policies are implemented.  

I would like now to turn to the Bills that have to be passed by this Parliament which His Excellency referred to on page 18 and 19 of his address.  Hon. Members, His Excellency in His address has stated that the Bills like the Electricity Bill, the Referendum Bill and the Amnesty Bill are very important and that it is expected that Parliament, in this session will pass them.  I would like to begin by observing that the Referendum Bill has been passed and is now the Referendum Act.  Of course it has been passed with Amendments.  I would also like to note, Mr. Speaker,  that both sides - the Multipartyists and the Movement are giving the matter serious attention.  Those supporting the multiparty system have launched their participation -(Interruption)

MR. DOMBO: Thank you very much hon. Fiona Egunyu for giving way.  Mr. Speaker, the point of clarification I wish to seek is, when the President gave His Address, he expected this Parliament, like the hon. Member has said, to pass a number of Laws which we would like to do.  But in order for Parliament to pass those laws, we need a conducive atmosphere in which we must operate and that one of them is accommodation in which to work from.  I want to seek clarification whether it is really worthwhile to thank the President when his directive for people to vacate the premises of Parliament has been resisted, and up to now he has done nothing about it.  Thank you very much.

MS EGUNYU:  Thank you, hon. Dombo.  Now when I am thanking the President for his precise Address to this Parliament, I am not supposed and I do not expect myself to just sing praises.  I have also been pointing out where there have been some shortcomings and I was getting to what hon. Dombo has just said in due course, I wish you could give me appropriate time.

Hon. Members, as I was saying, this Parliament has already passed the Referendum Bill with amendments and now it is the Referendum Act.  I was also, in my submission, thanking both parties; the Multipartyists and the Movement for the serious attention they have accorded the matter.  I was further thanking the Multipartyists because they have already launched their participation by a call to their followers to either boycott or, through seminars where they are discussing the merits and the demerits of the referendum. So, I think that is very commendable on the  part of both the Multipartyists and the Movement. So, I think we are getting somewhere with the Referendum Act.

I would like now to talk about the Electricity Bill.  His Excellency did say that the Electricity Bill is one of the important legislations to be passed.  As you are aware, a Motion for a resolution for a government guarantee for AES was deferred until the Electricity Act is in place.  It is therefore imperative that the Executive should table this Bill in Parliament and that this Bill should be debated and disposed of as quickly as possible so that the development of the power sector is addressed.

I would like now to talk about the Amnesty Bill.  I think it is very crucial that we debate this Amnesty Bill. As you all recall, His Excellency did give a blanket amnesty to almost all fighting groups and the ADF but some of these combatants have been hesitant to come out because they do not have a legal guarantee or legal assurance.  So, it is imperative for Parliament and those of us who are committed to peace in this country to move in and have this Bill Tabled and then enacted by Parliament  -(Interruption).

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I thank hon. Fiona Egunyu for giving way. The clarification I am seeking is with regard to the point she has mentioned; that is the amnesty.  Aware of the fact that the President is supposed to be the custodian of peace, he is the President of everybody including the rebels fighting the government, provided that they are Ugandans. Do you not think it is necessary - on top of amnesty  - for the President to accept to talk to the rebels outside Uganda for the good of ensuring that all can be listened to whether enemies or not?

MS. EGUNYU:  Mr. Speaker, I am sure hon. Ken Lukyamuzi knows that amnesty extends not only to the legislative framework but also to the negotiations and talking. So I am sure he wanted to make his contribution which he will do in due course. 

I would like now to address the issue of a conducive environment for Parliament to execute its duties, and to ensure that these laws are passed on time. Mr. Speaker, His Excellency did issue a directive that the premises of Parliament presently occupied by the Police and Foreign Affairs should be vacated and handed over to Parliament.  I would like to say that the process has been a bit slow but something is in the pipeline. And I can assert here that the hon. Minister in charge of the Presidency is doing something about it, and that the Speaker has been meeting with the respective Ministers to see what can be done about it. But I call upon the government to expedite the process.  They said, something is in the pipeline;  it is only that we should call upon government to expedite the process so that we can execute our legislative functions. 

I would like now to turn to security. Mr. Speaker, I would like to say that on the issue of security, His Excellency has articulated the security concerns of this country, and as a means to address insecurity, he has seen that there is need to open up roads in these areas so that the army can move. I would also like to submit that the opening up of these roads, he will also open up these areas, mainly in the mountainous areas and other areas, for social interaction and this would activate development in these areas.

I would also like to commend the policies and the programmes which are supposed to be put in place to ensure that the people in conflict areas get restocked, and that agricultural implements and other things are given to these people.  This is because  -(Interruption) - Mr. Speaker, I am under siege from my two hon. Members here.  Mr. Speaker, I believe that hon. Maj. Kazoora and hon. Wacha -(Laughter and Interruption) 

MR. BEN WACHA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Member is discussing the President's Speech, how does the name Ben Wacha come in? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: She says she wants protection.

MS. EGUNYU: Mr. Speaker, I was seeking protection but it would appear that those around have got the message and I am now secure.  

Mr. Speaker,  as you can note from the mood in the House, I am sure that many hon. Members are anxious to contribute to this particular debate.  I cannot, in the short time available to us to debate this Motion, expound on all these commendable government policies addressed by His Excellency the President.  I therefore yield the Floor with a call to all my hon. Colleagues to give support and to provide a legislative framework for the implementation of these very remarkable government policies. Mr. Speaker, I once again commend His Excellency for his very clear and precise exposition of government policies and programmes.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members. 

MR. NJUBA (Kyadondo, East Mpigi) Mr. Speaker, I must thank you for this opportunity to make this contribution. Traditionally, this is a time when government policies are outlined in the speech and it is elucidated by members of government, particularly those in cabinet.  So, I am a little disappointed that the Motion was moved and supported by the distinguished backbenchers in this House. Now this has some signals; one of them is how serious this House is being taken by government and that is why we are having problems.  I sympathized with the last speaker, trying to answer as the Minister of Finance, as Prime Minister, as Minister for Planning, as Minister for Defence and I admire her courage and wish her luck.

Oon a more serious note, I did listen to the Speech by His Excellency the President and I did read it several times and if it were not for the tradition, I would have rejected it on - there are many other points but, at least, on two points. There is a tendency in this country, and it is a problem in many African countries, to take some institutions or people as irrelevant and a nuisance; that they do not matter, or alternatively that the country they lead is owned by a few individuals, if not by an individual. That we, therefore, are irrelevant but I want to remind Government that we are elected  - each one of us was elected. I was looking at the Rt.hon. Prime Minister but he was also elected somehow.  We owe a duty to inform those who elected us of the programmes that are going on.  Therefore, we should be told in no uncertain terms what is happening.  

I said I have read the Speech and I listened to it. What is conspicuously missing is any reference to the war in Congo. The people I represent from Kyadondo East were very, very disappointed.  I also work in town and many people talk to us; they were very, very disappointed.  We should know what we are doing in Congo;  we should know the progress being made; we should know how much we are spending, even if, I would concede, it was in confidence. What are our losses? What are our gains?  Let me say this.  I am not against going to Congo, after all, all these countries have been conquered. It would be a good thing for us to conquer part of this wilderness, sending hon. Kaijuka to become governor there - (Laughter and Interruption).

MR. KAIJUKA: Mr. Speaker, I am seeking clarification from my distinguished Brother and Friend, hon. Njuba, whether or not in terms of his assessment and analysis and judgement, he thinks that Kaijuka, in a contemporary world, Sir Richard would be suitable for that kind of rule. If he could only clarify.  I thank you.

MR NJUBA:  Mr. Speaker, I only picked upon my very dear Friend Sir Richard because I know he will be the last to take offence, knowing it has come from me, but he has also got experience and some colonial tendencies - (Laughter). Mr. Speaker, on a lighter note, he is popularly known and he accepts to be referred to as "Sir".

So, Mr. Speaker, seriously, if we go to Congo and they have failed to govern Congo, we can govern over there but let the people know.  We want to go there and acquire friends. Some people have been told to go and look after goats and ducks, that  there is a lot of land there but we must know. Alright?  This country must know because it is our country.  We are trustees for the future of this country.  Now, we have been told in the corridors of power quietly that we are there for defence.  Kisangani is several thousand  kilometres from the border - even further I am told, that it is like you try to guard Rwakitura and you station your men in Nabugabo.  There must be another motive! 

So, I am saying, on behalf of the people of Uganda, we are not against peace in this country. Alright?  We want peace in this country but we want to be told the real reasons why we get involved in this.  We want to know, it is our money, it is our soldiers that - I heard somebody came back and shortly passed away - may his soul rest in peace!  We do not know what he acquired.  He might have acquired some funny disease in this bush. So, Mr. Speaker, the people were so disappointed that government chose not to be advised.  

Now agreements have been signed left and right; one was in Tripoli, another one was in Lusaka but no sooner had the ink dried on these papers than a fight erupted. Then some of our good friends said "we are not going to observe", and some of these are people we are backing!  Now what is the position? The other day I heard some people were coming back but our arms and ammunition - armoury was being donated.  This is the second time we have heard of a donation.  The other day they were taken and we left them behind.  Now they were donated and as if to highlight the whole thing, Tanzania wants to have their debt paid.  

So, on all that we are saying this that this country belongs to all of us. We want peace in this country, we want prosperity but we want to know why we have gone so far and yet people come in and kill people in Bundibugyo, in Kasese.  How do we reconcile the two? We are far in there to cut the ADF off yet our people in Bundibugyo and Kasese are dying.  Are we doing justice to our people?  Are we defending them? I do not think hon. Saziri can answer this or hon.Egunyu.  With due respect, these are matters of policy of State and, therefore, we should not be slighted as a House or looked down upon.  If you think we are a nuisance, we can go home; okay, but history will judge you.

I want to move to another point, that is economic growth and economic development.  I want to ask government to please, for once, stop giving us statistics.  The statistics are misleading us. To go and ask a professor, what does it mean, what is economic growth? He says: "To you Njuba, a layman, means these high-rise buildings in Kampala, yes - they say -  people are prosperous."  I said but me and my constituents are broke; they go hungry."  "Oh, then that is why they talk about economic development."  Now whom are we working for?  Are we working for the muyindi, for the World Bank or those people who have the money, or are we working for the ordinary person alone who goes hungry?  We must come up with a policy. How can we lift the living standards of our people? These hand-outs from the World Bank and IMF, I am afraid, will not work.  

Government must find  a solution to the present poverty in this country.  It has to! Can you imagine that half of the children in secondary schools do not go back, have not gone back?  We have UPE but people are going naked, almost.  UPE is good, we are grateful but people who go to schools are going there naked,  they are naked!  What happened with the dreams we had in 1986, the dreams of fundamental change? Others are becoming billionaires and billionaires, the majority are sinking and sinking.  So, please government let us revise this.  

This money we are having as hand‑outs will not help.  I am worried, one day  - you know, in 1980 or around there, the Western powers mooted re-colonising this country - they did.  Today, with the money they are giving us - the loans the Ministry of Finance is talking about, one day the World Bank or one of its Governors will stand up and say, Uganda is so insolvent, we should take it over and rule it!  They will appoint a Governor and all of us will be irrelevant.  Bankruptcy is coming, unless we re-examine the policy. So, Mr. Speaker, Government must consider this, look at it and re-examine its approach seriously.

Before I sit down, I would like to, of course, welcome the law on Amnesty, but it is taking too long.  In fact we should pass it very fast. Even those who are languishing in prison should be set free so that those who are in the bush can realise that we are serious about it.  That is a welcome law, and I am appealing to Members that it should be dealt with quickly and taken.

Finally, on a sad note, I cannot sit down before raising the point of Lady Sebutinde and the two distinguished Ministers.  One of them is a lawyer and she should know that the power of the Commission is equivalent to that of a Court of Law, and she should know better that there is what we call "contempt of court".  If Lady Sebutinde was not kind enough, she could have locked up these ladies - all of them for contempt of court.  I would like to sound a warning, next time you start interfering in judicial proceedings, you are liable to imprisonment.

MS. NAMUSOKE:  Mr. Speaker, I have stood here and given the explanation relating to that incident, basically to say that the issues as were reported were not the issues in our meeting.  Is the hon. Member therefore in order to start accusing us when we categorically stated that that statement was not right?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What has happened is this: It is true you  came here and made a statement that you fully agree with the statement which was made by hon. Matembe, and when she said that, hon. Njuba was present in the House but that he has again referred to this particular issue would mean that he did not believe what you stated and that is all.

MR. NJUBA: Mr. Speaker, I thank you very much for that very wise ruling.  I was in the House, I heard and I stared at the hon. Minister of State for Internal Affairs and said, but the Minister who should have known better is of Ethics and Integrity, hon. Matembe, she knows that you do not go to a Judge and start discussing these things!  I do not think in this case by paying her this visit, justice was seen to have been done.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, hon. Njuba, as we started this debate, I said a Member would be restricted to ten minutes.

MR. NJUBA: This is the very last one, Mr. Speaker.  On another sad note, I learnt from my Constituency, and they asked me to tell the Minister that while we are grateful to the President for promising to pay everybody who had less than Shs.100,000 in Greenland Bank,  when they go there, they do not collect their full dues.  Why is it so?  Lastly, is it true that Uganda Government is the greatest debtor of the Co-operative Bank, and could this have led to its collapse?  Thank you very much.  
MR. ONZIMA (Maracha County, Arua): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I am a radical Movementist and I am in this Parliament on individual merit.  I was voted overwhelmingly, I scored 51 per cent. We were five contestants but the four shared the 49 per cent.  So, that is really overwhelmingly.  Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am here as a courageous, independent and principled Member of Parliament.  Whether in this House or in the International Conference Centre in the Movement Caucus or at State House or Rwakitura, Mr. Speaker, I have always done my best to advise our President on any issue that I think will propel this country forward.  

I remember one of them when there was a lot of noise about the son of the President when he was involved in the recruitment of students from Makerere into the Presidential Protection Unit.  Mr. Speaker, I also talked about our involvement in the Congo when we met the President at his country residence in Rwakitura.  Eventually the positions I expressed in these various places have been approved by even people like His Excellency, the British High Commissioner, when he met us here recently in Parliament.  So, I will continue with that spirit and, I think, for not less than 15 years in this House - (Laughter).  

Mr. Speaker, when the late Gen. Tito Okello took over this country after overthrowing Obote, we came up with an idea that  - I do not know whether this was also in the other parts of the country but at least in Arua, we came up with an idea that each sub-county should elect two elders to form District Elders Association so that in case of any problem, we would consult them.  At that time, Mr. Speaker, I was still a youth, but the people of my sub-county unanimously elected me as one of the elders to represent my home sub‑county of Oluvu.  

Mr. Speaker, in the year 1986, when our gallant soldiers, the then NRA, ejected Tito Okello and the former soldiers who served under Idi Amin, the senior officers in the then Tito Okello government rushed to Arua and summoned the elders of Arua District. I was there.  Mr. Speaker, you can imagine the circumstances under which one would appear before soldiers who were notorious and who had been defeated here and others defeated twice because in 1979, some were defeated by the UNLA and again in 1986, they were defeated by the NRA.

So, what happened was that  some of the soldiers came from the other side of the river - from Acholi land, then the rest in Arua. There are those who were calling themselves FUNA, others were calling themselves the Rescue Front and they all came there in large numbers with their guns.  We were there and they said: "We have come here, there was a peace agreement signed in Nairobi which peace agreement was abused by President Museveni, we have left several brothers of ours on the way stranded, others are wounded  they cannot move.  But now we have come, we want you the elders of Arua District to give us your blessings so that we go and stage another war, a front line at Karuma to give a blow to these NRA."  

This is what they said but then, who could speak in that meeting?  Who could say we are not giving you the blessings to go and fight again?  Nobody!  You can do your own research, but Onzima as usual had this to say: "You have been accused, not even for the first time, for raping women, for looting and killing innocent civilians and that is why you have lost your popularity.  Now, what proof do you have that when we bless you to go back, you will not kill, you will not rape and you will not loot?  If the evidence is there, if you can convince us as your elders, then we shall give you our blessings".  But could there be any way for them to prove that they will change?  It was not there and I strongly opposed the idea of another war.  They surrendered and we opted for peace. So from there, other people started gathering courage.  

Then I told them the second statement: "Because of this very act of yours, you have sold the political future of us the northerners and you have sold it for life very cheaply by looting, by raping and by killing."  So, I do not know what the political future of the people who come from the North is - and may be from the East as it stands today.  So, I do not know, the House will advise me if my assumption has not come true.

Mr. Speaker, the point I want to emphasize here is political stability in this country.  I want political stability in this country, not only for us, but for our grand, grand, grand children.  I believe in internationally accepted transparent and standard democracy for this country and this democracy which is internationally accepted and standard can only be pluralist democracy.  

Mr. Speaker, it is my conviction that in our Movement there is democracy, but that democracy is sub-standard, it is not standard democracy. Mr. Speaker, what is confusing us is that, that sub-standard democracy in the Movement is even made so sophisticated that some Bazungus have even failed to understand that it is a one-party system.  So, I am saying that the President has the capacity to transform the Movement into a political system that is credible and that will propel the Movement even after his second term of office because I do not think there is any other person in the Movement who can transform this Movement into a credible and acceptable political party other than the President himself.

You saw the confusion when we had the national conference of the Movement where about 16 concentrated Movementists all wanted to become the National Political Commissar.  Just one post of a National Political Commissar but 16 candidates wanted to take that post; What ambiguity!  Now, how much confusion will be there in the year 2006 when the President retires?  So, we can only avoid this kind of scenario if he plays his role to guide so that the Movement outlives the President - (interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Karuhanga, as I said we shall restrict Members to ten minutes but now hon. Onzima has gone to 14 minutes.  So, if you interrupt and eat in his time -

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, I wanted to thank hon. Onzima for giving way and get clarification from him.  As I have been following his argument very closely, he said that he believes in an international political standard of pluralism and multipartyism.  He also says that there were 16 people vied to become NPC and he saw through that vying some kind of confusion, and he can not imagine what will happen in the year 2006 when many people will be vying for this office.  He also told us that 6 people vied for a seat in Maracha with him where he achieved a landslide victory of 51 per cent.  At the beginning of his speech he said that he is a radical Movementist.  

At this moment, I am trying to find out, and I can not catch, hon. Onzima's political line.  Is he the radical Movementist who thinks that Museveni is the only person who can change the Movement when he has changed the soldiers who wanted to come back to Karuma from coming to Karuma when he was meeting the elders;  the one who has had this landslide victory and the one who is a radical Movementist?  Why can he not represent himself as a radicle Movementist and change the Movement the way he wants it to be?  Can I find exactly where his political beliefs are?  I am not finding him properly.

MR.AWUZU:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Supplementary to hon. Karuhanga's question, hon. Onzima has been portraying the good side of himself, and he has lastly mentioned the Movement meeting we had in the Conference Centre and he has quoted from the proceedings or the preparations for that meeting.  Fortunately, in that meeting all seats were named alphabetically, and alphabetically his name comes before mine. Unfortunately, his seat was right in front of mine and that seat was empty throughout the conference. He only came to the caucus meeting after the close of the conference and you remember very well how he embarrassed all of us when he came to that meeting after the session was actually closed.  The information I am seeking is,  why did he not attend the conference, why did he come to the after-party and then mess up the after-party?  I would be most grateful if he could throw light on that.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Onzima, you have got three minutes to complete your contribution.  

MR. ONZIMA:  Mr. Speaker, well, in the first place let me start with my Brother the hon. Minister.  Mr. Speaker, when the conference started, I had gone upcountry.  I had a more burning issue at home so I went for it however, I came back, not for that party of the Movement, but I was there, for instance, when the President quoted from the Bible that he was going to act like a shepherd who loses one sheep then he leaves the 99 and goes to look for the one, and he was referring to the hon. Cecilia Ogwal. I was there and when we went to the Movement Caucus at the last moment, Mr. Speaker, I think what I said there which the Minister misunderstood to be an embarrassment was, to the best of my knowledge supported by very many people who are progressive Ugandan Movementists. They supported my view and it was there in the papers in which I was described as a real Member of Parliament. I think maybe it was the Executive that got embarrassed, but the majority of the backbenchers supported my view and congratulated me abundantly.  

Mr. Speaker, as regards what hon. Karuhanga has said, I have made my point clear. I have said that as far as I know the activities of the Movement, at least where I have participated but not in the core of the Movement because there are those  people who were referred to as "conc" and others who are dilute. I am sorry even the hon. Sir Richard was referred at one time during the by-elections in Sheema in the papers as a dilute Movementist.  So that is why I am saying that the President should help us out by sorting out the mess in the Movement by turning it into a political party as was the case in 1980 when he is still in the chair or we shall face extinction.

MR. KAIJUKA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you for giving  way.  I did not quite get your point because I heard you talk about hon. Kaijuka being related with something dilute.  Now, whether it is in the past or present, Kaijuka is Kaijuka and there is no way I can be dilute.  So I wanted him to clarify what he meant.  I thank you.

MR. ONZIMA:  Mr. Speaker, I want to rush two other issues. I am a little bit disorganised because of time factor but I want to say this that when Amin took over from Obote in the early '70s, Amin had this to say that one of the reasons he had taken over from Obote was that Obote had a master plan  for Lango. It was there in the papers.  I was still a small boy in school but as Amin went on with his regime, he in fact turned out to be the  person who had the very master plan he had fought against at the beginning of his era -(Interjection)s- I am time barred, let me wind up with the two issues.  He had a bigger master plan for, what I will say, the people of West Nile from the beginning, contradicting the accusations he had labelled against Obote.  But as time went on, that master plan was reduced from being a master plan for the people of West Nile to a master plan for his own religion, Islam because everywhere you would find that the people surrounding him and even promotions were based on or they were more associated with the Moslem faith. 

Mr. Speaker, it is apparent that we are not very far from that position even today.  Mr. Speaker, I had earlier said I want political stability, I want political power to be  spread evenly in this country, and primary opportunities to be evenly spread in this country. Mr. Speaker, in 1996 I raised the issue of key ministries - Defence, Foreign Affairs, Finance, Education Internal Affairs.  Mr. Speaker, fourteen years down the road these ministries have not crossed the Nile towards the north nor in the east to places like Bugisu, Teso Karamoja.  Mr. Speaker, is this even distribution of power in this country? (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Onzima, I would not have liked to interrupt you but you know, when we started debate, we agreed that we were going to give 10 minutes.  Then you went on I gave you another 15 minutes, now you  are going on and on.  I think it is high time you stopped so that other people can have opportunity to make their contribution.  Make one last sentence then that is the end of it.

MR. ONZIMA:  Finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to say something about the visit of the President to Arua.  Mr. Speaker, in 1997, we were promised roads and power.  In 1997 when we met the President, he said that according to the Ministry of Transport and Communications - although you know he had assured us during the campaigns that the funds were there, the 800 million Dollars had already been secured,  When we met him at Kapeka he said that the hon. Nasasira had assured him that work will begin this year in September.  Then recently when he went to Arua he said it has been pushed ahead a bit, it will be in December.  When he came back from Arua, it is now again said this work will begin in March in the year 2000.  Mr. Speaker, this one is a wrong signal to us.  I now want to propose that -(Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I think make one sentence and please, resume your seat.

MR. ONZIMA:  Finally, Mr. Speaker, I have heard of the recently secured 269 million Dollars to tarmac the roads in Arua and in Bunyoro.  I want to say this;  we are not going to take this wholesale.  I am going to behave like Tomasi did with Jesus. When the roads start and get finished, we shall thank the government  but for purposes of keeping the Ministry of Transport on their toes, Mr. Speaker, I humbly suggest that the road from Karuma to Pakwach, to Arua then to Oraba - just in good spirit - should be re-named after our President, "Museveni Highway" so that this one will constantly be reminding the Ministers and the Ministry of Transport and Communications to have the road tarmacked. It will remain in history and we shall use it as a basis for campaigning for the President and that will solve the problem of Arua.  Thank you, very much, Mr. Speaker. 

MR. RWABITA(Ibanda South, Mbarara):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I stand to support and thank the President for his Speech on the opening of the Fourth Session of the Sixth Parliament on 2nd June 1999.  His speech covers a lot of aspects which are political, social and economic;  and I will restrict myself to about five of them.  One is on UPE.  This is on page two and page four of his address.

H.E the President talked about the importance of UPE in this country, and to me, it is one of the specific government policies that has revolutionalized education for the better because, as it is quoted in his Speech, in 1986, only 58 per cent of the school-going age was in primary school but today, we are talking of 85 per cent. I think this is a very big achievement  and to put it in figures, by 1986 there were only about 2.6 children in primary education, now we are talking about 6 million pupils and I am sure by the year 2003, most of our Ugandan children will be literate, knowing how to read and write.  But then, Mr. Speaker, the UPE has got two elements; one is positive and the other is problematic.  

The positive one is that it is going to accelerate the rate of literacy and, therefore, improve on Uganda's economy because with literate people, it is easy to teach them government policies and any other developmental projects.   Now, we must make sure - and here I am talking about the Ministry of Education - that the curriculum for primary six and seven should be seen to give our children a bit of practical skills because, as you are aware, not every kid will go to secondary school or higher institutions  but after primary seven, if a child knows how to keep animals - livestock; poultry, pigs what have you, he or she knows how to do a bit of agriculture; vegetable growing and what have you,  these skills can give that child at least the capacity to be self reliant even when that child does not go for higher education.  So there is need that the Ministry of Education looks at the primary education curriculum and puts in elements that will help our children in future to be self reliant.

Now, there is another element which is complimentary to UPE.  This is the functional adult literacy programme.  Mr. Speaker, I am calling upon Ministry of Gender and Community Development to make sure that the old people - even young ones who never went to school - get a chance of learning how to read and write,  otherwise, within the next five years, these people will be left in the sea of ignorance and it will be very unfortunate if the old people can not keep pace with the young ones so that our economy and our country can develop equally.  So, functional literacy programmes should be stressed by the Ministry of Gender.

However, Mr. Speaker, UPE has got problems: One is lack of infrastructures like classrooms, latrines and what have you but the problem is - and I am requesting the Minister of State for Primary Education to look into the usage of UPE funds.  To me,  it looks like this money does not go down to the grassroots properly because if it was being used properly, we should be seeing a lot of new structures in many primary schools but at the moment, most of the primary schools still have the old structures.  Where does this money go? 

Then there is an element of building with the parents, of course, contributing to local materials. Of course the headmasters are using the pretext that the children are too many but, Mr. Speaker, I do not buy that excuse because how come that government schools in Kampala and in the urban areas and even private schools where you get 150 and 200 children in primary seven, do pass very well?  It means these people upcountry are using the excuse of having too many kids to lower the standards and to have no facilities because, I think they are simply lazy or they do not use those funds that are given to them properly.  So, we need to look into the performance of the schools upcountry.  The excuse of having too many kids is there, but I do not think this should be a very big excuse to reduce the standard of education while municipal schools with even bigger numbers are doing well.  What is the problem?  Somebody should look into that.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIMARY EDUCATION (Mrs Bitamazire): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  The information I want to give to the Member holding the Floor is that the Ministry of Education and Government and the country at large has so far achieved access to education.  As he has rightly said, the number of students enrolled in primary sections has doubled over the last two years.  He has gone ahead to say that the quality of education should be supervised.  

The information I am giving him and the House is that the Ministry of Education is appealing to all stake holders, starting with the Members of Parliament, to take keen interest in how the funds are being used in schools and what is going on in schools.  To that effect, Mr. Speaker, we have even used the mass media to disseminate information concerning the role of different stake holders in achieving the objectives of education.  So, I would like to say that it is not only the Ministry but every other stake holder, right from home to Members of Parliament. We are all equally concerned and interested.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. RWABITA: Thank you very much, Madam Minister, for that information. Mr. Speaker, another problem we have now is the teacher/student ratio which is now 1:110.  We have heard of this problem of rationalisation of PTCs.  I would like to have a proper explanation by the Minister of Education;  what is the rationale, what is the logic of withdrawing assistance from many PTCs when we still need a lot of teachers?  The ratio of 1:110 is still quite high.  I need to be clarified on the rationale of withdrawing from the PTCs when we still need more teachers. I think this will be explained by the Minister of Education. 

Number two, Mr. Speaker, is the lack of visible planning for secondary schools for the UPE policy. At the moment, the numbers in P.7 are increasing year by year but there is no urgency in the Ministry of Education to build more secondary schools or even take over those which are private, especially those built by parents so that within the next two or three years, we have enough secondary schools.  Where are you going to dump these kids after P.7? There is no infrastructure growth in the secondary schools level at all!  So, I would advise the Minister of Education that instead of waiting to build new ones, they should discuss with their parents, take over some of the private schools which are already in existence and then put in teachers and books so that our kids after P.7 do not linger around and have no schools to go to. 

Let me talk on the question of security.  Mr. Speaker, the general amnesty given by His Excellency the President is most welcome and I think the major objective is to allow rebels to come back home.  This is a very good gesture from government and all people of goodwill should see that it is implemented.  However, the law is not yet in place so, can we have this law put in place so that both the local authorities, the elders in these affected areas and even Members of Parliament can have a guideline on how to handle this issue?  It is very important.  Mr. Speaker, the process of peace is possible if only this amnesty can be agreed upon by the stake holders.  This is so because we have a living example of Teso. 

When the people of Teso were given amnesty, the elders and the local leaders advised their children and sons to come back home and stop destructive wars.  The ex-rebels were well treated.  The young men and women who wanted to stay in the Army were trained and kept in the Army, the others were sent home but assisted to resettle.  The people in camps, especially in the north and in Bundibugyo, in Kasese and in Fort Portal need tools and all necessities of life so that they can live a reasonable life because at the moment, I understand there is a problem with supply of food and even tools and seeds.  For example, in the north it is raining but I do not think these people have got enough seeds to provide for themselves food.  

We are suggesting that in order to improve the diet of displaced people, especially from the north, animals from the western area where there is heavy drought should be bought by government and be given to the people in the north so that these people can get milk and meat and improve on their diet.  Mr. Speaker, the requirements and the needs for these areas are beyond budgetary provisions.  Therefore, I would advise government to call upon NGOs and donor agencies to support our cause.  We should be humble enough to tell the world that we cannot make it alone and these people would be ready, if invited, to bring seeds, utensils and equipment and tools so that these people can easily be resettled in their areas so that the north and the west can be resettled and we achieve peace.  Otherwise, getting these people out of the bush and not resettling them properly can cause us another problem. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. ANTHONY BUTELE (Madi-Okollo County, Arua):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to support the motion. I shall limit my remarks on one or two issues.  One is in relation to page two of the speech, that is inflation versus bank interest.  Mr. Speaker, the President said the rate of inflation is now only five percent but the interest rates are going higher and higher every other day. I request the government, and especially the Ministry of Finance, to try to help us in these bank rates because if you borrow money from any of these banks, for sure you will end up in NPART. I am very sure of that.  

The next thing I would like to say is in connection with the management of these banks.  The President said that all these banks which are managed by Ugandans and headed by UCB are all being mismanaged.  In that case, Mr. Speaker, why do we not surrender the management of these banks, including the Bank of Uganda, to foreigners until we Ugandans are ready to take over the management of these banks?  

The other issue I would like to raise is the issue of the closure of the Co-operative Bank. Mr. Speaker, this is a very, very serious matter. You may not understand the seriousness. I would advise you, hon. Members, to go to your constituencies and do some consultations and see how many co-operators are there in these 214 constituencies.  You will know their strength. The membership of the Co-operative Movement is more than ten million Ugandans.  You just go and assess, it is more than that. Do not take the Co-operative Movement very lightly.  Closure of the Co-operative Bank will affect these people directly or indirectly. Mr. Speaker, the Co-operative Bank did not die, it is alive! 

Yesterday the Mover of the Motion said others are in comma but the Co-operative Bank is very much alive, breathing and talking but Bank of Uganda is keeping the Co-operative Bank in a "safe-house" to see if we Members of Parliament can rescue and liberate that bank.  Bank of Uganda does not have the share holders to have access to the Co-operative Bank which they are keeping in a "safe-house". They do not want the Co-operative Bank to go for treatment. The only thing is now for this House, Mr. Speaker, to rescue the Co-operative Bank to go and do the work for which it was created. 

Now, on the question of insolvency, Mr. Speaker, that was done deliberately.  What has happened is that during the six years  the Co-operative Bank was interfered with and mismanaged by outsiders who had no Co-operative spirit.  They over stated the provision of bad and doubtful debts.  You see, when you do that kind of thing in accounting, you actually make the thing insolvent.  Now, who were those debtors?  The main one is the Government of Uganda which has not paid money owed to the Co-operative Movement!  

Leaving that, Mr. Speaker, I would now like to talk about the issue of power - (interjections) - not political power, it is electricity or power generation.  Mr. Speaker, the President said that the power projects, both Karuma and Bujagali, should go on concurrently.  The people of West Nile have taken serious note of that.  Any deviation from that approach will not be very helpful.  That is why this Parliament said that the overall  Electricity Bill should be passed first.  Fortunately, somewhere in the President's Speech, he made it number five of the Bills to be discussed by this Parliament.  

So, I hope, Mr. Speaker, that this issue will be resolved so that we in West Nile for the first time can have power to develop and make ourselves equal to the rest of Ugandans, rather than using West Nile as a source of raw materials.  We want to add our values there to the tobacco, cotton, Arabica coffee and mangoes in West Nile.  That requires the production of electricity in the West Nile region.  Mr. Speaker, with these few words, I support the motion.  I thank you.

MR. CHEBET MAIKUT (Kween County, Kapchorwa): I thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Mr. Speaker, I would like to begin by generally commending His Excellency the President and his Government for the exposition of a number of issues pertaining in our country in his recent State of the Nation Address to this Parliament.  In particular Mr. Speaker, I would like to commend government for tackling some aspects of social services. I do not need to mention them because some of my Colleagues have mentioned them; things like education, the infrastructure development like roads, telecommunications and so on.  

It will suffice here to mention, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Kapchorwa district are grateful to this government for the extension of power and telecommunications to them.  However, the majority of the people of Kapchorwa district in the two counties of Kongasis and Kween are yet to reap some of the benefits of this power and the telephones.  On that matter, I would like to appeal to government to consider extension of these facilities from Kapchorwa to the other two counties of the district.  

On security, Mr. Speaker, I would only like to comment on one small bit and that is the question of cattle rustling. Mr. Speaker, I submit that the barbaric menace of cattle rustling in our region has completely destroyed the livelihood of all the affected communities.  In Kapchorwa district, for example, not less than 500,000 heads of cattle alone have been rustled by neighbouring Karamojong rustlers over the past 20 years.  In monetary terms, this represents a loss to the people and the district of not less than 50 billion Uganda shillings. Other losses such as the loss of household property and other forms of livestock and the dear loss of over 4000 people have not been taken into consideration.  

I wish, however, to state here, Mr. Speaker, that there have been some positive steps characterised by backward steps in the whole process of pacification and addressing the matter of cattle rustling squarely.  I therefore call upon government to embark decisively and urgently on the disarmament within the region, bearing in mind that currently we have a firepower of not less than 100,000 guns.  Mr. Speaker, I wish also to say that we Members from Kapchorwa District will soon Table to this House a motion seeking to introduce a Private Members Bill which will provide for the compensation for cattle, property and life or blood and this law was existent in the colonial days and was very effective in curbing the menace of cattle rustling in that region.  

On poverty, Mr. Speaker, and general livelihood of our population, many Colleagues will remember that about 55 per cent of our population live below the poverty line. We are given the figure of 293 US dollars per capita income but many of us will recall that many of our population at the level of households have got access to less than an equivalent one dollar per day for their survival, and many of these have got families of not less than five people.  Many of these poor people, according to the UNDP human development report for 1998, live in the North and Eastern parts of Uganda.  

Needless to say, Mr. Speaker, Uganda is one of the 16 poorest countries in the world, capturing the position of 158 out of 174 countries.  Our life expectancy, Mr. Speaker, I am reliably informed, has now reduced from 48 years to about 41 years.  From 48 years average to 41 years life expectancy, this is a very serious indicator of issues of poverty prevailing in our society.  In this perspective, Mr.Speaker, despite successes at the macro level, particularly relating to control of inflation and the general macro economic stability, a number of policies still require review: For instance, the blanket adoption of the liberalisation policy.  

While Government must be commended for appreciating some of the inherent problems affecting the people such as the poverty at household level, Government equally stands to blame for giving relatively very little budgetary allocation to agriculture. Any available support must reach the real farmers, not only those at the top because those are, of course, the mainstream of our economy.  For example, in the last Financial Year, 1998/99, only 1.8 per cent of our total Budget went to agriculture and yet Uganda is a signatory to the World Food Summit which provides, inter alia, that at least every country in the world should target to allot agriculture a minimum of 20 per cent of their total annual budgets per annum  -(Interruption).

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of order.  Is it in order for an hon. Member to come in the House wearing a Congolese kind of uniform and engage another hon. Member, especially a mugole for so long and not participate in the debate?  The hon. Col. Otafire has not participated in this debate and, Mr. Speaker, if you ask him what has been going on he will not tell you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I think it is out of order to engage in a discussion when there is an official contribution going on.  As for the Congolese dress, maybe, it is a national dress, I do not know the linkage but there it is.  Please, wind up now. 

MR. CHEBET MAIKUT:  Mr. Speaker, because of the adoption of some of these policies -(Interruption).

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENTANDIKWA (Miss. Akello):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the hon. Member for giving way.  Mr. Speaker, I wanted to inform the hon. Member that Government has put in place a number of policies to try and fight poverty in the country.  I think that the distribution of things in the various ministries is, perhaps, what does not make it so obvious.  But there is the Agricultural Household Fund which is available in the Ministry of Local Government; there is the Poverty Eradication Fund which addresses issues of poverty eradication in a multi‑sectoral way;  there is the Poverty Alleviation Project which is in the Prime Minister's Office, and of course, there is Entandikwa.  

There are other micro finance ways of trying to fight poverty in the country but I would like to make an appeal to all of our Colleagues here is that, for example, in Entandikwa, when I look at the records, we must go and encourage our population to own these processes and to see the way that the various micro finance institutions work for poverty eradication.  We must try and encourage them not to expect to be given manna. They must themselves generate income through the little money which is injected for poverty eradication.  

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Speaker, I do not know whether the Minister who has just given information is aware that the Entandikwa Scheme has never been brought to Parliament for ratification, being monies expended by government by way of loans.  We have never pronounced ourselves that we have sanctioned such monies to be spent on individuals and, therefore, the Entandikwa Scheme remains illegal.  Is the Minister aware that she is carrying on an illegal activity?

MR. CHEBET MAIKUT:  Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. Minister for giving me information, and hon. Karuhanga for highlighting some of the problems facing the farmers and other people in this country.  Mr. Speaker, I would further want to say that I have with me the Human Development Report for 1998 for Uganda, and even the current one for 1999 which was launched early this week, and the statistics therein are very clear;  clearly spelling out the magnitude of the problem facing the majority of the people of this country, and we cannot run away from this, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I submit that the harder and better the farmers work, the more they are being punished. For example, the production of coffee has increased from about 2,000,000 bags to 4,000,000 bags over the past few years, and yet the real income accruing to the farmers and to the country has declined. 

This brings one question on board, which is a matter of policy that, within Government the policy of having strong teams in negotiating international agreements or negotiating for anything good is still very weak.  Government needs to address this issue very seriously so that the majority of the people of this country are protected and, therefore, their quality of life enhanced.  I shall cite one example. In the EU, for example, our sugar cannot enter the market however much our sugar cane workers and the processors work, however much effort they put in. This is because within the EU they have got an import duty of 400 per cent tax on imported sugar.  In other words, protecting their local production of sugar from sugar‑beat -(Interruption).

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. Member for giving way, and I really appreciate his focusing on agriculture, especially as the chairman of the National Farmers Association  but you see, some of the problems are really historical and, therefore, cannot be remedied in a very short period of time.  For example, when he talks about sugar, it is true that at one time Uganda could export sugar and Uganda had a quota in the world market for this sugar but because at one time sugar production in Uganda dropped to zero, nobody would take us seriously any more. And that has been true, Mr. Speaker, of many other products including textiles and so forth, to the extent that instead of the African, Caribbean and Pacific group of countries  taking benefit of the zero tariff they had for very many of their products in the European Union, it was actually the Asian countries which did not have that advantage which took much more advantage of this market facility. That is one of the reasons why the Lome Convention is actually being challenged and it is going to be abolished.  This is because we are given an advantage which we members of the ACP group of countries did not take care of.  

Lastly, Sir, on coffee; coffee buying was completely liberalised.  I do not think - I stand to be corrected - that the coffee agreement  operates in the world market any more; it does not.  The coffee prices depend on commodity prices quoted nearly everyday and the price paid for coffee at Mombasa is affected by these commodity prices.  As a matter of fact, the price paid to the farmer in recent years has improved many times both in the amount paid and even the speed at which this money is paid.  Therefore, I personally think that coffee has not had it better than it is having it now, as regards the fraction of the price paid for coffee at Mombasa that actually accrues to the farmer at his farm gate.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

MR. CHEBET MAIKUT:  Mr. Speaker, while I appreciate the information given by the hon. Minister, I would like to say that the provisions of the Uruguay Agreement, GATT and the forthcoming World Trade Organisation negotiations due to take place, I am told, at the end of this year, contain far reaching agreements which may have a negative impact on our economy, particularly relating to agriculture and if we do not have a very strong team of government negotiators, then the poor farmers in Uganda will be left behind when other countries are putting in cautionary interventions to cushion productive sectors from this kind of agreements.  

Mr. Speaker, I also wish to say that it is high time Government addressed the question of investment in agriculture, particularly infrastructural development, when addressing poverty; things like irrigation infrastructure and water in the farms.  How do you expect the farmer to borrow money and put it on irrigation? How will you generate the money, let alone the interest rates and so on?  Are we serious in our life-blood of this economy of our country?  

Lastly, Mr. Speaker, I am aware of the time but I would like to comment on two issues. One is the entrance to tertiary institutions of learning like Makerere University.  I would like to say that at this stage, Government needs to come out with a clear policy relating to a fair way of giving admittance to students from some marginalised districts.  Last year alone, Mr. Speaker, the students from my district who got entrance to Makerere University were only four in the whole district!  Is this a fair system of building capacity, given the decentralisation policy?  So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to call upon Government to look into this question of building capacity for our manpower development at tertiary institutions of learning. 

Lastly, Mr. Speaker, I would like to comment on the environment.  I note very seriously the contents of His Excellency the President's speech, that the environment must be given due consideration by protecting it.  But also, Mr. Speaker, I think it is important for one to remember that we can no longer adopt the biblical approach of preaching the Ten Commandments without addressing the real needs of our population. I am told by the experts that annually in Uganda, we consume about 750,000 metric tons of wood to meet our energy requirements in form of charcoal and in form of firewood.  Now, in the absence of any alternatives, how do you expect our people to protect the environment?  By not cutting trees - if we do not have cheap electricity -(Interruption) 
 
MISS. KABASHARIRA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the hon. Member for giving way.  May I be clarified by the hon. Member who comes from Kapchorwa: There is a forest called Kapkwata in his district which  is being cut down completely by a certain Indian. I have not heard him talking about it yet he is complaining of the environment.  Can I be clarified whether cutting those trees without planting trees is good for him?

MR. CHEBET MAIKUT:  Mr. Speaker, I believe that when we are here, we are interested in policy matters.  I do not think we can go to the specifics at this stage.  But suffice it to mention that the Uganda Wild Life Authority has got a policy of dealing with their estates throughout the country, and the Kapkwata softwood plantations and Suam in Kapchorwa district fall under their jurisdiction.  For quite a long time, they have had the administrative system of giving out concessions for harvesting these plantations, and for now over one year, we from Kapchorwa district - particularly the local government has expressed a lot of concern at our own level about the rate at which that plantation is being destroyed, or harvested, as they call it. Indeed, the Kapchorwa local government has put a ban on further harvesting of plantation forests in the whole of the district, and this is affecting over ten concessionaries.  So, with those few remarks, Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank you very much for giving me this opportunity. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, we have to adjourn because, as I told you, there is a meeting to try and solve the problem of sitting the committees.  The Minister, Hon. Ruhakana Rugunda is meeting the Business and Welfare Committee to find a solution to our problem. I am, therefore, reminding Members of this committee, namely the chairpersons of the various Sessional and Standing committees and other elected Members of particular committees, to go and attend the meeting.  

With that we come to the end of today's business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow, at 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose and adjourned until Thursday, 15th July, 1999 at 2.00 p.m.)
