Tuesday, 18 July 2006

Parliament met at 2.35 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, last week I instructed the Clerk to begin the process of elections to the East African Legislative Assembly.  I would now like to give you the update. There will be a notice of nomination in the Uganda Gazette and the rest of the media on Friday, 21 July 2006.  The notice will last five days before the nominations.

The 1st and 2nd of August will be the days for nominations. The political parties will then take on the process of nomination and report to us on 3 August 2006. Thereafter, we shall convey the names of the elected Members to the East African Community Headquarters. Therefore, the process really kicks off on Friday and those who have already notified their whips need not to do so again. Thank you.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL FOR THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF UGANDA FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2005

2.39
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to lay on Table the report and opinions of the Auditor General to the Parliament on the Public Accounts of the Republic of Uganda for the year ended 30 June 2005.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The report will be sent to the relevant committee for scrutiny and report back to this House.

2.40
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Rakai): Madam Speaker, thank you for providing me with this opportunity. I have picked information in my pigeonhole, which I feel is concern of public outcry. I have the document with me here. There is a problem with the extension of the Kenya-Uganda railway pipeline. There was a joint coordination committee, which was appointed by the heads of state who went against Article 123(2) of our Constitution, which mandates that: “Parliament shall make laws to govern ratification of treaties, conventions, agreements or other arrangements made under clause (1) of this Article.”
  
Our government entered into a memorandum of understanding with this pipeline, which is going to be extended from Kenya to Uganda. What is happening now is that - I have got even another document, which states that the minister wrote to the PSs of the relevant ministries and the PSs went ahead. I want to lay these documents on Table so that these documents are committed to the relevant committees to investigate even the action to be taken. If I am allowed I can lay them on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I have not understood what is in the documents. I have not understood the problem. I even think that this is a matter, which might call for a select committee. You cannot just lay it on Table. Would it not have been better to really explain and also come and seek my advice, because already I am thinking of an ad hoc committee? I am thinking of a select committee, but I do not know what the problem is. 

MR KAKOOZA: I am much obliged to accept to come and inform you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the problem, hon. Kakooza?

MR KAKOOZA: The information is about the extension of the pipeline, in which Uganda signed a memorandum of understanding. When government entered into a memorandum of understanding there was a process, which had to be followed.  Therefore, this is what I have been requesting to lay on Table so that you give it to the relevant committee, which will investigate the matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Honourable member, I think laying it on Table is premature. I really think what you need is a specific motion.  I need to read those documents before we know what to do next. You will come and we peruse them before we advise you on the best way to handle them.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO URGE 
GOVERNMENT TO DECLARE NATIONAL DAYS OF PRAYER

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, towards the end of last week, we debated this motion and we had asked a small sub-committee to formulate the final text of the resolution. Could I ask them to report?

2.43
MRS JANET MUSEVENI (NRM, Ruhama County, Ntungamo): Madam Speaker and honourable members, our committee that was formed by the Deputy Speaker the other day harmonised a reading of our motion and today I will not take up much of your time. However, in conclusion of the motion I presented here concerning the national days of prayer, permit me now to say that in humility, I thank God for giving me the courage and fortitude indeed to dare to introduce the name of God in this House, which for so long has believed that the subject of God is not important for a discussion here. 

After reading much of the letters and articles in the print media responding to this motion, some by honourable members of this august House, I have concluded that if indeed the knowledge of God is the beginning of wisdom as the Holy Scriptures tell us, then the lack of wisdom of who God really is must be the tragedy of our times. I, therefore, say that this is the missing link or the missing ingredient in our recipe for development. This is because it is that wisdom that provides clear vision in all that we want to do and without it there is confusion and waste of time and resources.

Madam Speaker, if we as leaders of our people who are called upon to make laws that govern this land can humble ourselves and agree to pass this motion as an instrument to give God His rightful place, then I have no doubt we will be pointing our country in the right direction. The Eighth Parliament will have made a stand for God and I trust that God will make a stand for us. 

To those who question the timing or the appropriateness or the reasons and purpose of this motion, I say that I believe that there is a reason and a time for everything. Ugandans are praying people and have always been so, but this request to Parliament is so that we as representatives of the people can now formalise this prayer culture into a unified nationally recognised structure, publicly acknowledged by the institutions of authority in this land, which has not been the case before. Just like every nation has its flag, let Uganda has its nationally recognised days to pray –(Interruption) 

MR ELIJAH OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure. When you asked hon. Janet Museveni, I thought we were going to hear the harmonised position of the committee that was put in place such that we do not take a lot of time. Because the way I see things move is like we shall end up in debate again. I do not know whether it is procedurally right for me to have brought this at this moment. What should have been the right procedure we would have followed?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, I was also expecting the report because if you start making submissions, they are going to attract a new debate and we do not want to reopen it. If you could report on the outcome of the consultations and we vote. Please, report.

2.48
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Independent, Makindye Division East, Kampala): I thank the Member of Parliament for Ruhama for initiating this motion. Madam Speaker, I also thank you for constituting this committee to harmonise the different positions. We have finally come up with one common position. The MP for Ruhama has given a preamble. 

We had an opportunity over the weekend to listen to public opinion and it was very supportive and positive. Our committee also consulted widely and debated exhaustively. (Laughter) We have finally agreed on the following:

    1) The two days of prayer need not to be public holiday. 
    2) We are going to dedicate two national days of prayer and thanksgiving every year. 
    3) One day will be a day of prayer and will be falling in the first weekend of every calendar year, and the other day will be a day of thanksgiving to fall on the weekend preceding Independence Day. 

Madam Speaker, the last paragraph of the initial motion moved by hon. Janet Museveni is amended as follows: 

“NOW, THEREFORE, this House resolves as follows: 
THAT the Government of the Republic of Uganda designates two national days of prayer and thanksgiving from among the days of prayer of the various denominations of Uganda during the first weekend of every calendar year and during the weekend preceding Independence Day.

THAT all the people of Uganda be urged to observe this day.” 

I beg to move, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mabikke, I want to read the final text. 

“Be it resolved as follows:
THAT the Government of the Republic of Uganda designates two national days of prayer and thanksgiving from among the days of prayer of the various denominations of Uganda, during the first weekend of every calendar year and during the weekend preceding Independence Day respectively. 

THAT all the people of Uganda be urged to observe this day.” 

That is the final text. However, you also have to amend the original resolution; instead of “President”, could you move that we amend it to “Government”?

MR MABIKKE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also move that we amend the text of the motion to read thus: “Motion for a resolution of Parliament to request the Government to designate two national days of prayer and thanksgiving.”  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO 
A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

    (1) The revised revenue and expenditure estimates for the fiscal year 2005/06;

    (2) The budgetary proposals for the estimates of revenue and expenditure for the fiscal year 2006/07

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that motion was moved by the Minister of Finance. I would now like to ask the Leader of the Opposition to respond.

2.53
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I would like to present to you the response from this side on how we understood the budget which was presented by Dr Suruma for the FY 2006/07. 

It has long been settled that the management of the state is a partnership between the ruling party and those not in government like the FDC. The duty of parties not in government is, therefore, not only to keep government in check but also to support government programmes and offer alternative policies and programmes. In the same vein, the ruling party has a duty not only to hear, but also to listen and acknowledge the alternative voice of other political parties. It is, therefore, FDC’s privilege to present the first response to the budget speech under a multi-party dispensation after 25 years.

MR MICHAEL NYEKO:  Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. The MP for Ruhama has completed the business, which had brought her to the front bench. However, I see her continuing to warm the front bench. (Laughter) Is she really in order to continue being there?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know we are discussing a very important matter, namely; the budget. She is consulting with the Minister of Finance. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the theme of the NRM Government budget is, “Enhancing Economic Growth and Household Incomes through Increased Production and Productivity.” In responding to 2006/07 budget, emphasis will be put on many of the statements of the minister as a basis of understanding the direction of his budget. 

The FY 2006/07 budget speech is structured in two parts. The first part reviews the performance of the economy in the year 2005/06 and the second part presents the proposed policies for income and expenditure. The reply to this budget speech will also follow the same structure and, therefore, now I start with the review of the 2005/06 budget performance. 

We notice that the minister’s review of the financial year 2005/06 is limited in both breadths and depths and conceals the blink state and performance of the economy. It also leaves numerous questions unanswered, which questions we shall put to the minister and the NRM Government as a whole with hope that we shall have them answered.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, in performing its constitutional duty to this nation, FDC will use the FY 2005/06 as a basis for evaluating the performance of the NRM party in the next five years. We, therefore, note the information provided as a basis of proposing solutions to the numerous failed promises, policies, and programmes that have compounded household poverty throughout the country. We will then give alternative policies, programmes and budget proposals for redirecting development. We invite the NRM party to make use of our popular plans that have endeared FDC to the people of Uganda. 
 
FY 2005/06 sector performance outlook in agriculture:  

One; Agriculture is the bedrock of Uganda’s economy, yet it has consistently been under funded and continues to attract very little government investment. The sector’s poor and declining performance is a matter of great concern to FDC.  For the information provided by the Minister of Finance we note that in the FY 2005/06, it recorded the lowest annual growth rate since the FY 1991/92:  down from 35.6 percent of GDP in 2004/05 to 34 percent of GDP in 2005/06.

Two; there was also an annual decline of 60 percent in cotton production from 250,000 bales to 100,000 bales in spite of the Shs 5.0 billion invested to enhance productivity in the sub sector to raise production to 300,000 bales.
 
Three; a decline in production and earnings is mentioned but not quantified, despite the fact that a good tax structure was availed to the manufacturers of cigarettes.  

Four; no significant growth (i.e. 0.4 per cent, less than a percent point) is recorded from monitory and non-monitory food crops, which constitute two-thirds of value added agricultural output. This performance was recorded against the background of financial support interventions approved by this House in the financial year 2005/06. These were nine in total: 
    a) Mobilisation and support of at least 8,980 farmers groups, provision of integrated support to 4,000 farmers groups and provision of farm inputs.  We would like to know from the honourable minister, how many groups were supported and where? Of the Shs 7.0 billion allocated for integrated support to farmers, how much was disbursed?
 
    b) Rural micro-finance service provision: could the honourable Minister of Finance inform this House, which micro-finance groups received which support and in which amounts and when? 


    c) Community information system provision: In which parishes was the minister able to establish the community information system? I also want to know the status of the livestock and the crops stock taking exercise, which was allocated Shs 2.0 billion.

    d) Enhancing access to domestic, regional and internal markets was another of the strategic intervention, which the minister identified in the financial 2005/06 to improving agricultural earnings.  May we know from the minister where the new markets were found and what their value is? May we also know to what extent indeed we have improved our terms of trade and balance of payments in the last financial year?  

    e) The intervention was delivery of agriculture inputs; which inputs did the minister provide and in what quantities and where?

    f) Agriculture extension; where and how this was implemented.

    g) Agro-industrial development through enhanced support to research and development - (Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, I would like to beg for your indulgence. I do not know whether it is procedurally right - because hon. Mafabi is referring to the document to which I felt if Members had the opportunity to look at, would really follow. So, I do not know whether it is procedurally right for him to continue reading when we are not benefiting.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the document is going to be issued to you so that you can go and read them at your leisure after this presentation.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, thank you for your wise ruling. It is common knowledge that these documents are always given. The seventh was agro-industrial development through enhanced support to research and development. We want to know what research was undertaken and what were the outputs and outcome of this intervention.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe hon. Mafabi, if you could excuse me a minute. I want us to welcome our guests who are in the gallery. We have on this side students of the University of Birmingham in England. Please, give them a clap and then on this side we have students of St Noah Mawaggali from Jinja. Please stand up. I see also hon. Dan Ogalo of the East African Legislative Assembly, hon. Salaam Musumba, hon. Wandera and hon. Wafula Ogutu.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I thought I had forgotten this side. Thank you very much. The eighth one was extension services through NAADS, which was allocated Shs 5.5 billion. We want to know from the minister the return on this investment on the money. 

The ninth, Madam Speaker, the minister also undertook to clear outstanding arrears of Shs 4.5 billion to cotton seeds farmers. May we know the status of this intervention?
  
Madam Speaker, the control of livestock and animal disease remains a daunting challenge to the country. May we know how far the minister has implemented strategies to ensure that Uganda’s beef and other animals’ products are intentionally certified for export?

All statistics presented by the minister in the industrial sector point to a national crisis. For the nation to fully appreciate the calamity of the industrial sector, the honourable minister must tell this august House what else is wrong with the sector apart from the energy crisis. In the financial year 2005/06, the minister announced major interventions to bolster the industrial sector as the engine of economic growth. May we know from the minister, what value addition in coffee, beans, gum and cotton was realised with the Shs 7.25 billion allocated for this purpose.

The minister also announced that the government would capitalise Uganda Development Bank, which would manage the innovation and industrial fund.  Madam Speaker, may we know from the minister the status of the innovation and industrial fund? May we also know how the Shs 2.75 billion allocated for industrial research and Shs 2.0 billion for the artisans was utilised? 

Madam Speaker, government allocated Shs 22 billions to develop a modern well planned and serviced industrial park at Namanve. May we know from the minister how this money has been utilised and what achievements have been made, if any? 

As we went to hear from the minister, we note that in spite of the above financial allocations – 
    • One, there was a 60 per cent decline in the rate of growth in the industrial in the period of one year.
    • Two, the former manufacturing sector experienced the sharpest decline in growth in the last year from 13.5 per cent to negative 3.5 per cent. That is to say from a double-digit growth to a negative.

    • Three, the construction sector has stagnated at annual growth rate of 10 per cent for the last five consecutive financial years with the imposition of excise duty on cement, a decline in growth and employment in this sub sector is inevitable yet avoidable with good fiscal policy management. 

Madam Speaker, we in the opposition urge government to reduce the cost of construction by abandoning the proposal to increase the cost of cement, steel and other construction materials. It is a belief that Uganda’s land-lockedness and lack of railway transport are enough constraints to industrial development without additional taxes. 

The absence of a clear industrial development policy has left the sector with no direction. This misguided belief that foreigners will develop industries must be re-examined. Government should also demonstrate that it is building linkages between industry and agriculture and develop local capacity in small and medium scale enterprises.

Investment: Madam Speaker and honourable members, domestic savings from investment is a national challenge. The minister confirms in the budget speech that, the rate of domestic savings is low; the bulk of investment is to be private which private construction accounts for the entire rate of 15 per cent realised in the financial year 2005/06 from 8.8 percent in the financial year 2001/02 and foreign direct investment in the last year amounted to only $15 million (that is to say Shs 1.25 million per month). 

We in the opposition recognise the importance of normalising the domestic and foreign investment. However, we note with great concern the ad hoc nature of channelling natural investment and the diminishing role and effectiveness of Uganda Investment Authority in investment promotion. We demand a national debate by this national Assembly on the worrying trend of presidential land donations. 

Madam Speaker, the cost of capital remains a huge disincentive to investment. This is largely due to low domestic savings. This budget of the minister proposes nothing substantial to increase domestic savings, instead government revenue proposers are set to increase the cost of living and consequently reduce household disposable income which will inevitably leave people with nothing to save.

When Uganda Investment Authority was created, it was hoped that it would play the same role that Uganda Development Cooperation played in investments supported by Uganda Development Bank. However, over the years, investment in Uganda has taken the character of allocations without the prerequisite study of bankable development projects being developed, supported and marketed.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, we in the opposition wish to advise that the best way out of this vicious cycle is to reduce the cost of capital by government not participating in borrowing from commercial banks using the Treasury Bills. This can only be attained if government reduces its deficits by cutting down on expenditure. Government should restrict commercial banks from buying government’s securities.

Exports and Imports:

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the minister has avoided addressing a major problem of trade imbalance. We in opposition want to point out the large and growing trade imbalance for which the minister provides no proposals for redress.  Imports in the financial year 2005/06 were $1.9 billion while exports were $0.8 billion. Consequently, a loss in trade of $1.5 billion was registered whose impact on the economy is not acknowledged by the minister.

Export led growth has for a long time been the echo of development in Uganda. However, we note that: one, agriculture which is coffee, cotton, tobacco and wheat remain the major source of export earnings. Two, the export earnings for the whole year were miserably $800 million, or perhaps to make it sound better, the honourable minister recorded it as $0.8 billion. Three, the contribution of remittance of our people in the Diaspora and their contribution to the economy is not mentioned as a source of export earning for the financial year 2005/06, yet it is quite significant.

Madam Speaker, we in the opposition shall expand our trade policy to balance this trade deficit and improve our balance of payments in due course.  However, we believe that creating import substitution incentives and developing our local industries through taxation policies are some of the immediate remedies to this import dependence and the attendant economic cost. Can the Minister of Finance inform the country which strategies he intends to enforce to improve the country’s export capacity?

Monitory developments:

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the minister reports that the performance and the monitory programme were good for the second year running.  Inflation on average is recorded at 5.3 per cent, slightly higher than 5.0 per cent of the target.  Import substitution particularly from petroleum products and customs for East Africa is not recorded. Bank of Uganda is mentioned having had leverage in sterilising the economy and immunising the economy against global inflationary buglers to the deflationary level of 4.4 per cent from 6.4 per cent. However, the impact of these interventions on the economy is not recorded.

Madam Speaker, the Uganda shilling is recorded to have experienced depression pressures from the USA dollar. The shilling depreciated from Shs 1,730 in June 2005 on the open market to Shs 1,857 in October 2005. It was Shs 1,870 as of June 2006. 

The commercial banks weighted average lending rates remain high. Credit to the private sector from the banking system is recorded to have increased by 14.6 percent structured as follows: trade and other services, 60 per cent; manufacturing, 18.5 per cent; and agriculture 10.1 per cent. This clearly shows that agriculture is still worse off.

Following the enactment of the Micro Finance Deposit Taking Act 2003, three micro finance deposit taking institutions were licensed, bringing the total to four recording an increase in credit available for lending. It is not clear from the budget speech when government adopted a strategy of supporting member-used and member-owned financial institutions commonly referred to as savings and credit cooperative organisations.  

To bolster the level of savings, savings mobilisation and savings among the poor and the tool for financial service delivery, the need for medium and long term financing is recognised in paragraph 28 of the budget speech. It is recorded that the NRM Government now intends to restructure Uganda Development Bank and place an industrial fund for private sector development under its charge. We propose that the borrowing repayments of the European Investment Bank, that is apex 1, apex 2, apex 3 and apex 4 in Bank of Uganda be utilised to constitute the initial capital available for long and medium development to Ugandan investors.

Madam Speaker, the East African central banks have adopted a risk-based supervision to strengthen the financial sector and help mobilisation and channel resources to productive sectors. We in the opposition shall continue to monitor this with keen interest.

The revenue collection outturn was Shs 39 billion short of the target in the financial year 2005/06 of the Shs 2,281 billions. In spite of this shortfall, government has set in the financial year 2006/07 to collect Shs 2,567 billion, that is a 16 per cent increment. The Shs 2,685 billion was released to finance the financial year 2005/06 budget, recording a deficit of Shs 443 billion. This according to the minister is truly continued, prudent and fiscal management, of course, the NRM style. 

Donor support of Shs 886 billion which constitute 24 per cent of the financial year 2005/06 budget through the poverty action fund recording the total budget expenditure of Shs 3,760 billion. May we know from the minister whether the Shs 5.0 billion allocated for the capitalisation of UDB has been achieved and whether the export guarantee facility managed by the central bank has now been moved to Uganda Development Bank?

Interest rate development:

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the interest rate and bank charges are high and this is a high cost to the investors. The average rate of 25 per cent per annum for lending and banking charges are a discouragement to borrowing. The government should reduce this rate and banking charges. There is an urgent need for a regulatory body to review the costing of banking charges. Currently, commercial banks are making super profits as a result of these high charges.  

Micro Finance:

Madam Speaker and honourable members, micro finance institutions are lending at a rate of three per cent to six per cent per month, which translates to 36 per cent to 72 per cent per annum. This has only compounded poverty as the poor who are the target of micro finance innovations have sold their assets to repay the loans. The opposition believes the best way is to offer meaningful post to agriculture by establishing an agricultural bank to provide farming loans with experts to support small, medium and large-scale agricultural enterprises.  

We have noted that large resources are allocated in the ministries for micro finance. This should be channelled through banks, and not through ministries. The ministry’s mandate does not include banking business. If government gives loans directly, this would destroy the already built loan payment culture in the micro finance sector. It is now known that government money is for political rewards.  

Madam Speaker and honourable members, there is a danger of managing micro finance under an NRM minister. Not only is it partisan, its constitutionality is questionable as far as managing public funds is concerned. Public funds should be accessed by all taxpayers not just NRM supporters.

The minister states that line ministries and government departments under performed in producing tax revenue. We want to know from the minister, when did the ministries become taxpayers? A clear distinction needs to be made between taxpayers and tax collectors. Government is a consumer of taxes paid and does not pay any tax. Tax collectors are those who collect tax on behalf of government and cannot be called taxpayers. The ministry should instead provide this august House a schedule of the big taxpayers and tax collectors.  

Lands, Environment and Natural Resources:
Madam Speaker and honourable members, when opposition recognises that over 80 per cent of our population is engaged in agriculture, as such land and its usage is a basic source of livelihood. We note with great concern the continued state of landlessness and its attendant inconveniences to the majority of our people, especially in the districts like Kibale, Mayuge and Bugiri. Government’s duty to provide for land ownership and protection was long recognised in the 1995 Constitution. The Land Act 1998 enacted by Parliament set up a land fund to support affected communities to gain land rights and resolve historical land distortions. 

We note the dismal progress made in implementing the 1995 constitutional directive with only 16,000 hectares of land allegedly purchased to date in respect of resolving the land ownership and land rights matters. May we know from the minister where the 16,000 hectares of land were purchased, at what price and how many of our people benefited? We shall at an appropriate time move that budgetary reallocations be made to bolster the land fund as one of the measures of ensuring that our people of Kibale, Mayuge, Bugiri, et cetera gain land rights.

Uganda’s economy is primarily natural resource based. The environment and climatic concerns to sustain the natural resource base are a matter of ongoing interest of opposition. As such, the performance of NEMA, National Forest Authority, the Forest Inspection Division and the Meteorological Department, their capability and capacity must be enhanced and supported financially. The minister should support the urgent need to linkage of the environment concerns to development. They are allocating more resources to environmental conservation.  

Drought as the cause of low power generation and productivity must, therefore, be addressed. However, government should have addressed the cause of drought, not to treat symptoms. The cause of drought is degraded eco-systems and investment should be made in reversing the degraded eco-systems. At an appropriate time, we shall move an allocation for this cause.

Tourism development:

Madam Speaker and honourable members, Uganda tourism development potential is recognised by the opposition. The targets set out by the NRM party to increase the number of international tourists are unclear. However, the potential of internal tourism is not acknowledged or promoted and supported. Until the outstanding subscription arrears to the tourism organisation are cleared, the expected contribution that tourism makes to the economy will remain low. The grading of hotels will also help in improving our international hospitality and boost the sector.  

Madam Speaker, in the financial year 2005/06, international tourists had grown to more than 500,000 annually. May we know from the minister, what tourism infrastructure development took place for which Shs 2.0 billion was allocated in the last financial year?  

Mineral development:

Madam Speaker and honourable members, Uganda’s mineral wealth is not yet optimally exploited to support the country’s economic growth. We note with great optimism the hope of Uganda joining the oil producing and exporting countries (OPEC), with the discovery of commercial quantities in Lake Albert.  

Madam Speaker, with the installation of geological information, documentation and environmental system, Uganda’s geological map will enable government to access the mineral potential and exploit it. However, can the minister tell us how far have they gone in implementing the mineral project?

Roads:

Investment in the road infrastructure has been ongoing. Budgetary provision of Shs 526 billion in the financial year 2005/06 were made for completion of the following roads: Kyegegwa-Kyenjojo road was supposed to be finished by 30 June 2005; Karuma-Orinyo; Orinyo-Akwachi; Fort Portal-Hima; Kagamba-Rukungiri; Busunju-Kiboga-Hoima and Jinja-Bugiri. 

Five roads were to be upgraded from murrum to tarmac. They are Soroti-Dokolo-Lira, Kampala-Gayaza-Zirobwe-Wobulenzi, Matugga-Semuto-Kapeka, Kabale-Kisoro-Bunagana/Kyanika and Busega-Mityana. 87 national bridges were to be repaired and maintained.  

Madam Speaker, may we know from the minister whether extra sources were obtained to do the addition of Kikongogoro, Katungulu and other equator roads? We want to know from the Government whether it intends to do the same roads in the financial year 2006/2007 because they appear again.

Concerning air transport, Madam Speaker and honourable members, the minister has not informed us on the status of the routes that were operated by Uganda Airlines and how much revenue has been generated from them. May we know how much the country is earning from air transport and the fate of our Uganda cargo transport plane, the C-130?

Following the divestiture of Uganda Railways Corporation, Government undertook to create a holding company to manage infrastructure and assets that remained under it after concessioning the national railway. May we know from the minister the status of this undertaking?  

Madam Speaker, we in the opposition recognize railway transport as one of the cheapest forms of transport for a landlocked country like Uganda. Government and the NRM party do not appear to lay the required priority on improving the national competition in this budget.

The privatisation and utility reform process has been a national disaster where all public goods and services have been privatised with no consideration for the public in return. Enterprises have been privatised but the minister does not spell out how much was got from the sale of these enterprises, how much was spent and what the balance is on the privatisation and utility reform account.  

Secondly, there are enterprises that have not yet been fully paid up to-date. The data list has not been provided for our attention. 

Furthermore, there are workers of some of these private enterprises who have never been paid to-date, for example, Uganda Transport Corporation (UTC), Uganda Tea Corporation, Kibimba Rice Scheme and others which have pending issues.  May we know from the minister the fate of the workers’ benefits? We in the opposition demand for a public inquiry of the entire privatisation programme in this mega scandal.  

There is a serious need to rectify Universal Primary Education (UPE) shortfalls before implementing Universal Secondary Education. It is our belief that the Government would be wasting resources if the shortcomings of UPE are not corrected before embarking on Universal Secondary Education. Planning and implementation of Universal Secondary Education should be felt. 

What Government is proposing is a small contribution towards secondary education. The opposition requires that Government meet the total cost of secondary education.  

Madam Speaker and honourable members, we must point out the grave problems that UPE has encountered:

    1. Lack of adequate classroom infrastructure;
    2. Lack of adequate teaching materials; 
    3. Lack of effective supervision of schools;
    4. Lack of teachers;
    5. Low motivation of teachers;
    6. Lack of food for pupils;
    7. High dropout rate.

When does Government plan to achieve quality UPE? How much does Government intend to pay for each Universal Secondary Education student? Has Government recruited the 4863 primary school teachers proposed in the financial year 2005/2006?  

Government undertook to build technical colleges and secondary schools in every sub-county. May we know from the minister the progress on this policy?

The health budget is Ugshs 282.73 billion, which is 9.7 percent of the total budget. This gives to every Ugandan Ugshs 10,472, which is about $ 6 per year. This does not meet the minimum requirement of the Human Development Index of $ 34 as contained in the Human Development Report of UNDP.  

Madam Speaker, opposition welcomes Government’s effort to build health units up to parish level. However, many remain unoperational due to lack of the requisite medical staff, equipment and drugs. The Health Centres IV have not been constructed in many constituencies and even where they have, they face the same constraints as the parish health units.  

Modern medical practice relies heavily on modern equipment for diagnosis and treatment. The district, regional and national referral hospitals lack equipment and drugs. At an appropriate time we shall make proposals for setting new standards for these referral hospitals. We note with regret that the NRM Government has failed to recruit the 2000 health workers proposed in the financial year 2005/2006. The high turnover in medical staff must also be addressed.

As a measure to motivate medical staff in the immediate term the opposition proposes that:

    1. The remuneration of medical staff be increased;
    2. All medical staff be exempted from Pay As You Earn like the Army, Police and people in foreign embassies;
    3. A hire purchase scheme for tax-free cars be established for medical doctors;
    4. Decent accommodation for medical staff within the vicinity of the hospitals should be provided.  
As a first hand measure Kitante Courts on Kitante road should immediately be renovated and returned to Mulago hospital in order to ease accommodation for junior doctors.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, opposition notes with great concern that the NRM Government, due to corruption and mismanagement of the health sector has facilitated the increase in HIV/AIDS prevalence from 6.1 percent to 7.1 percent. FDC calls upon the NRM Government to scale up interventions to reduce the prevalence and also ensure that the process is free of corruption and incompetence.

As regards water and sanitation, we note that:

1) The national safety water average of 63 percent is still low and a matter of grave concern to the opposition.

2) Safe water coverage in most parts in the district like Mayuge, Bugiri, Iganga, Sembabule, Yumbe, Kyenjojo, Kalangala, Kotido, Nakasongola and Pader are as low as 25 percent. 

We in FDC propose that a special programme to bring the level of underserved areas to the national average of 63 percent be put in place this financial year. We shall at an appropriate time move a motion for reallocation of budget resources for the said purpose.  

The revised revenue and expenditure estimates presented to this august House on the 15 June 2006 is premised on the NRM party manifesto of 2006 with the theme of ‘Bonna bagaggawale’ which means prosperity for all. The resource envelope available is estimated at Ugshs 4,255 billion of which 59 percent will be from internal revenue collections and 41 percent from donor support. 

Nine sectors have been pointed out for strategic expenditure in order to operate as follows:

    • Investment in the energy sector;
    • Rural development and support to the urban poor;
    • Rehabilitation and restructuring of Northern Uganda;
    • Industrial development;
    • Support to scientists; 
    • Development and maintenance of transport infrastructure;
    • Defence and national Security; 
    • Justice, law and order;
    • Investment in the social sectors.

As we all know a budget is a set of priorities supported by resource allocation. I shall now quickly proceed to look at government stated priorities and their respective allocations.

Investment in energy development:

The first thing a nation faced with any crisis must do, is to be honest with itself. The Minister has failed to face this challenge squarely. The energy shortfall is estimated to be 80 mega watts and not 200 mega watts as stated by the minister. 

The Minister has attributed the energy crisis to drought and fast economic growth. For a minister who has been working for the growth of the economy to turn around and blame the present energy crisis on economic growth is a daylight admission of failure to plan to say the least.  

Madam Speaker, if the National Planning Authority (NPA) had been allowed and facilitated by the NRM government to provide comprehensive plans for this nation, these glaring failures would have been avoided. We in the opposition propose that the Government of Uganda follow a module of a 25-year development plan divided into five-year plans with targets.  

In the financial year 2006/2007, the ministry is proposing to allocate Ugshs 99 billion to the Energy fund for dam construction. How can we believe the minister this time round when in the Financial year 2005/2006 Ugshs 20 billion was allocated to start an energy credit fund for the same purpose and the fund was never created?  We want to know from the minister what the status is of this initial Ugshs 20 billion. 

In the financial year 2006/2007, the Minister is further proposing to allocate Ugshs 70 billion to procure 100MW of thermal energy. In financial year 2005/2006, the Minister procured 50MW of thermal energy at only Ugshs 22 billion. We know that if the NRM party had the people of Uganda at heart Ugandans would get at least 160 MW of thermal power with the Ugshs 70 billion we are allocating now. We in the opposition challenge the NRM government to deliver 160 MW instead of 100MW with the Ugshs 70 billion.  

Government must not be allowed to defer loan payments by the Uganda Electricity Generation, Transmission and Distribution companies as the Minister proposes. These companies are collecting revenue and making profits. This revenue of Ugshs 33 billion should be utilised to procure an additional 75 mega watts of thermal power. Ultimately, the financial prudence that opposition is proposing to Government within the resource envelope of Ugshs 103 billion will reduce the energy crisis by 235 MW immediately.  

The Ugshs 103 billion is Ugshs 70 billion plus Ugshs 33 billion.  Madam Speaker and honourable members, in financial year 2005/2006, the Minister allocated Ugshs 20 billion for extension of electricity to 16 district headquarters and the completion of rural power projects.  May we know from the minister the progress of these interventions?

Rural progress and support to urban areas:
 ‘Rural development remains a central tenet of the Government’s social-economic development strategy’ is not supported by the requisite resource allocation to turn around the low production and productivity of rural households. 

How can rural development be a central tenet of social and economic development when only 0.58 percent of all local revenue is allocated to agriculture, one percent to Water and Environment, 1.6 percent to Health while 13 percent is allocated to Defence and 0.72 percent to Internal Security Organisation, which is more than Agriculture?  

At an appropriate time we shall propose budgetary reallocation as a measure of channelling more resources to Agriculture, Health, Water and Environment.

Madam speaker, as a first step measure to increase household production, productivity and food security the NRM government should implement the opposition plan to provide two hoes to every household this financial year. 

The minister is proposing to support approximately 39 farmer groups this financial year. This he says will raise the number of farmer groups supported in financial year 2005/2006 to 20,000. Madam Speaker, how is he able to support 20,000 farmer groups when his target in financial year 2005/2006 was 8,980? What the Minister is telling this august House is far from the truth.  

We wish to point out some serious administrative and policy clash, which if unresolved will undermine the potential benefits of the cooperative spirit that government intends to promote as a tool for rural development. Instead of supporting the Department of Cooperatives which already has expertise at both national and district levels, the NRM government has chosen to establish a new disbursement mechanism under the Minister of Finance headed by a State Minister in charge of Micro Finance. 

It is a known fact that the function of initiating, coordinating, supporting, overseeing and facilitating implementation of strategies and programmes aimed at enhancing the development of cooperative was placed under the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry. 

We in the opposition propose that the mandate of the Minister of State in charge of Micro Finance be transferred to the Department of Cooperatives under the supervision of the Minister of State in charge of Cooperatives. 

Rehabilitation and reconstruction of Northern Uganda: 

Madam Speaker, concerning Northern Uganda, we note with appreciation the improving security situation in the North and North-eastern parts of Uganda and government’s effort to develop a Northern Uganda Recovery and Development Plan.  

We are also glad that the NRM government has agreed with FDC, DP, CP, UPC, JEMA, PFM NGO’s, all religious institutions and indeed the people of Uganda that the Northern Uganda crisis that has lasted two decades can also be resolved sustainably through peaceful means.  

We call upon the NRM as a party in government to involve the other political parties and stakeholders in healing the nation by establishing a Truth and Reconciliation Commission.

We are greatly concerned about the ad hoc nature of decongesting the internally displaced peoples camps that government embarked on after the elections. We urge government to consult widely as they arrange to rehabilitate and reconstruct the lives and the livelihoods of the affected people, communities and their leaders. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, effective recovery, reconstruction and development of Northern Uganda would require not less than Ugshs 1 trillion over a period of five years. That is Ugshs 20 billion per year. 

The Ugshs 18 billion that Government is allocating for settling Internally Displaced People, post conflict recovery and development of Northern Uganda is just a drop in the ocean that will have no meaningful impact on the lives of our people in the North and North Eastern Uganda. 

We shall at an appropriate time move to propose a reallocation of resources in order to increase the Government of Uganda’s contribution to the resettlement of Internally Displaced Persons, post conflict recovery and development of Northern Uganda.

In financial year 2002/03 government promised to establish Export-Processing Zones (EPZs). A similar promise on this year’s budget is one of those tasteless songs to the ears of anyone interested in the fast industrial development of Uganda.

The proposed Ugshs 5 billion for Namanve Industrial Park would yield more value if it were invested in Jinja, Tororo and Mbale that already have serviced land for industrial use. This would also help decongest Kampala, Jinja, Tororo and Mbale that are already linked with a railway network and their eastward location and proximity to the hydro-electricity power sources would ensure the competitiveness of Uganda’s exports that the minister emphasizes in his budget speech. 

The opposition therefore proposes that a National Industrial Policy fast tracks industrial development in Jinja, Tororo, Mbale, Lira, Arua, Kasese and Gulu for balanced development. 

We appreciate the important role that quality assurance and certification play in promoting the growth of the economy and the great contribution that Uganda National Bureau of Standards plays in ensuring standards. 

However, the opposition notes with great concern that in a financial year 2005/06 no allocation was made to UNBS in spite of the minister’s announcement in the budget speech that he had allocated Ugshs 2.3 billion to enhance quality assurance, product certification, laboratory testing and consistence with regional and international standards. May we know from the Minister how and where he spent the Ugshs 2.3 billion?

Support to scientists:

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the one product where Uganda has competitive advantage is coffee. Therefore, investment in research and development should emphasize on coffee.  

The opposition notes with great concern that the Ugshs 8 billion that the minister is providing to scientists to under take research and innovation and later to the production process will be spent on banana development, fruit juice processing and malaria research with nothing to coffee.

We in the opposition propose that an addition of Ugshs 10 billion be made available to product development research particularly coffee. It is quite shameful for a country that has grown and exported coffee for a whole century to start processing instant coffee from a neighbouring country.

Development and maintenance of transport infrastructure:

The slow pace of implementing the ten-year rural development plan leaves opposition doubtful about the NRM government’s commitment to developing road infrastructure in this country. We are particularly concerned about the following: 

    1. The failure to complete the Jinja-Bugiri road which is Central to the Northern transport corridor;
    2. The failure to ensure quality road design and works;
    3. The abandonment of Kabale-Kisoro-Bunagana-Kyaniga road construction; 

    4. The continued postponement of constructing the Kampala-Kapeka-Ziroobwe Road, Wobulenzi Road, Matugga-Semuto-Kapeka Road and Soroti-Dokoro-Lira Road.

We therefore call upon the NRM Government to:

    1. Resume, without further delay, the construction of Bugiri-Jinja Road;
    2. Strengthen the supervision and quality assurance mechanism and also free public works procurement and implementation of undue political interference which has made construction costs highest in the East African Region;
    3. Construction of Kabale-Kisoro-Bunagana/Kyanika Road and Soroti-Dokolo-Lira Road should commence immediately. 

We in the opposition propose that all revenue generated from road licence fees, motor vehicle transfer fees and driving permit fees be allocated and ‘ring fenced’ for maintenance of the road network of Kampala City and the municipalities of Entebbe, Fort Portal, Gulu, Jinja, Kabale, Lira, Masaka, Mbale, Mbarara, Moroto, Soroti and Tororo.

Government should get serious with enforcing traffic regulations in respect of axel weights compliance. This will not only save our lives but it will also increase the life of our roads. 

The role of railway transport to a landlocked country does not need emphasis to any development economist. As you all know, the present railway network started in 1896. It is now over 100 years old. It is regrettable that in the 20 years of the NRM, Ugandans have witnessed the near demise of the entire railway network. 

The Kampala-Kasese line, Busoga line, Mbale-Soroti-Gulu-Pakwach lines were closed and vandalized and no passenger service exists. What remains of Uganda Railways is a mere five kilometres stretch between Railways headquarter office in Kampala and Port Bell. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, even under Idi Amin when nothing was ordinarily expected to work, Uganda Railways was working several times better than now. This has left the country with no option but concession of the operation of our railway to a foreign company. 

We note that the concession company is expected to invest $ 18 million in the rehabilitation of the existing railway infrastructure. However, to ensure effective public oversight the Minister should provide this National Assembly and Ugandans with the agreed investment plan.

Madam Speaker, given the opportunity the opposition government would have embarked on reviving and upgrading the old railway line and linked Uganda to our neighbours. For example from Gulu to Nimule, Arua to Kikaya on the Sudan border, Pakwach-Nebbi-Goli, Pakwach-Arua-Odramakach, Kasese-Npondwe on DRC border and from Kasese-Katuna on Rwanda border.

The lack of commitment in developing the professional capability of the army through increasing its capacity in information technology, acquisition of strategic capability and training is exemplified by the way the Ministry of Defence’s budget has been allocated. Out of the Ugshs 354.21 billion, only Ugshs 16.6 billion has been allocated for capital development. A whopping Ugshs 338.7 billion, that is 95 percent has been allocated to recurrent expenditure. 

It is interesting to note that the Wage Bill of Ministry of Defence is 33 percent more than that of the Ministry of Education. Madam Speaker, do we have more soldiers than teachers in this country?

We have a lot to say about the Ministry of Defence but in order not to compromise national security, the opposition shall, during consideration of the policy statement of the Ministry of Defence move that the House proceed in a closed session. 

Justice, Law and Order:

We appreciate Government’s effort to improve the delivery of justice to citizens through construction of courts, prisons, police stations and accommodation of police and prison officials. However, we note that the space for meeting the infrastructure demanded for the courts, police and prisons is too limited. 

The limited number of judicial and prison officials does not assist the matter. The poor remuneration of those officials also undermines the efficiency and effectiveness of service delivery under the judicial, law and order sector. Madam, in order to further improve the delivery of justice to Ugandans, we in the opposition propose the following:

    1. 3,300 police officers and constables should be recruited this financial year;

    2. The salary of Police and Prison Constables should be increased from the current Ugshs 158,784 to Ugshs 232,000. (Applause)

    3. Recruit 1,300 prison constables.

    4. Recruit four judges for the Court of Appeal to bring the total to 12, recruit 17 Judges for the High Court and bring the total to 50, recruit 48 Chief Magistrates to bring the total to 77, and recruit 44 grade one magistrates to bring the total to 150.  The number comes to 77 because every district has a Chief Magistrate. 

    5. The remuneration to all judicial officers should be reviewed with a view of increasing it. There was something, which is omitted there, which is called imbalance in funding.  

Madam Speaker, you notice there is imbalance in funding in the three Arms of Government: the Judiciary, the Executive and the Parliament. We note that Parliament lacks accommodation for offices of its Members and the chambers where to deliberate. In the budget speech, we do not see any budget line for these two items. 

We in opposition propose that the Ministry of Finance should urgently allocate resources for the construction of the chambers for Members of Parliament and rent officers for the Members of Parliament to ensure that they do their oversight function.  

Investment in the social sectors: we in the opposition appreciate government’s effort to meet the millennium development goals, which are called MDGs through the provision of Universal Primary Education (UPE), and the proposal to introduce universal post-primary education. 

But at the same time, we note with great concern the low quality of education being provided to our primary schools. We are particularly concerned, that only 19 percent of the pupils who complete primary seven attend the required level of preface in literacy and numerals. 

The high drop out rate for pupil is of vital concern to us. This House should note that out of the 2.1 million pioneer pupils who were enrolled at the commencement of UPE, less than 300,000 pupils sat for the Primary Leaving Exam (PLE). 

Equally worrying, is the high level of primary school teachers; attrition rate according to the Ministry of Public Service was 40 percent. 

One of the major reasons for this high rate of attrition of primary teachers is poor pay and lack of housing.  

The success of Universal Secondary Education will rely heavily on the availability of, secondary schools in every sub county, a minimum of 12 to 20 teachers per school, and availability of a library and three laboratories per school. 

The opposition therefore proposes the following: 

    1. That government grants at least 100 community schools to meet the immediate demand; 

    2. That you construct three laboratories in at least 300 grant aided schools since government has made science subjects compulsory.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, just hold on a bit. Can I ask the Members who are in the lobby to either keep quiet or come back into the chambers?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

    3. Recruit 12 000,00 teachers to fill the existing vacancies in secondary schools;
    4. As a measure of promoting public private partnership in the delivery of Education, government should give tax exemptions in form of tax holidays to private school to reduce the cost of education;
    5. Government should also pay salaries of Mathematics, Physics, Chemistry, Biology and English teachers in rural private schools;
    6. Exempt all teachers from PAYE; Pay-as-you-earn. (Applause)

We welcome government’s proposal to increase the salaries of primary school teachers and we urge government to raise the minimum salary for teachers to Ugshs 250,000. (Applause)

Increasing public effectiveness: 
We highly appreciate the undertaking by government to improve efficiency and effectiveness of delivering of public goods and services to our people. It is our hope that the NRM Government will go the extra mile to set ethical standards and internal controls to meet the goal of cutting back waste and replication of expenditure.  

We in the opposition propose the following:

    1. Abolish the position of the Resident District Commissioner -(Applause)

    2. Streamline and reduce Presidential Advisers; 

    3.  Minimize the cost of travel abroad; 

    4. Cut on capacity building, i.e. seminars, which have become a money generating activity for technocrats.  We propose all government meetings, seminars and workshops be held in government premises.  For example, how would Parliament hold an entire workshop in a hotel leaving the Parliamentary conference hall or Parliamentary gardens? (Applause)  

    5. Rationalise the use of government vehicles, and ban their use after official hours and non-official work, for example, in bars, weddings and so forth;

    6. Provide loans and high purchased facilities to entitled government officials as a way to save money;  

    7. Review medical treatment abroad for government officials and provide the same services in our hospitals;  

    8. Ensure that the office of the Prime Minister effectively executes its mandate of coordinating, monitoring and evaluating the performance, effectiveness and efficiency of all government departments;

The payroll management:  

The cleaning up of the payroll was long overdue. We welcome the proposal of holding accounting officers responsible for any anomaly found on their respective payroll.  

But we object to the proposal to reduce the non-wage provisions of a department or a local government where payroll anomalies have been discovered, because such action would undermine the delivery of services to the people. 

I want to give an example here. If resources allocated for purchase of drugs to Bugiri health centre are reduced on account of payroll anomalies occasioned by the Chief Administrative Officer of Kisoro or a sub county chief - what we are trying to say here is that; if a sub county chief or a CAO makes a mistake, you should not reduce the money meant for a particular service; deal with the person as an individual.

Revenue and tax measures: 

I now turn to the salient tax issues for financial year 2006/07.  We welcome the proposal to reduce tax on the evidence distributed by companies listed on the stock exchange. However, we propose that the reduction should be from 15 percent to 5 percent.  

This measure will harmonize the withheld tax rate on dividends with Kenya and Tanzania and also promote savings and investment. Here the Minister said that he is doing it as East Africa, but considering East Africa, in Kenya and Tanzania it is 5 percent, so we want him to bring not 10 but 5 percent.

Again, the financial year 2006/2007 Budget is proving that the NRM government is a government of the common man only in words but not actions. It is only the NRM that can propose to exempt Value Added Tax (VAT) on Liquid Petroleum Gas of course, which is used by the high class to increase as the alternative source of energy and ignore kerosene, which is largely used by the rural and the urban people.  

The opposition, which is truly for the common man, is therefore proposing that kerosene be exempted from tax. Madam Speaker, at an appropriate time, we shall be moving amendments to the Financial Act 2005 to remove this ad volorem tax.  

The Minister is proposing to widen the scope of withholding tax agents to include petroleum, telecommunication, banks, construction, insurance, beer manufacturers and soft drink bottlers. The cascading effect of this measure will ultimately increase the consumer prices of goods and services in an economy already choking with high prices dues to energy crisis.  

Secondly, there are major holds up of working capital and the economy is characterized by prohibitive interest rates.  

The opposition strongly objects to the proposal of withholding tax agents and at an appropriate time, we shall ensure that the Minister’s proposal is shelved.  

We support the Minister’s proposal to introduce a tax of 15 percent on gross interest received for purposes of government securities. The proposal to increase duty on non-malt beer from 20 percent to 30 percent is openly at variance with the theme of this budget of ‘Enhancing economic growth and household income through increased production and productivity.  

If implemented, demand for beer made out of sorghum, which is locally grown, which is locally grown, will fall and consequently demand for sorghum as a raw material for making senator and eagle larger will fall.  The final outcome of this measure will be increase in unemployment, a decline in household incomes and an increase in poverty and sorghum growing areas of Uganda - Kigezi and Teso.  

We recognize the Ministers effort to promote a clean environment through physical measures. We welcome the 10 percent environment levy on vehicles aged 8 years and above but object to the exemption of some vehicles at the discretion of URA officials. 

This exemption will open a window for corruption and undermine the objective of this measure. Fiscal measures to discourage the importation and dumping of used vehicles should go hand in hand with measures that encourage the importation of new vehicles. 

At an appropriate time, we shall move that taxes of new vehicles be reduced. From our point of view, corresponding fiscal measures should apply to all new and used appliances.

Traffic fees and licenses are already high, encouraging evasion and causing government loss of revenue. We note that this item has been a target for increment every year and as such is already over taxed. 

As a measure of reducing the tax burden and regaining revenue lost because of evasion, opposition proposes that traffic and license fees be reduced by 20 percent and amnesty to all vehicles in arrears up to 31 June 30 2006 should be granted. This amnesty should be effected within three months of passing the budget.  

In all, the opposition stands for low tax, low fare and equitable, prudent tax administration and efficient monitory and fiscal management.  

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I thank you for your kind attention. One Uganda; one people; for God and my country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Shadow Finance Minister. Can I now invite the Chairperson of the Budget Committee to lay the Budget report on the Table?

4.15
THE CHAIRMAN OF THE BUDGET COMMITTEE (Mr William Okecho, Independent): Madam Speaker, this being my first report to this august House, I wish to thank the House for having entrusted me with the chair of the Budget Committee of this House. 

I also thank my Members for having trusted me with the leadership of reading this report, which was actually prepared and presented to the President much earlier.  

The report has got three sections: There is an introduction, we have a section on micro economic plan and budget framework and we have another analysis of sector indicative budgets and the final section’s on proposed reallocations.  

Now, Madam Speaker, as a way of introduction, I wish to report that Parliament received from government a three-year Micro Economic Plan and Budget Framework for financial year 2006-2007 in accordance with section 4(1) and (11) of the Budget Act, 2001.  

The Budget Committee examined these reports and the various Sessional committees made recommendations earlier on and a report, was made. You forwarded them on our behalf to H.E the President, in accordance with section 7 (3) of the Budget Act. 

Section 8 of the Budget Act requires the Budget Committee to present the recommendations submitted under Section 7 (3) of the Budget Act, 2001, to Parliament and that is why I am here today. 

This report, which I am presenting, summarizes the said report and the full report is hereby laid on Table for the benefit of the honourable members. You will receive your copies in your pigeonholes because we have not had the opportunity to photocopy all of them due to power problems. 

In due course, the relative sessional committees will present details of sector reports arising from the scrutiny of the ministerial policy statements, which we are now receiving for those sectors. Actual changes in the budgetary figures will be effected during the consideration of the Appropriations Bill. 

We have had some recommendations from the other side in this regard but you will have to take your own actions later on when you receive the Appropriations Bill.

In its report the Budget Committee expressed to His Excellency the President the key principles and proposals for effective budgetary allocations and implementations as mandated under section 11 of the Budget Act of 2001.  

Madam Speaker, the committee noted that budget programming was based on incremental budgeting rather than activity-based budgeting. The committee was concerned that this incremental budgeting is not efficient as it obscures historical deficiencies. The committee also recommended that future budgeting should be activity-based where activities are ranked according to their economic and social rates of return on investment. That was an important recommendation, which as you examined the policy statements you may have to take up. 

Section (B) of this report handles the micro economic plan and the budget framework. The committee appreciated that the support of the population during the February elections was an endorsement of the NRM party principles. However, the implementation of the NRM manifesto of 2006 during financial year 2006/2007 cannot be done outside the PEAP and the MTEF. The programmes in the PEAP should not be abandoned.  

In the multi-party dispensation, manifesto programmes should be integrated in the national plan, that is, the PEAP for effective planning and implementation. 

The committee noted also that the central part of the government rural development strategy for financial year 2006/2007 is modelled around the Economic Development Strategy normally abbreviated as (EDS) whose aim is to have every household in Uganda have the means to earn the minimum income that enables it to access basic human needs such as food, shelter, clothing, health, education.  

However, the committee was concerned that the new EDS model had no legal and institutional arrangement for implementation this financial year. There has been inadequate preparation for the programme and it is likely to create duplicity of institutions, including creating institutions parallel to the existing local authorities, in the face of growing concerns about public administration costs.  

In addition, there is lack of professional and technical capacity at sub-county levels to implement the programme. This is actually what many have been hearing as sub-county models. So the committee recommended that implementation of EDS be deferred for at least one financial year and have the legal and institutional framework and a comprehensive plan for its implementation completed. We hope to achieve this during this financial year. 

The committee noted with concern that the Government continues to make ambitious macro-economic projections in the wake of national and international adverse developments. Annual inflation projection of five percent and annual real GDP grow rate of seven percent are not realistic over the next financial year given the following factors, which were noted during the budget: prolonged drought, high and rising prices of petroleum, frequent and prolonged power shortages and the depreciating exchange rates.  

The committee further noted that the reduction of the fiscal deficit is a welcome macro economic objective. It, therefore, recommended that the only realistic scope for attaining the objective lies in expenditure realisation rather than deficit financing in any form. Deficit financing, as you know has the potential for crowding out the private sector more especially interest payments and the debt. 

The committee notes that government’s interest payments on domestic and external debt are projected to increase over the MTEF period from Shs 270.2 billion in 2006/2007 to Shs 319.8 billion in 2007/2008 and to Shs 333.4 billion in 2008/2009. This is a reflection of unsustainably high indebtedness of the Government and the nation.

The Budget Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendation to urgently develop and implement a deliberate programme for managing public borrowing in order to reduce the interest costs and free resources in the domestic financial system and for the budget. 

We went ahead to analyse, under section (c) of this report, sector indicative budgets, which all sector committees have got to take heed of. Starting with Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries, the committee was concerned that the agriculture sector share in the total budget had been projected to drop to 3.5 percent in the financial year 2006/2007 down from 0.4 percent in the financial year 2005/2006. The committee, therefore, recommended that the sector’s budgets be progressively increased to attain at least the ten percent agreed in the Maputo Protocol.  

The committee further noted that the recurrent budget for the sector has remained the same for the next financial year 2006/2007 as the one in 2005/2006 supposedly to enable the Ministry to maintain the activities initiated in financial year 2005/2006. However, the 9.1 percent reduction in the budget will render some of the MAAIF and agriculture extension staff redundant. It, therefore, recommended that the Ministry’s mandate be further reviewed to leave it with only affordable level of staffing and activities.

The committee also noted that the agriculture sector, which is the major economic activity in the country, continues to be hit by drought, hunger and strained household incomes have dropped very low. It was also noted that much as NAADS operations have increased to 37 districts and currently in 344 sub-counties with 20,000 farmer groups being supported during the financial year 2005/2006, NAADS continues to be thin on the ground.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, are you reading the whole report?

MR OKECHO: No, this is a summary of the report.  The committee recommended that the strategy of replicating the NAADS programme in the whole country be developed and implemented. Madam Speaker, this is very short and it will take me a very short time.

The committee did not support the re-allocation of Shs 1 billion for irrigation under MAAIF to market research. This reallocation should not take place according to our recommendations. 

The committee doesn’t support reallocation from strategic export programmes in MAAIF of Shs 8.47 billion to sub-county development. This amount should be reinstated into the MAAIF budget.  

Tourism, Trade and Industry:
The committee noted that the MTEF ceiling to the sector continues to present the wrong impression on the non-wage recurrent budget by pooling wage subvention with the ministry’s non-wage budget. So it recommends that a separate budget line be created for wage subvention and it further recommends that this change should be effected next financial year, that is, 2007/2008.

The committee was concerned about lack of access to credit by local investors in the country who have been prohibited by some factors like high interest rates charged by commercial banks. This undermines investment by local firms. It was, therefore, recommended that access to credit by local investors be made affordable by providing long-term financing to enable the private sector to drive the economy since it is the engine of economic growth.

Contribution of membership to multi-lateral agencies:

The committee was informed that Uganda is in arrears in terms of its contributions of membership to vital multi-lateral agencies. Uganda was suspended from the World Tourism Organisation with effect from December 2005 due to accumulated arrears. Other multi-lateral agencies where membership is at stake include the Lusaka Agreement and COMESA organs. 

Uganda, therefore, stands to miss out on the benefits accruing from membership of these organisations including the ability for the World Tourism Organisation to combat negative travel advisories on Uganda through its mechanisms. It is, therefore, recommended by the committee that contributions to membership of the World Tourism Organisation should be catered for in the budget for this financial year. Membership dues to other multi-lateral agencies like COMESA and the Lusaka Agreement should be urgently rationalised as per the committee’s earlier recommendation.

Restructuring of the Uganda Development Bank:

It has been talked about but we had made some recommendations. The committee was informed that the industrialisation fund that was previously under the ministry was transferred to the Uganda Development Bank in order to ease its management. However, releases from the fund have been curtailed by the fact that UDB has been undergoing restructuring for the last ten years. The committee was concerned that there was lack of leadership capacity in UDB to steer the fund. It, therefore, recommended that UDB restructuring should urgently be completed to enable potential investors to access the idle resources in the bank.

On the first annual African Tourism Investment Summit meeting (FAATIS), the committee was informed that the Government of Uganda accepted to host FAATIS in Kampala in October 2006 and is to cost Shs 1 billion. The committee was further informed that His Excellency the President had directed that funds to host the meeting be provided. The funds had been identified last financial year but were never availed to the ministry. The committee recommended that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development funds the Shs 1 billion budget for hosting the FAATIS summit.

Development of the Jua Kali sector:

The development of this sector requires a total of Shs 3.427 billion. Land for the Katwe artisans has already been purchased at a cost of Shs 230 million. The process of procuring the design and drawings of the common facilities is going on. The committee was informed that the Ministry of Local Government wants this budget line to be transferred to it and has already submitted a proposal to the Ministry of Finance to this effect.

The Budget Committee recommends that the jua kali sector remains under the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry where it is best suited. And the Ministry of Local Government should not be allowed to take over this function as it clearly falls outside it mandate.  

The proposed merger of UTB, UIA and UEPB:

The committee was informed that the position on the merger has changed and that it has been observed that the proposed merger may no longer be viable. Plans are in place to strengthen and facilitate each of the organisations above to perform its required tasks. The committee, therefore, recommends that this position be communicated to the concerned institutions.  

On the social services sector, in the Ministry of Education and Sports, we were informed on primary education that the salary increase to Shs 200,000 for primary school teachers would be met next financial year and the total of Shs 342 billion had already been secured to implement this programme.  We, therefore, appreciate government for finally honoring its pledge.

Secondary education:

The committee was informed that the Ministry of Education and Sports is to implement the Universal Post Primary Education and Training policy, which is now abbreviated as UPPET. We were further informed that this policy would be phased out starting with senior one and year one entrants from primary seven enrolling in business, technical and vocational education training institutions (BTVET). The committee proposed that the implementation should be done cautiously to avoid the initial problems that faced the Universal Primary Education (UPE) policy some few years back.

Business, Technical and Vocational Education Training (BTVET): 

The committee was concerned about the delay by government to construct the 16 polytechnic schools as earlier agreed. The committee was informed that the 14 community polytechnics were to be constructed with the Islamic Development Bank funds, which have never been disbursed since the signing of the agreement. We, therefore, recommend that government identify local resources to begin construction of the 16 polytechnics.  

We were also concerned about the delay in the completion of the laboratories and libraries in rural secondary schools. We, therefore, recommend that this construction be completed since it is essential in the implementation of the UPPET policy.  

Tertiary education: the committee noted with concern that no provision has been made for salary enhancement of staff in public universities despite the fact that government had made assurances to these staff. We, therefore, recommend that government takes this matter seriously to avoid possible strikes. The Government should desist from selective pay awards in future, as they are a source of industrial unrest. The committee further noted the lack of funds totaling to Shs 5 billion in the MTEF sector for the construction of a library at Makerere University Business School (MUBS) despite earlier recommendations. We, therefore, recommend that this activity be provided for in the current financial year.  

Sports:

Madam Speaker, the committee noted that meager resources had been earmarked for the sports sub-sector despite its potential benefits like international publicity of the country as it happened in the recent Commonwealth games with the Inzikuru’s gold, Kiprop’s gold and other medals.  

The Education Service Commission:

We were informed that the budget for the Education Service Commission has been provided with adequate funds to carry out teacher recruitment. The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports ensures that the teachers are recruited and are able to access this pay.  

The Ministry of Health:

The committee noted that the health sector’s project donor funding is projected to significantly reduce from Shs 267.38 billion approved last financial year 2005/2006 to Shs 134.95 billion in this financial year 2006/2007. This reflects a reduction of Shs 133.43 billion, translating into a 50 percent reduction.  

We also noted with concern the persistent under-funding of the drug budget for the health sector. We, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Health budget ceiling be increased to adequately fund its priorities. The committee also noted that some districts lack hospitals and yet they receive many patients. The committee was informed that the Ministry has been assessing the existing infrastructure and equipment in these districts. We appreciated this move but strongly recommend that funds be sought to provide for district hospitals where they are lacking.  

We are also concerned about the persistent lack of theatre equipment and the insufficient funds for maintenance of the existing ones. The committee, therefore, recommends that maintenance of medical equipment be considered as a top priority to avoid losing this expensive equipment. We know of some, which are still packed in cartons and boxes and are not used for a long time.  

The committee was concerned about the continued under-funding of Mulago Hospital Complex, Mulago Hospital more especially. The committee, therefore, recommends that Mulago Hospital Complex be given enough funding for drugs to meet the increasing patients’ demand and to mitigate the infection rate effects. Mulago assessment centre should be given special consideration under PAF to enable it to manage the increasing patient turn up.  

We were further concerned about the inadequate staff to man the existing health units is crippling some of the units. We, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should expedite the incentive scheme for hard-to-reach areas to attract and retain staff in health facilities located in such areas.  

Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development:

The committee noted that the social development sector has continued to suffer from gross under funding with 31 percent spent on rent. The committee recommended that the Ministry should acquire a permanent home expeditiously in order to save the colossal amounts of funds spent on rent.  

We were informed, Madam Speaker, that the cultural leaders’ funds have not been budgeted for yet government made assurances for a monthly contribution in order to implement the regional tier policy. We, therefore, recommend that a budget line be created to implement this constitutional provision.  

The committee was also informed that His Excellency the President has directed that the Uganda National Theatre be renovated. We were also informed that Shs 2 billion required for this important task is not provided for in the budget. The committee, therefore, recommends that the National Theatre management should explore the possibility of using locally generated funds and also acquire some financial support from the CHOGM Secretariat for the required renovation.  

We also noted with concern the urgent need for funding of the industrial court despite the enactment of the new law that granted its autonomy. We, therefore, recommend that a budget line be created for the Industrial Court so that its funds are charged directly from the Consolidated Fund.

The committee noted that the Ministry of Gender has delayed in the formulation of the elderly policy, which has affected the budgetary allocation for its sub-sector to the extent that the Minister almost has no operational funds. We, therefore, recommend that this policy be given urgent attention to enable the minister access funds for effective functioning.  

The committee was informed that the Ministry has identified a foreign donor UNESCO who is willing to construct a national library and requires land from the Government of Uganda. We, therefore, recommend that land for the national library be made available to avoid non-absorption of this generous donation from UNESCO. 

The committee was informed that Uganda was nominated to host the forthcoming Women Affairs Meeting (WAMM) in June 2007. The preparatory activities and hosting of the meeting require Shs 600 million. We, therefore, recommend that this money be re-allocated from within the sector budget since government has already committed itself to hosting this meeting. 

Works, Housing and Communications:

Madam Speaker, we noted that counter-part funding of donor-funded projects suffer gross under funding. The implication of this is that completion of many ongoing projects will be delayed. Many projects, which have attracted donor funding, will not take off as planned. The Government will incur further costs arising from breach of contracts already signed with contractors. Therefore, we recommended that government adheres to its commitments of providing counter-part funding to donor-funded projects as programmed to avoid delays in the implementation.  

Road Maintenance:

We recommend that the ministry and local authorities, especially Kampala City Council, swiftly and sensibly respond to pothole development like the Police fire brigade treats the source of fire. 

Railways: 

We appreciate the renewed interest by the Government in railway transport as exemplified by the provision of Shs 0.05 billion meant for studies on Kampala-Kasese railway line within the Ministry’s budget. We support this development and recommend that these studies be carried out expeditiously to avoid further damage to railway lines.  

Construction projects:

We are concerned about the continued delays of many construction works. It was, therefore, recommended that the Ministry concentrates on a few construction works and avoid spreading resources so thinly thereby making no impact.  

The housing sub-sector: 

The committee recommended that government plays a pivotal role in the housing sector by evolving a comprehensive housing policy. The committee further recommends that the Condominium law be expeditiously implemented. We also recommended that the public servant loan scheme be expeditiously implemented to enable civil servants access the loans at the Bank of Uganda bond rates.  

The communications sub-sector:

It was recommended by the committee that the regulator Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) should ensure that communications companies are not operating in a curtailed way to the detriment of the poverty eradication objective of the Government.  

The Legal and Parliamentary affairs sector: 

The committee commended the Government for creating new votes for the Law Development Center (LDC) and the Uganda Registration Service Bureau among others. However, it reiterates its previous recommendation to reclassify the Parliamentary Commission from the public administration sector to the legislative sector and to transfer the Uganda Human Rights Commission from the public administration sector to the Justice, Law and Order sector. 

Funding for Parliament should be raised to at least five percent of the national budget, as the case is with sister parliaments in the region. The committee noted that Shs 2.6 billion had been allocated to the Parliamentary Commission to cater for wages for the new Members of Parliament. However, the allocation is not accompanied by a non-wage provision. The committee recommends a further provision to cater for the corresponding non-wage allocation to cater for the facilities for service delivery. 

We further noted that the Parliamentary Commission had been allocated Shs 1.1 billion as a contribution for the Pension Scheme. This amount is even lower than the one illustrated in the Certificate of Financial Implications at the time the relevant Act was enacted. We, therefore, recommend that this amount be raised to Shs 3.3 billion.  

Public Service and Local Government sector:

The Minister of Local Government and local revenue collection; the committee was informed that the local revenue collections by local governments continue to decline due to several reasons, but above all interference by the central government. We, therefore, recommend that the Ministry enhances other sources of local revenue to assist local governments to raise revenue. 

The committee observed that the dependence on the center for these funds is not viable and sustainable. It was, therefore, recommended that the funding gap of Shs 0.67 billion for the payments to entitled political leaders in districts should be provided by the center.  

The committee observed that the creation of new districts was having a toll on the Consolidated Fund in the aspect of public administration costs and other costs unique to each district. However, we recommend that all the start-up funds for the newly created districts and town councils be provided for in the budget for them to operate without disruption.  

Compensation and severance packages for retrenchees: the committee was informed that the restructuring exercise was complete and only awaits the payment of severance packages. We were further informed that funding for this was provided for under LGDP II. The committee was also informed that the Ministry of Local Government requires an additional Shs 200 million for the center to facilitate the recruitment exercise, induction course for new staff and other follow-up related costs. The Government is urged to provide for this exercise. 

Regional tier: the committee urges the Ministry of Local Government and that of Public Service to develop the structures for the operation of the regional tier, and that funds should be availed as and when the structures become operational. 

The Ministry of Public Service: we noted during the committee meetings that pensions, gratuities and the East Africa Community compensation dues to former workers of the East African Community, traditional civil servants, local government, widows of former soldiers and other categories are still outstanding. It was, therefore, recommended by the committee that urgent steps be taken to liberalise the social security sector and take steps to adopt a contributory scheme. 

We noted that funds provided for pension arrears fall extremely short of the requirements. The committee, therefore, retaliated that a comprehensive policy and plan be urgently developed to resolve this problem. 

The Vice-President’s residence: 

We were disappointed that this activity has not taken off. The committee urged government to fulfill its obligation and ensure that the Vice-President’s residence is constructed as a matter of priority. 

Natural resources: 

On the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment as it was then called, we were informed in the committee that under large town’s water supply, under the National Water and Sewage Corporation and water supply systems, it improved to 69 percent coverage against 70 percent target coverage in the financial year 2005/6. It was recommended that a report on sewerage connections for the period be made and presented to Parliament. I hope it is there in the policy statement.

The committee was concerned about the water levels in Lake Victoria, which have reached critical low levels partly due to Nalubaale and Kiira Dams. The current water releases are exceeding their water abstraction levels of hydropower production to Jinja. We recommended that urgent steps be made to rectify this anomaly.

National Environment Management Authority (NEMA):

We were informed, Madam Speaker, that several regulations, standards and guidelines aimed at sound management and use of environmental resources have been developed and disseminated. However, the capacity to enforce these laws and standards as well as monitoring the quality of the environment on a regular basis by local governments is inadequate.

MR BIKWASIZEHI: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I am at a loss. As the Chairperson of the Agriculture Sessional Committee, together with other colleagues we are supposed to be Members of the Budget Committee. The chairperson is presenting a report of the Budget Committee, I do not know when that report was made and by who. The recommendations he is making, particularly the sectoral recommendations, should have had an input from sectoral committees. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this concerns the budget of this financial year done by the Seventh Parliament. What he is doing is really giving you information to enable you to go and work in your committees. It was done by the Budget Committee of the Seventh Parliament on this particular budget. So, they participated. Please, hon. Okecho, summarize. 

MR OKECHO: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for that very good advice. I want to tell Members that we only have a few sections on Presidential and Foreign Affairs, something to do with State House, Defence and Internal Affairs and Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I request that you read about them in the report, but there is something important I must say. There are proposed reallocations, which is the last section of our report. 

The committee during its deliberations proposed various intra and inter-sectoral reallocations within and across sectors, amounting to Shs 38.05 billion. This must be noted by the sectoral committees. Of this amount, Shs 0.5 billion was proposed to be reallocated from within the Directorate of Public Prosecutions to non-wage votes. It is stated in the report. The rest of the Shs 37.55 billion was reallocated from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, from the sub-county programmes, to the following institutions: LDC, the Judiciary, IGG, the Parliamentary Commission, the Judicial Service Commission, and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. 

The details of these reallocations are presented in the main report. It will really be in the interest of the committees that handle these various institutions to check this report and see how much extra money has been made available to these financial institutions. 

Madam Speaker, with that, hoping that the Members will be able to scrutinize this report very well, I beg to move that the House adopts the report and uses it as a basis for discussions during the coming sessional committee meetings. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much Chair of the Budget Committee. Honourable members, we are required under the Budget Act to have completed the budgetary process by 31st of August each year. Yesterday the Business Committee met to try and rationalise the use of time. We have altered the sequence of our activities. We are not going to start the general debate. We are going to start with the committees and then we shall come back later, after you have interacted in the committees, to have the general debate on the Budget. 

You have heard from the Ministry of Finance. You were present when he gave the statement. You have heard the alternative views of the Opposition. You have heard the views of the outgoing Budget Committee. You are going to read the policy statements and form your own positions. So, I would like to inform you that we are adjourning the Plenary from today so that tomorrow you can begin your work in the sessional committees. I believe that you have been directed where the committee meetings take place for each sessional committee. 

The standing committees of the House will be in abeyance until the end of the budgetary process, to allow members to move freely back and forth to committees of their choice. So, we expect that from tomorrow until the 11th of August, you will be in your committees. 

There will be some interruptions, maybe Cabinet meetings, and there is going to be a small workshop of the chairpersons, which might also interrupt that process, but we shall advise you. Otherwise, we expect you to finish deliberations by the 11th of August then you start reporting committee by committee on Tuesday, the 15th of August. After that we shall conclude with the appropriations on the 31st. That is the programme we are going to follow now. Accordingly, we shall adjourn the plenary until the 15th of August. 

There are two small announcements. The AMANI Forum is having an annual general meeting today in the Members’ Lounge. I think it started at 4.30 p.m. Those who wish to attend should go and do so.  

There is also a delegation of Kenyan Members of Parliament here to give you moral support in AMANI. I understand the NRM caucus will also meet immediately after here in their usual place, the Conference Centre. 

On that note, honourable members, I want to thank you for your participation and to invite you to go to your committees and start handling the sessional committee work. Thank you very much. The House is adjourned sine die.

(The House rose at 5.06 p.m. and adjourned sine die.)


