Thursday, 13 July 1995

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliamentary House.

PRAYERS 

The Deputy Vice Chairman (Mr Cosmas Adyebo) in the Chair.

The Council was called to order.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: While you are very good at raising point of order, I would like also to inform you that I am going to institute a new procedure, a regulation in that, Members who absentee themselves always will not be paid their allowances.  We shall keep on deducting so that you are given what you qualify for.  On that note, we adjourn for 15 minutes.

MOTION

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE IN CHARGE OF ENTANDIKWA (Dr Kisamba Mugerwa): Thank you Mr Chairman. Hon. Members may recall that the hon. Minister for Finance and Economic Planning moved the following Motion - during the Budget Speech on 15 June 1995. (Interruption)

MR OMARA ATUBO: Point of order. Mr Chairman is it in order for this distinguished House to proceed in business without a quorum?

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Omara Atubo, we have just come out of an adjournment of 15 minutes following an earlier order.  But I think the matter has been effected due to the fact that this afternoon, almost all the hon. Members were assembling in the International Conference Centre for a seminar on children which is very crucial now that we having a bill before us.  So most of the Members have been there and we have noted that.  We went for an adjournment we have just come back and I can see that we have almost formed a quorum.  If you really do not mind too much, let us continue with the business.  It is in order.

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr Chairman, as I was saying that hon. Members may recall that the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Planning moved the following motion during the budget speech on 15th June, 1995; that the National Resistance Council do resolve itself into a committee of supply for consideration and approval of the Revised Revenue and Expenditure Estimates for the Fiscal Year 1994/95 and that the budgetary proposal for fiscal year 1995/96 Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure.  Since then, copies of the Budget Speech have been delivered and distributed to hon. Members.  

Secondly, we have also afforded the hon. Members with the Background to the Budget.  All what I can say now is just to draw the attention of hon. Members to some corrections which are required to be noted at this stage.  In paragraph 40 and 39 of the budget speech, on page 13, line four - share of the total budget being accounted for by-insert the word project between by and grants on line four and also on the following line, instead of 192 billion shillings, please insert 164 billion shillings. on paragraph 40 line one, instead of 994.2 billion shillings, please insert 1009.2 and on line two paragraph 40 again, the figure instead of 553.3 insert 556.  

Permit me also to inform the hon. Members that we have tried to marry the investment programme and the Background to the Budget. In our recent review of the planning circle, documentation, we have attempted to merge the public investment plan formerly known as the Recovery Development Programme volume one and the Background to the Budget as a rationalisation measure while a comprehensive merger of the two will be achieved next financial year.  There has been an improvement and I commend to you this Background to the Budget. It is more informative than it has been previously presented. (Interruption)

MR KANYOMOZI: Point of order.  The Budget Debate it is a serious annual event. Are we in order to continue when we do not have a quorum? 

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: Hon Members, I have been telling you and I have been asking your indulgence to ensure that you attempt to attend the Parliamentary proceedings.  You know as the highest organ of law making in the country, it is obligatory that you attend all the Parliamentary proceedings.  And you will recall that we even did plead with that now that there is peace in Uganda, in Kampala, we could as well go on until late in the evenings but it has been very difficult for hon. Members to realise this.  And while you are always calling upon me to observe the rules and procedures on which I do agree, I am also unwillingly informing you that from next week, we shall be paying hon. Members their allowances based on the attendance.  If you come here for 15 minutes, we shall pay you for 15 minutes because this is a serious matter hon. Members.  You should be reminded, how do you convince the whole nation that you attend Parliamentary Debates only from Tuesdays to Thursdays starting from 2.30 p.m. to 5.00 p.m.? How many working hours are those?  Please, let us be serious.  You are actually asking me to come with these measures and I am going to do it and you are not going to blame the Chairman. So I am calling upon you that sometimes we need also to be flexible in handling these matters.  Order, order. 

As far as the quorum is concerned, it is you hon. Members to realise the quorum and you know it is obligatory.  But some of you normally come late, they go back very early and I think this is out of order.  While you are raising a point of order here and there, I am telling you please, let us observe our very own procedures which we instituted otherwise, we are also coming with measures so that democracy prevails. You get what you rightfully gain.  So I think we now form a quorum.

HON. MEMBERS: No.

AN HON. MEMBER: Mr chairman, this is a very important House.  It set rules which it must also have to follow.  Quorum in such organisations like this is a basis for the legality of that meeting. Now if you begin to give the impression that we can always transact business in this House notwithstanding the rules that we have set ourselves, we may haves, we may have no basis for being respected.  I would rather suggest that since there is no quorum for us to discuss, what we do with those without permission absenting themselves and therefore, rendering those who are serious unable to go ahead in the business? Because I think the most important rules here for the legality of our decisions here is that we have a quorum.  So, I suggest we must first raise a quorum, if got, let us discuss what penalty we do, maybe suggesting putting names of people who are not coming here.

MR OBWANGOR:  The standing orders of the House are not against the discharge of public affairs. Once we belittle standing orders, this House will be hopeless.  I pray with all the necessary prayer that we do not disturb the standing orders.  Either we adjourn for 15 minutes as given by standing orders which is sensible or the House adjourns until the next time. 

MR MARWAS: Mr Chairman, whereas we want to follow the Standing Orders, but we should also bring to mind that the original number of Members of this House does not stand today.  You also know that we have lost Members but the question if you take stock of the House now, it is far lower than it was before.

AN HON. MEMBER: Mr Chairman, I am just coming from a symposium which was meant for this Council at the International Conference Centre where most of the Members were since this morning and I think that is the major draw-back for lack of quorum today.  So, I beg that you excuse them and I expect within the next 15 minutes or so, they will be here and therefore, we shall realise a quorum. Thank you Sir.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: Order hon. Members.  Could the Clerk tell us whether we form a quorum, and tell hon. Members who are outside to come in.  Hon. Members, we now form a quorum. Could we proceed?

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Briefly, Mr Chairman, I only want to use this opportunity just to inform the hon. Members that since the establishment of the Entandikwa Credit Scheme, 4,491,850 shillings have been released, that was 4.4 billion shillings to 27 districts and the districts of Mbale, Mbarara, Arua, Moroto, Kasese, Pallisa and Jinja were caught up.  They were ready but they were caught up by financial year.  However, the districts of Apac, Tororo, Rukungiri, Kamuli and Kotido, up to now, have not set the machinery.  I would like to assure the hon. Members that they should assure the public -(Interruption)

MISS KADAGA: Point of order. Mr Chairman, is it in order really for the Minister to say that the district of Kamuli has not really started when money has already been disbursed in at least two counties?  Is he in order, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: Let him clarify.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr Chairman, each district has received some money for administrative purposes.  Now I am talking about seed money.  So what we did - because there were some problems that some intermediary agencies which were selected could not run without some money.  So all the districts so far have received the money for administrative purposes but now we are talking about seed money.  They have to sort out applications, short-list them and send them to us to enable to release the funds.  What I was winding up in that it is important that we assure the people that they will get all their money for which they could not get last financial year as long as the machinery is set.  

The second point is on planning.  Uganda decentralisation, quite a number of districts have started coming up with development plans. As you will realise in paragraph 34 of the budget, not every - but 36, the development budget so far has not been decentralised. As the Minister for Finance said, it will be during this year, we are initialling a machinery to study how the development budget will be decentralised.  However the districts now can sit, take stock, short-listing of their projects and prioritise them at district level, then they should discuss with each sector line Ministry to see how they have prioritised it in that sector and after which they are submitted to the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning for the National Development Committee to consider within the context of the national priorities.  This is because some districts have no capacity for planning purposes. So arrangements are being made to intensify, to build up capacity for planning at the district level.  

I would like to wind up by also clarifying on the road toll following what was in the budget and the statement made by the Minister for Finance.  Still some people are confusing this issue. Two issues must be noted.  One; that what we are trying to do is to ensure that there is free flow of goods on main highways.  Secondly, that traders do not pay more than once for the produce other than at the source of the district from where they have collected those produce.  So, we are appealing to the district administrations to find machinery within their district to ensure that they collect all the revenue for which they are entitled to collect through their by-laws and local administration Act.  Otherwise, some traders have taken the advantage of the statement to say that no payment at all.  There should be a way in which they should pay at the course.  

We appreciate that some districts have problems because the produce is not collected atone point but as capacity is built up, it is important that district administrations all collect the levy which they are entitled to since in this budget we are saying that we are not going to entertain over expenditure.  The districts will not come to solicit for any more funds.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE (Rukiga County, Kabale: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I stand to second the Motion moved by the Minister for Finance and Economic Planning on 15th June, 1995 at the International Conference Centre.  I want to take this opportunity to thank and congratulate the Minister for Finance for the positive and development oriented 1995/96 Budget.  When the budget was read, it was analyzed by the Press the following day and it was later analyzed by national experts at Sheraton.  It is worthy noting that the comments on 1995/96 budget have been extremely positive. Since the budget was read there have not been any significant controversies.  The only controversy so far raised prominently is the one where the sales tax on beer fell from 70 percent to 55 percent.  The interpretation by URA indicated that the total tax on the crate of beer will have to be 149/-.  This I suppose will soon be resolved since the policy makers to my understanding had no intentions to raise extra taxes on been when actually they were reducing the tax rates on beer.  

The 1995/96 budget, did not leave anything which can increase the prices of commodities countrywide.  Interestingly even where the taxes were increased like the case of sugar from 10 percent to 50 percent on locally manufactured sugar, the wholesale price has fallen.  Meaning that either the effective demand in the country is very low and that people therefore, are unable to buy or that the manufactures were either making super profits and therefore, they are willing to share them out or that they are now making a loss.  Nevertheless, the increase to 15 percent of locally manufactured sugar has meant that there is now an abundance of imported sugar because of the various reasons and ways of bringing it into the country which is in the long run destructive to the economic performance.  

The Minister for Finance is to be congratulated for the successful performance of the economy in the 1994/95 Financial Year.  There was significant improvement in the general economic performance on all fronts.  This improvement was a result of the macro-economic policies and a commitment to their implementation. It was also due to general political stability, a good and secure economic environment that has remained attractive to both local and international investors.  A serious salesmanship of Uganda which was led by the President thus increasing the international acceptance and appreciation of Uganda.  There was also significant private sector participation at policy and implementation levels of the economic policies.  

The last year saw greater interaction between the private sector and the policy makers on issues that affect the private sector.  This dialogue must not only be commended but must be encouraged and the policy makers should do more consultations with these, those that to whom various policies are directed.  These would increase acceptability and harmony of action. I wish, therefore, to commend that the national forum which has so far met twice to advise government and this is private sector initiative which is voluntary, should not only be commended but should be encouraged to go on and deep meeting and advising the government and we thank government for having accepted to that kind of advice in many cases. 

The economy also performed well because of the existence of security situation in the country which also played a great deal on this economic performance and we hope that if the whole country secure, then the performance will be even better.  The good prices fetched by coffee section were a significant boost to the general economic success especially the foreign sector.  It is however, extremely important to realise and note that since this was windfall gain to the economy, the economy should be prepared to stand a shock should the prices tangle down otherwise, if we are not prepared for that tangle, we may get the shock ourselves. The economy registered  successes in the financial year and the budget in the narrowing on the current account deficit. This means that we are on the road to balancing the recurrent account expenditure budget.  This means a movement towards economic independence because, if the recurrent budget keeps being top-tapped by donors, then it means the decision-making is also to be influenced by the donors.  

It is important that at least this country balances its own recurrent account expenditure if any donations come, it should come on the capital account. There was increase in every sector transfers which is a sign of increased trust in the economic policies being followed and although some people may think that okukuba kyeyo may be a bad idea, in the long run given the unemployment in the country, they have indicated that they seriously contribute to a higher foreign exchange transfer into the country.  

We also should congratulate the government for containing and stabilising inflation in the single digit zone, which is an act to be commended.  That kind of stability ensures confidence in the economy.  However, I wish to add that it is not always necessarily true that containing inflation in single digit is necessarily the only way to develop.  I have said this one many times, and I believe that at certain times, it may be necessary to have a self-liquidating financial management in order for us to shake the economy.  

The performance of the economy in the 1995/96 Financial Year placed all the country in an advanced stage in the pre-condition stage which would lead us to a take off stage.  What I mean here is that there are enough preparations now for this country to begin the road on take-off and this is where there are a lot of problems in interpretation.  The fact that the economy has been growing very fast does not mean necessarily that the economy has taken off.  It only means that with the small debts, the jump is big because if you had a million shillings and somebody gave 50,000/=, although it is a significant amount, he would have only given you a twentieth which is only five percent.  Whereas if you had 100,000/= and somebody gave you 50,000/= which is the same amount, he will actually given you 50 percent.  So the growth at 100,000/= would be 50 per cent and the growth at one million will only be give percent and if that kind of understanding was to be enhanced among all our people, the cry that poverty is still rampant when the economy is growing would actually have been reduced.  

As I support and second this Motion, you allow me to comment on two sectors of the economy and where appropriate show where we need to do a lot more to consolidate the gains so far achieved. The investment portfolio in the country has been steadily growing and at the end of May 1995, projects approved for investment were 1434 worth two billion shillings and with a capacity to employ 85,000 people, ten percent of whom would be foreigners.  That means that if these projects are actually finally implemented, we expect a job increase of over 80,000 workers in that sector has been that where are the benefits going?  And some say they are not being seen.  This assertion is true and this is because in the earlier light of the project, the impact is normally minimal and when we talk of employment opportunities, this normally refers to a stage when the project is fully operational.  However, in the long run, these will be realised.  Another concern that was raised is that new foreign funded projects have tended to recruit from outside for the management and skilled labour rather than look at the Uganda labour market.  This unfortunately is an evil that we shall accept for sometime, however unpalatable. The main reason is that there is low trust among the foreign investors in the Ugandan management level cadres.  But signs now show that this is soon to be history and they are beginning to look at the Ugandan market for their managers.  

There is also concern that the lower level of cadre of workers should not be recruited.  Certainly this is true.  This may sometimes be blamed on the organs of government that engage in giving and enforcing entry and work permits because in some cases people get work permits when actually they should not have got them and once they have got them and once they have got them, then they tend to be around.  In other words, we have to strengthen the organs of government and State that actually give work permits to the people who come to work here.  

The proposal for amending the investment code is a welcome move and I am sure amendment will improve the factability of the code and make investment in Uganda more attractive both for local and foreign investors.  And I want to emphasize that the attraction should be increased for local investors because in the long run, you will have a greater stake in the economy.  

Allow me to talk on the capital budget section.  This year, the capital budget was given a significant share.  It actually is 40 percent of the total budget was given a significant share.  It actually is almost 40 percent of the total budget which is to be welcome.  However, the experience of the past has shown that when there is a financial bottleneck in the area or in the Ministries, this is the area that is normally stifled.  In other words, whenever a Ministry fails to realise the money from the Ministry of Finance, they immediately run on the capital budget and use it for recurrent and if they do not, then the Ministry of Finance tends to ignore the release of finances or funds on capital budget and concentrate on releasing funds on the recurrent expenditure.  This approach is dangerous because it kills the goose that lays the golden egg. The reasons for this situation is that whenever there are shortfalls in finances, there is a general fear because of the international pressure.  In other words, whenever the Revenue Authority or any other organisation like donors who bring money fails to bring money in time, instead of actually releasing or creating more money so that we can go on performing, there is a fear that if we do that, there will be inflation.  But as I have said, self-liquidating inflationary financing is a tool that can be used in development process especially if the economy has a very significant portion of the subsistence sector and the economy itself is underbanked and therefore there is need to monetise a greater section of the economy.  You can certainly used inflationary financing to vibrate the monetisation of the economy by crating a situation where every body thinks he has got to produce in order for him to earn cash. 

In the last budgets, release of capital funds in some sectors were such that rather than funds, requisitions were being released.  This would tempt the accounting officer to divert such funds.  What I mean here is that if a Ministry had a programme that put up a block or a building or an office worthy 30 million shillings, the Ministry of Finance has had the habit of releasing a third of that.  However, if somebody is going to buy bricks and iron sheets and other things worth 30 and you give him ten million shillings which shall not buy either and you cannot buy iron sheets, the alternative will be to diver that money for another activity which in the long run will not have been what was meant to be and that at the end of the day capital development is crippled.  It is important therefore, that the Ministry for Finance organises itself in such a way that when a project requires amounts of money, that money is released in block so that the project can take off.  it is better to start two projects and finish them than to start on ten and finish none.  

In the budget of 1995/96, there is an increase of the wage bill form 125 billion shillings to 160 billion shillings.  However, it would seem that this increase is not necessarily a new creation of money but a monetisation of what was in other programmes of the recurrent expenditure which are not being turned into money and called an increase in salary.  If that be the case, then we may not have done justice to the employees in the economy. (Applause and Interruption)

MR YONA KANYOMOZI: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, just to reinforce what my Colleague is saying, in fact if you look at the monetisation of the fringe benefits the civil servants and public officers were getting, which has been now taken to their wage bill, it is very small compared to what the market can offer.  The feelings which people have been given, for example, a man who was staying in Kololo in a house which is now on open market would be 1,000 dollars per month he is not getting that in real terms in order to be able to live still on the same level of comfort as what he is going to get when it is monetized.  I am saying - Mr Chairman, just a point of information.  What my Colleague is saying is very, very crucial.  Unless government does something to turn these monetary privileges into real, the civil servants and the public officers are going to be worse off than they were under the old systems

MR ADRIAN SIBO: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, two points here. One is that although he has increased the wage bill by 40 billion shillings as hon. Manzi is saying, the monetisation bill should have been 60 being made up of 30 billion shillings for housing and 30 billion shillings for transport.  That is a figure that has been calculated properly.  The second point is that the increase, the so called increase, is going to give the civil servants an increase of only give percent in his take home cash.

MR MARK TIVU: Point of information. Mr Chairman, the method of determining the wage bill is one, the productivity of the labour employed and secondly, the market forces.  But what is happening in Uganda is that we have given arbitrary way of determining the wage bill for the workers. The consequence in comparative analysis to other organisations which pay either depending on productivity or on the market forces is that they pay higher than the government and therefore, our productive workers leave the government service to go for those international agencies and NGOs who are giving the real wage.  And secondly our workers or employees are now offering productivity, which is lower than what they are supposed to offer.  Thank you.

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Mr Chairman, I thank all those hon. Members for the information.  But let me only comment only on one and say the reason why the wages do not attract productivity is that in the market, there is a higher supply of labour than the demand.  For instance, currently it has been said we have not more University graduates, diploma graduates and S.6 leavers on the streets who would be willing to take up any price because their shadow price is currently zero.  The increase in the wage bill is to be welcome.  The wages are not yet to levels that would give them minimum requirements of life.  Nevertheless, the gesture is positive and in the right direction.  As a matter of ours, higher wages tend to increase the productivity and efficiency of the labour force. Afterall, the workers are the major and most important element in the productive forces of any enterprise.  It is therefore, important that they must be recognised. If we are to achieve and sustain the economy, the workers will continually be considered for incentives that enhance a higher quality of life at each stage. 

Allow me to touch on taxation.  A good tax regime must be responsive hence the preference of ad valorem taxation as opposed to specific tax reviews. A good taxation must increase stability, should be progressive, it should stimulate production, should be expensive to evade.  You make a tax system such that it tends to evade.  But if it is expensive to evade, it means that the cost of mot paying the tax is higher than benefits of paying it.  So we must have taxation actually that is expensive to get.  It should be administratively convenient and easy, it must be transparent and easily understood by the tax payers because if it remains such that people do not understand it, then they will not only be confused by those collect, but will also try to do other things to avoid payment.  

I am happy to note that the tax proposals as contained in the budget have gone along way to achieve those objectives.  The producers can now work out their own tax obligations without assistance and be able to know what they are supposed to pay and that is why there is a greater understanding between the private sector and the government because the people now know that they are supposed to pay an incidence of that tax.  Savings are necessary for investment. This therefore requires serious balancing. Taxes should, therefore, ensure that they lead the payer with reasonable take home compared to the growth.  

It is also important that the threshold should also be reasonable enough to ensure that the payer actually keeps alive with an alternative to work.  It is also important that taxes should not make the payer worse off than he was in period one.  So in other words, if your take home pay was 20 shillings in 1994/95, it should not be a theme for 1995/96. 

However, I want to comment that I think this could have been an oversight on the policy makers because the employee in 1994/95 was taking home free of taxation P.A.Y.E. 130,000/= but in the new budget proposals, he will have 100,000/= per month because in the previous budget and financial year, the threshold was 70,000/- per month with lunch of 30,000/= and transport of 30,000/. However, with the abolition of the last two and putting them together now the employee is free from PAYE up to 100,000/-.   I am sure this oversight will be corrected in due course and I want to propose that the minimum pay for a worker as a threshold for not paying P.A.Y.E should move to as high as 1,140,000/= and you can get this figure by looking at the Bank of Uganda Household survey and looking at the workers Union’s consideration of what it takes and costs to maintain an ordinary one man, one wife, two children family at the minimum and I think appropriate calculations can be given an appropriate time.  

There are a few taxes that have been imposed which are likely to have negative effects like the extra five percent which I have talked about because it has made imported sugar slightly on Value Added Tax.  On July 4th 1996, we shall implement the VAT in this country.  Clearly, the objective is intended to increase efficiency and transparency in tax payment and also to increase administrative convenience is tax collection.  However, the recent experience is of Ghana and it should not just be brushed off.  I propose that we send a team there to see on the spot what happens.  The team to go should be small but must include both policy implementers and those who pay the tax.  We must prepare in such a way that when VAT is introduced, it is not only understood but it succeeds because the way VAT works requires a lot of understanding of the tax system and actually calls upon the business community to be slightly more literate that we may be having.  Therefore, the current educational programmes which are currently on T.V. and radio for VAT should be made easier.  I have myself seen the programmes on TV and the presenters are making things more complicated than they should be and yet if you get mess in VAT, there will be a collapse in the whole things; because remember VAT is supposed to replace those CTL and Sales Tax.  

Let me state something briefly on the public debt.  At the level where the public debt is equal to 60 percent of GDP or approximately 3.15 billion dollars.  It is certainly very hard and we may be on the board line of a debt trap but we should take heart. Debts can turn out to be a source of strength because the creditors will have a stake in the success of the debtor so that the letter is enabled to pay; because you cannot actually strangle the creditor for if you do, then he will not pay.  However, the important issue here is that we should now move to borrowing for credits for activities that either will generate their own funds to repay or where the indirect benefits are so significant, the growth as a result of the loan are almost obvious and will lead to payment of the debts.

MR KANYOMOZI: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the House and the speaker that public debt is okay if it is used for production and secondly, it becomes easier that nobody strangles you if it is bilateral.  The most problem we have in Uganda I think, is that our public debt is for multilateral organisation like the IMF and the World Bank which always insist that you have got to pay and if you do not pay, they put conditions.  The bilateral laws from countries are the ones which are easier to be turned into forgiveness unlike the ones of World Bank, IMF, African Development Bank.  Maybe, it may be necessary for people who go to negotiate to see a proper mix of how we borrow and from whom we borrow.

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE: I thank the hon. Member for that information.  Mr Chairman, I want to comment, I think the important thing to have a proper mix because whereas bilateral laws are easier to forgive, but multilateral loans take longer time to mature and that is the attractiveness that create a situation where the third world countries go to multilateral because it is considered better to pay in 50 years than to pay in ten years. Sir, what is also very important we must as a country project capacity to negotiate internationally.  This may help in knowing how to get along stringent conditionalities but with a small.  We must take the bull by the horns because currently I think our negotiating capacity is not only extremely low but sometimes is actually absent.   

I wish to commend the performance of URA in the collection of revenue.  They did a great job to exceed the target.  However, there have been some reports that in some cases, URA used unconventional methods to collect that money.  That should be discouraged and tax regulations should be intensified so as to create a tax culture and create a good relationship between the tax collector and the tax payer.  

In winding up, the NRM Government should be congratulated for coming up with the capital market bill and we should also thank the committee on economy and the committee on finance for having given it reasonable surgery.  We hope that when it is passed, it will change the scene of our investment climate in this country and we hope that when it has been put in place, government and the parastatals that are not yet sold but which are viable would be off-loaded on the market so that they can begin and push off the market.  We really wanted the capital market yesterday especially since that is the best was to raise the investment capital.  The 1995 existing budget main objective is to consolidate and enhance the growth of economy.  It is when there has been massive growth and development are separate animals although they are related.  There cannot be development without growth but there can be growth without development.  Mr Chairman, I second the Motion. (Applause)

MR KIGYAGI (Isingiro County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Chairman for giving me this chance to contribute on the 1995/96 budget.  Mr Chairman, I will be brief and I will only touch on privatisation and parastatal reform, decentralisation and road toll.  Before I make any contribution to the budget, allow me in passing, to make two comments.  One is on locusts.  Two weeks ago, locusts invaded the counties of Isingiro, Bukanga and some parts of Rwampara.  We were not here, but fortunately, the CMs, the Members of the Council and the Minister for Animal Resources and Fisheries moved very fast.  You appropriated funds for the cause and the Ministry moved very fast to contain the situation. The damage done was very minimal and I can assure we are not going to ask for any assistance in terms of food.  I was very surprised about the Ministry of Agriculture because you remember at one time when we had a disaster of some animal disease.  We had to airlift the drugs here.  But this time, the Ministry in 12 hours moved with motorised pumps and started spraying and by the time the aeroplane arrived, we had contained the situation and it had not caused any disaster.  We are very grateful to the Ministry of Animal Resources, Agriculture and Fisheries.  

I would like to make another comment by way of passing.  The economy has leaped forward and the country is doing very well but we have one shortcoming which is corruption.  The Press, the local population, public accounts, parastatal accounts, the IGG have done their level best to fight corruption in this country.  But the executive wing of government, the politicians, the police and the courts of law have not done their part and unless these arms of Government come to assist the already existing pressure as exhibited by the press, the local population, the parastatal Account Committee, the IGG, and the Public Accounts Committee, we have a problem, this economic forward movement we are experiencing, might be curtailed.  Mr Chairman -(Interruption)  

MR KARUHANGA: Point of information. I thank you Mr Chairman and I thank hon. Kigyagi for giving way.  I want by way of supplementary information, wish to inform him that in fact, what he is talking about, our courts and the judicial system not having been put in its proper place is correct.  You will recall that there was a Commission of Inquiry to look into the mismanagement of criminal cases headed by Justice Porter, where I also served as a member.  We did our inquiries, we published our report on time, we made fundamental recommendations but these have never been presented to Government, even Cabinet has never ever considered the report of that Commission.  So now the report is just gathering dust, somewhere in the offices of one of the big bosses, who is now a very good custodian of such a very important recommendations.

MR KIGYAGI: Thank you for that information. Mr Chairman, one time, four years ago, I talked to one of the executive officials about corruption and he told me that he was more concerned about corruption than me but the only difference was that he was more patient than I was.  I have waited for four years, and I have not seen this patience.  To elaborate this point, I will tell you a physical example, which I attended on 29th of June, this year; I was attending an Annual General Meeting for the Banyankole Kweterana.  On that day, the Commissioner for Cooperatives attended and the Minister for Trade and Industry was present.  On that day, the farmers gathered and the main issue was that, the General Manager of the Banyankole Kweterana, had given himself - paid himself gratuity of Shs.29.7 million and the right gratuity was supposed to be Shs.9.7 million, because he had finished a contract.  The normal procedure is that you compute the money and you give it to the boss and the Board approves it.  This General Manager computed the money himself, he paid himself the 29.7 when the issue -(Interruption)

MR WASSWA NKALUBO: Point of order. Mr Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Member to bring up that issue when the matter has been taken for the court of law and the money has been charged?  Is it in order?

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: Now, there are two things.  The matter I think is - as far as you can recall this matter is before the court, and I think the person in question has been given bail, and I think the hon. Member is just trying to elucidate by giving reference to that one. Please, proceed.

MR KIGYAGI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for your protection. What happened -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: Order, hon. Members.

MR KIGYAGI: On that day, the Minister and his Commissioner were aware of the pleas of the members of the Union.  But they struggled their level best. First of all, the Minister did not comment on the outstanding issue, and any member of the Delegates who would get up to comment on it, were shut down by the Commissioner.  I was so scandalised to the extent that I saw a note being sent by the representative from the apex of the Union - Uganda Cooperative Alliance to the Chairman because I was also on high table, asking the Chairman because on that day, I happened to attend with hon. Kanyomozi, asking the Chairman, not to ask hon. Kanyomozi to make any comment, because apparently, his interests are contrary to the interests of their group and I got hold of that note, I have photocopied it and sent to hon. Kanyomozi to show him something that I do not understand.  Someone from Uganda Cooperative Alliance is the person who is the apex of the Cooperative Movement, sends a note to the Chairman, that this issue should not be raised and should not ask hon. Kanyomozi to say anything, because he says things which are contrary to the interests of group.  It was a shame, and it was very unfortunate.  I think, unless we come out as politicians, leaders, executive members of our society to condemn corruption, this exercise is gong to kill our forward Movement.  

To make matters worse, Uganda Cooperative Alliance are the external auditors of Banyankole Kweterana and I am told, they have made a report, saying that, actually the money which the General Manager paid himself was just an over payment, and it can be reversed, he refunds the money and he can go back to office. As I speak now, I am told he was released on bail, but he is still in office.  So, if the Minister of Trade and Industry was here, I would be very grateful, because I was sitting next to him and we chatted about these things and he did not make any comment and on lst of July, on Cooperative Day, he made a very good speech and I was seated to the two of the Cooperators, they asked me, is this man we were with in the Annual General Meeting two days ago?  I said, I think he is the one, but -(Laughter)- he has changed.  That is something to say on corruption and I think some of us have waited for four years and the patience has run out and the only weapons we have is that, we must be straight and we must be honest and if something is wrong, even if it is done by the President, let us put in public, so that it can be corrected.  (Applause)

On privatisation and Parastatal reform, the Minister in one of the representations when he was making a presentation on the PERD Bill which we passed here, made a very thorough analysis of why we were privatising the Public Enterprises.  He said, he wanted to scale down Government initiative in economic activities, he wanted to relieve the Treasury of the burden of public enterprises losses and capital expenditure.  He went further to say that he wanted to improve the efficiency of the enterprise operation; he said that he wanted delete capital receipts for the Treasury in privatising the Public enterprises.  He said, he wanted to minimise the involvement of Government and bureaucracy in the public enterprises operation; and he lastly said, that he wanted to encourage wide share ownership by the Uganda public.  I do not k now whether all these objectives have been fulfilled, then he went further to tell us that he was going to use the following methods to divest the public enterprises.

One was direct trade sales, the other one, was joint ventures, management contracts, public offering, give-ways, liquidation, management and employee buy - out and then, some sales to Cooperative Societies. In all the above the Government seems to have put its finger only on outright sales and the other day when I gave an information to hon. Matembe, the members might have understood because they thought I was condemning privatisation and reform.  I want not. On page 11, of the background to the Budget, they say that in Section 233, that the Public enterprise sector is made up of about 107 Public enterprises and so far, they have sold about 34 and they are going to have about 18 liquidations, and about 25 Public Enterprises are up for sale.  Out of the 34 that have been sold, I said, that we had realised about UShs 51.72 billion and I gave an information and I said that in the Public Sector Reform and Sales, the Government is going to use about 100 billion shillings, so I was wondering that since we have already sold about 34 and we have got UShs 51.72 billion, the remaining ones, if sold, might not be able to go up Shs.100 million.

Tthe benefit we are getting from the sale of these enterprises, although, at the end of the day, we might not be able to get any profit, a direct net profit from the sale of the public enterprises, as compared to the money we are using to turn around and sell these enterprises, we get a benefit by way of earning some taxes from these Public enterprises which have been sold to the public sector; they have become more productive, by way of producing commodities and we are no longer getting money from consolidated fund, to support these public enterprises. I have one comment to make though, that in the sale of the Uganda Commercial Bank, I think the Government should change its strategy; because in the sale of the Uganda Commercial Bank, we should be able to consider the economic strategy of this country, because if we sold off U.C.B. 

I am very sure as one of the Members said the other day, that no private Bank is going to invest in Kisoro, is going to invest in Kihihi, is going to invest in Kanungu and at the end of the day, this is a Government wing we are using to collect taxes; I do not know how we shall collect taxes in these areas, and then secondly, why does Government not keep UCB as a service?  We are going to put about Shs.100 billion in the non-performing assets of UCB Let this money be money sent for a service, for its people; so that once we have formed this Bank, we keep it as national bank and if the sales are to be done, let the shares be sold to Ugandans; gradually, as the Ugandans acquire capital, so that we can keep this bank solely as a breather for Government if it has any of its programmes to implement, which might not be economic, but might be socially viable to its population.  

So, my view is that, we should borrow a leaf from the privatisation of Kenya Commercial Bank, the way they did it, was gradual and slowly and it has not affected the operations, the breather for the Kenya Government.

Lastly, I would like to say something on Road Tolls.  Road tolls have confused us.  The Minister today, has confused me more; because if you take a constituency like Rwampara most of that constituency, is on Kabale highway; it is a trunk road.  So, the man just moves from his home, to the highway and comes to Mbarara.  Now, if he does not pay any Road Toll - I mean any tax, because he is not supposed to pay any tax on a highway, what happens?  

So, I think what the Government has to do, what the Minister of Finance has to do, they have got to liaise with Local Administration and find ways of limiting these road tolls, but if you say, there is no road toll that is going to be put on a high way, then all the people of Rwampara along the Rwampara highway coming to Mbarara Municipality, will neither pay the Municipal dues nor the Local Government dues.  I cannot say anything on decentralisation, because my time is over, Mr Chairman. Thank you for the opportunity you have given me.

MR TIVU MARK (Youth Representative, northern Region): Thank you very much Mr Chairman for allowing me, on behalf of the Northern Region Youths to comment on the 1995/96 Budget. (Interruption)

MR MWANDHA:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is it in order for the House to proceed and discuss the Budget Speech when the Mover of this important Motion on the Budget Speech and even the Seconder, are out of the House? Mr Chairman, is it in order for us to proceed? (Applause)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: What does the Standing Order say? Is there any regulation?  But otherwise, hon. Members - order, excuse me hon. Members.  There are Cabinet Ministers here present.  Order.  Please and if the Mover is not in the House that does not mean the debate should cease.  Any Cabinet Colleague can stand for his Colleague in his absence.  But even then, I think the Mover of the Motion, who is apparently out of the Chamber is begin seconded and the Seconder had just finished the contribution which was very lengthy.  Please may I clarify then you come with a procedure? And I think in my opinion, if the Seconder is still in the House - if the Seconder is here and we have an alternative Minister present in the House the Minister who is the Motion is being represented in the House and in that manner, I am in order to allow the proceedings to continue.  Please proceed.

MR TIVU: Thank you Mr Chairman.  I think there is lack of seriousness among some of us policy makers in management of Uganda’s affairs.  First of all, let me thank the Minister and the Ministry of Finance for the policies it has adapted in the budgeting for last two years.  Historically, it used to be that, budget would be managed by:

i) The exchange rate,

ii) The fuel prices, and 

iii) The Wage Bill.

This used to be speculative in our markets.  When people will hear that the Budget will be read tomorrow, you will find the ordinary man who has never gone to a classroom will say, what will be the exchange rate?  What will be the fuel price and what will the English? As a result, commodities will get lost and as result prices will go up.  But today the Minister has adopted a policy whereby we have managed the speculative aspect of the Budget, for which the Ministry needs to be commended.  I think as we adapt such kind of technical and economic policies and the management of our society, we shall be able to avoid speculation measures - speculative activities of people which can distort the economy.

Secondly, let me also commend the Minister for reducing financing through ways and means.  Before two years ago, you find that a Budget will be read and you see a very big deficit and then the Minister will announce and say, this one we shall finance through ways and means.  Their impact is that, this through ways and means, may means an increase in money supply and therefore, consequently an inflation pressure and also, it had a result of enabling Parliament to authorise financing of unknown Government projects. But to day, by eliminating financing or by reducing rather financing through ways and means, I think Parliament is now able to know and control the money supply in the economy and therefore, to control the government programmes and projects for which I think the Minister also need to be commended.  

I also want to commend the Minister for sending in time releases for the various Government Programmes which has led to great improvement in services and Government sector.  It has been for Uganda that projects are planned and put here as policies, but then at times the monies are sent after three or four months when some of the activities are out of tray.  For instance, if there is a firm project in the Northern region which is supposed to be financed between March and September where is rainy season, Government should come to sign money in December when it is dry season.  This will mean automatic failure in the implementation of Government policy, but I think the Minister, this time, has tried as much as possible to send finances to government projects and programmes in time, and as I said, it has led to improvement in government services and I wish him to continue with this kind of method.

I also want to comment very briefly on government projects like NAPU, PAPSCA, CAP and so on.  This is Government money, because whether they have been financed by foreign bodies and so on, we end up paying the public debt, but I think the concern of the local authorities is that, they have not been involved in the budgeting of the activities of these organisations; as a result the project is there, you are being just told there is a project, NAPU, for you, you have to see it.  But how much money is it being given for you as a RC.V, you do not know, and as a result, you only end praising the thing without knowing how much you have lost.  It think I will encourage a policy, whereby the money is given and then they say, with RC.V chairman, for Rukungiri, such an amount of money is given.  Can you monitor it in that way? I think there, the local authorities will be much pleased.

The Minister talked about low demand in Uganda industries today and you know, as in least developing countries, we leave in a very competitive area.  You know the East African Community, when it was in existence, Kenya benefited a lot, because of its potential position, but now the Ugandan Industries are coming up.  What should we do as Uganda to improve our market situation? As these developing countries, majority of all people live below subsistence level and therefore, as we have kept our industrialists grow, then, let us - by keeping them demand, I suggest the following:

The analysis of the Ugandan market, is that we defend on Boga Zaire and on Southern Sudan for our markets; but now the Zairian economy is very fluid, this is because, I live along the border.  The Zairian economy is very fluid, because they have devalued their currency so much, so that we are supposed now to import from them. Now because of that devalued currency, our good cannot go to them.  So, the consequence is, we are with our own market.  

Now, because of the diplomatic relationship between Uganda and Sudan that has broken out, and also because of the SPLA War, wee do not have now free transactions for our goods with the Sudan and as a result it has now reduced our market.  My appeal is, as Uganda, we must use diplomatic means to restore our diplomatic relationship with the Sudan; so as to improve our market if our industries have to grow.  Unless we do that, we shall be concentrated with little markets and our economy will not grow and hence the economy will not grow, we shall not pay taxes and - it will be a matter of - viscous circle of poverty, Mr Chairman.  (Applause)

Let me talk briefly about public debts. (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: Could you wind up?

MR TIVU: Let me wind up by talking briefly about public debt.  I think last year, member voiced their concern. (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of clarification. I did not like to interrupt the hon. Member holding the Floor in particular, when he said, the Minister releasing funds upcountry.  About two weeks ago, I traveled in the northern part of Arua, as a Secretary/Committee member, in Works, I found all the workers on the roads, were removed for the reason that no money was given.  So, when he said, the Minister has released money for upcountry activities, so I do not know whether he includes the money for roads, because there are no workers on the roads and the roads are getting back to their worse situations.  Thank you Mr Chairman. (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: Could you, please, wind up?

MR TIVU:  Mr Chairman, the information I have and indeed it happened, if he talks of Arua, I was Secretary for Arua, Finance Committee, we privatised road activities and I really doubt if his clarification if clear because, we have implemented Government Policy of privatisation and most of these things are privatised; and I represented very large region where by I know, and most of the places I have gone, the Government services have improved.  

Let me wind up by talking about public debt.  Public debt I have been told the - is it 3 point something billion dollars of Uganda is not what is contracted only within this Government, it has been contracted by a sequence of governments and I think governments have taken it upon themselves to contract debts anyhow, because they know, they are not going to be responsible for the payment of these debts; it is going to be the youths and the children to pay these debts. (Laughter) 

As a representative of the young men and women, I am concerned about these debts, I think we must know the ways and means why these debts have been contracted and when they are going to be paid; we must put a limit - when these debts are going to be paid, we should not just contract them anyhow at the expense of the future; because we do not know - what about if they are paid for buying military guns? (Interruption)

MR KABUGO MESUSERA: Point of information. I should like to inform the hon. Member who is holding the Floor, that public debt is always met annually and certainly, in most cases, six monthly and sometimes, every quarter depending on the contract and the nature of the contract.  In this case, since this is a national issue, of a national interest, there is no date that is set, that such a debt will be paid off; because unless you say that Uganda will stop to operate, in the same as other countries, the public debt should not create an issue here.

MR TIVU: Mr Chairman, I am aware and knowledgeable that in budgeting you have local taxes and public debts to finance your budget.  But the issue I am concerned with is, the ways in which this debt is being contracted; and how it has been used and how it is going to be paid.  I am not against public debt, I know it is inevitable in budgeting, but I am saying, do we just do it anyhow, because I am not going to be responsible for its payment? This is my concern, Mr Chairman.  With these few comments, I support the Motion.  Thank you.

MR SIBO (Nominated Member): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would have liked to start by lauding the Minister for Finance with praises for his good Budget, but since he is absent, I think I will pass over and go straight to my observations.  I will be short, I want to comment on three areas of the Budget.

One is the effects of liberalisation and privatisation policies and the second are what the Minister calls PPA Project priority areas and the third, is the living wage.

On the effects of the legalisation and privatisation of their life, I think substantial.  We have tended to forget sometimes what we have in the past done, for instance.  The legalisation effect on our agriculture on the farmer, are quite disastrous.  The farmer of cotton and coffee has no costs known to us, the cost has been calculated by the cotton and Coffee Development Authorities and in this case, they are not taken into consideration when the prices are fixed.  Normally the producer fixes his price for his product, but in this particular case, the prices of cotton and coffee are fixed by the national market and as a result, the farmer is actually left into the hands of the profiteering chunks.  

One would have liked to see some subsidy or the stabilisation fund established so that when the farmer cannot get his price, the funds assist him.  But in this case, those funds which have the same effect are not available, and as a result, the farmer is left with two options, either to dispose of at a loss or to hoard.  In both case, we stand to loose.

The second effect of our policy on privatisation liberal policy  - liberalization has led us to abandon certain previous policies we had to bring in the indigenous Africans into the economy.  You may recall that sometime back, on trade, government had actually started or did introduce Africans into trade by building - constructing certain buildings all over the country, in order to bring these Africans to participate in trade and commerce.  Now, these buildings, have now been abandoned and as I speak now, even the Minister of Finance does not know how many buildings he has all over the country.  These buildings, we are not even collecting Revenue from these buildings and it is - these buildings were intended to bring in Africans into urban areas, in trade and commerce, this has been abandoned.

Second point in this respect, sometime back also we had established certain special streets which were reserved for indigenous Africans again to bring them in trade and commerce.  Again, this policy has been deserted and therefore, in fact, as we speak now, many Africans who had come in to Kampala, for instance, have been left, thrown out on the streets, without security, without compensation, at all.  Indeed, you may also recall that sometime in early 60s, the Aghakan himself came out here, and suggested to his community, that they should leave the rural areas and leave trade and get themselves more into industry to allow the Africans to carry out trade and commerce.  Now, again, this policy to have deserted and now there is of course, they have come back.  We think that really this is a backward step to do.  We should consider these policies and see how best we can again rehabilitate our indigenous Africans who may not be able to compete effectively in this ruthless trade.

Again I mentioned earlier on, that the farmer has been  I think deserted to a certain extent.  We had what we called the farmers Scheme in Uganda Commercial Bank, Rural Farmers Scheme in Uganda Commercial Bank, this has been deserted and when the Uganda Commercial Bank has been privatised, certainly, that will be out.  This is understandable, because Commercial Banks are not Development Banks and development loans are very expensive and have very little returns in the long run and as a result, all the Commercial Banks are not interested in development loans. I would like to suggest that we should seriously consider establishing an Agricultural Bank.

Second point is the project priority areas. (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: Order hon. Members. Proceed.

MR SIBO: Mr Chairman, these areas are said to be infrastructure, primary education, primary health care, security, water, judiciary, rural feeder roads, and agricultural research.

On infrastructure, I would like to request the Minister of Works who is not here, but I hope the Minister will pass on this.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: Order hon. Members.

MR SIBO: That the road from Kabale to Kisoro is no longer a road, it is just a cattle truck, with very high ridges and very deep holes.  The problem is that, we have got very traffic, very heavy lorries supplying Zaire and Rwanda, passing through this road, and have really made a mess of it.  Sometime back, 1993/94 Budget Financial Year, a study was carried out, I think I must say by the kind Minister hon. Nasasira, was very effective on this and I thank you for that and he did suggest that after the study by this year 1995/96, the road will be constructed.  Now, I do not see it in the Budget, he is out unfortunately, I do not think he has impressed on his successor to look into this.  On the judiciary, earlier on, somebody had commented on the unfortunate problems we have in Judiciary.  The fact of the matter is, that the best lawyers in the country are not attracted into the - to the benches.  What we have, are those who cannot make a success outside the bench and it is a shame! (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: Order, order.

MR SIBO: Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: Cries of order.

MS KADAGA: Point of information. Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor and this House, that we have some of the finest brains - legal brains in this country on the bench.  Therefore, it is not correct to say that the people who are on the bench have failed to work outside.  Really, we should be straight, it is an insult to the judiciary.  I insist that he withdraws it, Sir.

MR SIBO: Mr Chairman, I think I was trying to compare the two.  If it is not acceptable -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information. I was to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that, not all brilliant lawyers have to go into private practice, a lot of these brilliant lawyers, remain in the civil service and they develop through the Civil Service and eventually end up on the bench and they do very well and some lawyers who can do well in private practice, do not do well, as Judges or magistrates.  So, with that information, I think -(Interruption and Laughter)

MR BAKASHARUHANGA:  Point of information I wish to inform the hon. Member on the Floor, that Uganda may be the only country, which pays lawyers more money than doctors and yet, the Minister of Education, calls on Ugandans to study science.  He should advise us to read law! (Laughter)

MR SIBO: Mr Chairman, with all this information which I welcome, I accept them very willingly, I was only trying to suggest that we are not doing enough, although my hon. Member Bakasharuhanga says that we pay them, but actually we are not paying anywhere near enough to attract good men there.  Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: Could you wind up hon. Member.

MR SIBO: Mr Chairman, this point I would like to make in the third point I am making on the living wage.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: Could you wind up, please.

MR SIBO: I will make it short, Mr Chairman.  The President in his statement said, that the Government will try to pay a living wage and the Minister of Finance, says that, he is going to pay a living wage and the Minister of Finance, says that, he is going to pay a living wage next year, 1996/97; but I have my doubts. Earlier on, you were told that in fact, he has increased the Wage Bill from 125 to 165 and I pointed out - in fact this is not - it should have been 185, if we are talking in terms of monetisation of housing and transport, it should have been 185 billion, but we do not even get there.  

In any case, if we calculate the living wage with a minimum of Shs.70,000/-, we actually go to the level 247 billion.  Now, this means that the Minister next year will have find 87 billion to add on the 160 and I doubt very much whether we have got that ability to collect revenue from that level of 60 to 247.  The only way you can do it, is to change his priorities and start on those priorities in favour of the living wage; I do not know whether you will be able to do that.

I want to say, to tell the Minister, that actually a wage is a fair post to the Budget and he should remember that.  If we are going to have a well motivated, civil service, we have got to pay them; and if we do not pay them, they are going to pay themselves, and they are paying themselves, as we speak now.  At some stage, I may be able to give you some figures on this, but this is a fact.  So, I would like to urge Government to seriously consider bringing the wage Bill into the priorities that they have in the programme.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

DR F. BYARUHANGA (Kitagwenda, Kabarole): Thank you Mr Chairman for giving me the opportunity to make a contribution to this Debate.  A few days ago, I was in the village and I met one peasant, by the name of Begumanya.  Begumanya is about 38 years, I have known him since his birth, and I had got to understand him as a person who had lost hope.  After his P.7, he came this way, and got a job as a factory hand, worked for about 10 years, he failed even to buy himself a goat, and in disgust went back to the village.  In the village, he found the same situation; but this time, when I talked to him, I found him a little more hopeful.  He has about 150 trees of coffee, and when I asked him whether he has sold his coffee, he said, yes, he had managed to sell it before the price collapsed, he had sold at Shs.900/= a kilogram and I asked him what he had done with the money.  He said he had roofed his house which formerly had been a grass-thatched house, with 30 iron sheets and the rest, he had bought himself two cows. Now, with the rest of the money, he was very hopeful that given the trend of things, he may also become a successful person. This is a clear illustration that our economy is improving and actually, even the livelihood in the village is also -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: Order, order.

DR F. BYARUHANGA: Is also improving.  Now, I was giving Begumanya as an example; Begumanya is not the only coffee farmer in Kitagwenda, thousands of our peasants are coffee farmers, they are having a similar experience but coming back to - when one goes to hon. Mayanja’s Budget, one finds the following figures, that the agriculture grew by 6 per cent manufacturing grew by 18 per cent, it gives me the impression that if our agriculture was growing faster than it is doing now, that if it was for example, growing at 10 per cent per annum, wee would be having a better economic performance, our economy would be growing at faster rate and also, the changes in livelihood of the common people in the villages, would be bigger and faster than they are to day; because I have the fear that if we only depend on growth of industry, say if we recorded 30 per cent in industry but did not record any growth in agriculture, our economy would be said to be growing probably say at the 10 per cent we have hit now.  But the people in the villages would remain as poor as they have been.  Now, the agriculture is not growing in the villages because of several reasons.

One of the reasons, which I think is the biggest problem we have in this country, which even Prof. Kagonyera talked about in the general debate, is that we have talked a lot about democracy, but we have not talked enough about discipline.  I do not belong to that group which says that a country only grows by discipline.  I believe that a country needs both democracy and discipline in order to grow.  But in this country, we have all tended to become professional politicians and only talk about democracy, but do not give much emphasis on discipline.

When you go to the villages today, although we are managing to record this 6 per cent growth in agriculture, most of the people are actually not working, most of the people spend all their time right from morning to evenings in bars - just drinking their local brew and unfortunately, these people who spend all the their time in the bars are the youths.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Order. He is making a very useful contribution.

DR F. BYARUHANGA: The youths who have the muscle to do real work.  We definitely must tackle this problem; we definitely must tackle this problem if we hope to see real development in our rural areas.  I have moved around this country, and although some of us -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Whereas I appreciate what the Member says that the majority of these people who are involved in boozing are youths, I want to disagree with him, because I have been researching and I have found out that the majority of these people, who booze are men.  What the youths are mostly involved in is drug abuse, and most of these men even go with their wives.  Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: Cries of order.

DR F. BYARUHANGA: The problem is that, here we define the youths as those people who are 30 years and below and I know the ones between 20 and 30, many of them in the villages are married and probably do not look to be youths to her, but they are mainly the youths.

Some people outside this House are often heard talking about issues like federo, hoping that federo would be a pain share. For example, to the problems of poverty in the Uganda countryside.  Well, federo may probably deliver some infrastructure, but what is actually required in our villages is hard work; we have to face it that way.  Really hard work by the very people who inhabit these villages is required so as to cause some progress in the countryside.

MR KIGYAGI: Point of order.  Is it in order for the hon. when the Member is contributing?

DR F. BYARUHANGA: Another problem that besets our people in the rural areas is the lack of infrastructure, that would move their produce to the markets and would even bring in people like the extension staff to assist them to do their production.

In last year’s Budget, although I do not have the figures here, we voted quite a chunk of money for road repair.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information. The point the hon. Member has raised is very, very important, but sometimes we raise these issues to Ministers and they do not respond, in particular, I am talking about the roads from Rhino Camp to Pakwach, that road is 65 miles, but because it is bad, when the cotton is ginned from Rhino Camp, it is taken to Arua, 42 miles, then from Arua to Pakwach, 82 miles, a total of 124.

So, all the profit of the ginnery is absorbed on transport; that is the major disease of that Ginnery.  So, I am requesting that the Government should take immediate step to take over that road from Rhino Camp to Pakwach.  So, the issue of road should be taken very, very seriously.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: You wind up hon. Byaruhanga.

DR F. BYARUHANGA: I was talking about the road network.  Last year, we got quite a lot of money for road repaid, I have also been moving around, but I have not noted much or many road works in the countryside. This year, we are again going to vote quite a lot of money for road repair, especially for rural feeder roads.  But then we shall find that at the end of that year, we shall be here again talking about lack of roads in our country.  Where does this money go? That is my simple question, where does this money which we vote for road repair and road construction, every year go?

Another problem, since you have told me to wind up, is agricultural extension.  I had already talked to the hon. Minister of Agriculture and promised him to give my views in a written form, since I may not have the time to express them here.  But I wish to assure him that this unified extension that is being tried out right now has actually failed; we do not see the delivery as far as the farmer is concerned; we shall again need to sit down and look for another approach, that will get this man, who has the knowledge, he be it a research worker, he be it a professor in the Agricultural Faculty, he be an expert working in the Ministry of Agriculture, some method that will get this person to interact with the man who actually grows the crops.  I believe there is a way, because really our extension has let this country down and we are going to enter the 12st Century with 19th Century Agricultural Technology and this very absurd, because I expect that this country in the next century will starve, unless we modernise our agriculture in this country. (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Thank you Mr Chairman for giving me the opportunity to inform the Member holding the Floor and the whole House.  It is true the extension system failed especially during the difficult years.  Attempts have been made to revive this extension.  This programme which the hon. Member is talking about is only three years old.  It has succeeded in certain aspect.  There are some problems which have got to be addressed.  I think it will erroneous to say the system has failed.  I think rather he should identify the problems which have got to be tackled and I think together we can work out a system which can help our farmers but wee do not want to give a signal to the population of the country that this programme which has just started which has hindered some results which are very positive, we should not give a wrong signal from this House that this system is hopeless.  

I think this is the information I want to give to my hon. Member that we have problems and I think that those problems were at one time identified in this House; especially the attitude of our technical people from the Veterinary agriculture and all the other related things, we have not been used to working together and I think we have already made progress towards this field and I urge him not to make sure a blanket statement.  Otherwise, what we have already done can go out in ashes.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

DR F. BYARUHANGA: Thank you for the information.  In fact, my problem is not with these people that I do not want these people in the various fields to work together.  My problem is that as they work together, they should deliver.  Although they are working together, they are not delivering. Now, if we can find a way of making these people as they are now deliver, I have no quarrel.  

Mr Chairman, since you have allowed me to wind up, let me wind up by advising the Minister for Finance -(Interruption)

MR OBWANGOR:  Point information. I would like Mr Chairman, to inform the hon. Friend on the Floor of the House and the House that there is a mechanism, there is no new way we can increase production in order to improve rural welfare.  Other than that, we increase in an authentic way, a satisfactory way, the morale of the so-called extension staff.  Whether be a DC, whether be agricultural officer, whether be a doctor - yes, because they are in the field - whether be a teacher.  Pay them well.  (Applause)

DR BYARUHANGA:  Thank you very much for the information.  Although I am informed that the extension workers are now getting some good allowances.  So, to wind up, I would like to advise the Minister for Finance to continue studying this question of VAT because as we have heard VAT has caused some problems in Ghana.  We do not wish to see its introduction causing similar problems here. Since we hope to have a national planning commission.  I believe that most of our problems will get solved as far as capital projects are concerned but before we have the national planning commission, I would wish to request the Minister for Finance also to keep a close eye at the project monitoring unit that he has in his ministry.  Let him cause them to do their job so that our money - the money somebody was quarrelling about this money which we borrowed from outside - is not squandered.  Also, I would also wish to advise the Minister for Finance that I believe time has come to question this whole issue of expenditure on technical support.  This country has produced very many experts in various fields.  I do not see why we are spending millions of dollars on technical support.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. 

MR KABUUBI (Bujenje County): Thank you Mr Chairman for allowing me to contribute on this Motion.  I would like to begin by talking about the corruption aspect.  Last time I said here, I think some people have been querying me on this statement which I made last week in Parliament that I had said that there is no corruption.  I did not say that there is no corruption in this country.  What I said that this government is working very hard to eradicate corruption. (Laughter) At least the government has made an effort to stop corruption by creating these bodies like Public Accounts Committee, Parastatal Accounts Committee which in the past did not exist.  I mean like in Obote II Regime.  There was Public Accounts Committee but it did not work.  The only thing maybe which should be addressed now is  -(Interruption)

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, thank you very much.  I would like to inform my hon. Friend holding the Floor of the House that as a legislator in this House, he ought to be aware that in our Statute Book, there is Parliamentary Act 8 of 1970 governing corruption.  In our recent history we created the Leadership Code Act but we are unwilling in spirit - the law is there but nobody is pushing to stop corruption.  We are allowing that our government aggressively attacks this enemy - corruption because it is stopping development is the areas - all areas whether education, Police, what not. We do not seem to love Uganda.  That is why we are having corruption.  Corruption has increased because it is not stopped.

MR KABUUBI: I would like to thank government for the effort at least it has rendered in order to eradicate this evil by creating these bodies.  However, there is a problem which I have realised and which has escaped our attention as parliamentarians.  These are these co-operative unions and district authorities.  There is too much embezzlement of public in these unions, in local authorities.  We have a problem.   Almost in every district, you find we have problems especially we parliamentarians.  We are even hated, we do not want to be seen because whenever we ask - has this man arrived here?  You get a lot of enemies. So this is an area where government must really put its attention.  

We should also try to have a Public Accounts Committee which should look into the union affairs because these farmers - we represent farmers because they are saying this is not a government issue but we represent the farmers who are being cheated.  The scenario of Banyankole-Kweterana is very much alive in our mind where someone was supposed to be a chairman of the union but of all the people, a minister comes in and interferes with the democratic process.  This is a big shame.  Someone is supposed to be - people had decided on their choice of the right person they want. Here is a minister who comes in and interferes with democratic process.  This must be condemned by democratic thinking minds.  (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: Order, order.

MR KABUUBI:  I would like to talk about privatisation and I will mainly centre on UCB.  Uganda Commercial Bank is a bank for Ugandans.  It is our bank.  This bank has done a very commendable job because at least what we hear the 82 billion which we are talking about non-performing as of now - this money was loaned to us Ugandans although we have failed to pay but this money is to us and I know if efforts will be exerted, this part of this money will be recovered.  You can imagine that money has had a multiplier effect on Uganda’s economy.

MR ONGOM: Point of information.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform the Member on the Floor that the statement he is making is very valid. In fact, it is not just that the loans were given to Ugandans but the majority of what is outstanding actually is interest.  Because the loans were given to Ugandans but the majority of what is outstanding is interest - because the loans were given mainly at a time when the interest rate was very high.  I have an instance where I borrowed money on the same interest.  The actual capital has already been paid but we still end up owing about three times the capital you borrow.  It is really the interest.  It is not that the people are not willing to pay but the money was borrowed at the time when the interest rates were very high.

MR KABUUBI: Mr Chairman, I thank him for the information.  Anyway, since he has not disagreed with me, the money has accrued to Ugandans.

AN HON. MEMBER: I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor and the House that the money which is held as non-performing, is not only held by Ugandans, but also was lent to non Ugandans.  Kagame is the case at the point and late Rwigyema.

MR KABUUBI:  Anyway, Mr Chairman, that was a small percentage really and that time he was a Ugandan.  He had not said he was not Ugandan.  So, I stand -(Interruption)

MR NASASIRA: Point of information. I would like to inform hon. Kabuubi that Kagame who is non-Ugandan has paid back.  You can add on that.

MR KABUUBI: Mr Chairman, the reason why I am trying to stress on UCB - really we should mind about our country.  We should be very patriotic.  Whether we are taking decisions about privatisation but we should also be patriotic.  We should also weigh the benefits we accrue out of this privatisation.  I have attended many of these seminars where we have been called - I as a Member of parastatal accounts - I have been privileged to attend some of these seminars which have been organised either by the Commonwealth Secretariat and the Equator Company from New York but what I have discovered, they are saying that the purpose of privatising is to allow these organisations to work better - to have more money so that we can have more taxes and what have you but really at the cost of our people?  

We need taxes, I agree to run a government but really we cannot just kill ourselves just because we want taxes.  We should -(Interruption)- on Uganda Commercial Bank.  This is the only bank which has branches all over the country and the foreign banks like Stanbic, like Barclays, they have even failed to go upcountry, they have refused completely.  They cannot go outside. They want only to operate in Kampala and mind you, some of these banks - even all these foreign money we are getting from the World Bank is only rotating with those banks - Stanbic.  Donors - those who are giving us loans have got conditions, they say that it must go through Barclays Bank, it must go through Stanbic.  So you can imagine and these banks earn a lot of interest and they are not even benefiting our people.  They earn a lot of interest by carrying out the banking services.

MR MAYENGO: Point of information. Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member as I have done on many occasions that it for exactly that reason that we are advocating the selling of shares of these companies like UCB to Ugandans and I believe that when we do that, those Ugandans who own the shares of UCB will be getting the benefits and probably they will resist the ideas that might cause the failure of the bank.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information. Uganda Government has continued to borrow development funds from outside and unfortunately these funds are being given to these foreign banks to administer, putting our local people at the disadvantage because suppose you are coming from Kitgum and you want some funds for the development there, you have to go and open an account with Stanbic but Stanbic will tell you if you want to borrow for a project, we are unable to provide for this project there because they do not have a branch.  This is a very serious issue, yet when they come to final days, it is the Ugandan Tax payer to pay that money.  Why do we not give this money to our local banks - to UCB and Uganda Cooperative Bank who have got branches everywhere?  This is a very serious matter. I would like somebody responsible form the Minister for Finance to come and tell us why.  Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: The Minister for Finance is being represented.  The minister is taking note.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  On 3rd of September 1993, we passed the PERD Statute and Clause 27 said, ‘The Minister Responsible for Finance, shall at least every six months submit a report to the Legislature on the Steps taken to implement the provisions of the Statute.’  This is two years now.  I think the only way to save UCB is to ask the Minister to present a report of how far he has gone with divestiture and reform so that we can give him new guidelines on the selling of Uganda Commercial Bank.  So, it is a problem for us and I think government should think twice about the position of sale.  

I know we are pressed by the donors that should privatise almost everything by 1997 - that every parastatal should have been privatised but we as Ugandans there are certain things we should say no, this one is my right.  We should not be dictated upon for everything that is going on.  At least we should also say no, this one we are not privatising for the sake of remaining with our destiny here.

MRS MUGARURA: Point of information.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  Of late the ban and board have been trying to look for solution for these weak banks.  We have found out that the cost of designing and implementing programmes to help these banks is cheaper than selling them off wholesale because we found that the economy of our country ticks because of these indigenous banks.  (Applause) 

The people who are borrowing 3,4,5,6 million are the people who keep our economy ticking and the only way to save them is to keep these banks in place and design a programme because we have no godfathers.  The foreign banks have got fathers; Institutions which run to them when they are in hardships but when you re-examine what is on the ground, the banks have met their conditions, they are suffering from bad debts-like UCB because of the situation.  The interest was so high - 58 per cent and all these banks accumulated excess interests and this is why the people are failing to pay but the money was invested.  

So, we are saying our government should have a responsibility to keep these banks in place and at the moment we have contracted consultants to work out a programme where government could assist these banks because it is cheaper and more profitable to keep these than selling them off. Thank you.

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  The information I would like to add on is that as much as we are saying the Ugandans should have a chance to get these shares but there is another problem which we have also to be clarified.  Last time I heard a Minister here posing a bit when he was talking about Nile Hotel that Ugandans were given a chance.  Ugandans are not exposed to the real cost of the share.  That is why we are failing.  They tell you - you are free Ugandans to apply but they do not tell you the cost of a share in such an organisation or an enterprise to be divested.

REV. ATWAI: Point of information.  I would like with your permission to remind the hon. Member on the Floor that I think it is not proper to talk about Uganda perse because this loan that we are talking about - this which is bringing down the back is Kampala here two years ago, I said that this loan had not crossed Kafu and then the hon. down there shouted and said even it has not crossed River Mayanja. So, when we talk about Ugandans, we should begin to narrow it so that the recovering trust should now look into this loan within Kampala area.  Not outside. (Applause)

ME. OLYANG:  Point of information.  Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  Further information to the hon. speaker holding the Floor.  Additional to the information given by the hon. Lady there in Bank of Uganda, I would like to inform my Colleague here that Messrs Wade Adams bank had run bankrupt in Europe and they were given a contract here in Uganda.  They were supposed to start last year in October.  Today as I speak, I see them meandering around the roadside not quite grading, not even being supervised and because their bank is outside, we have no future in Wade Adams; I wish they were banking with UCB here in Uganda.  That is the further information.

MR OKODI: Point of information.  I want to reinforce the Member’s point by giving this information.  Government with the assistance of the World Bank has designed a very good programme for revitalising the cotton industry.  It has set a aside a substantial sum of money to give to the farmer for cotton production but bank of Uganda has invited Commercial Banks to take on these loans to channel them to the farmer and non of them is willing but we could utilise the services of our indigenous banks like UCB and Co-operative Bank to lend this money to the farmer and improve their lot through cotton production.  So, the Member’s point is so valid that government must necessarily take it.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

THE MINISTER:  Point of clarification.  Thank you Mr Chairman, I would not like Members to continue on some of these issues that is why I stood up to give you some clarification because Members may come up again to ask for a report on divestiture.  The Minister here yesterday reported that he has got already a report and I saw a copy of it and I think the Minister for Finance is due to give you some information on that. 

A Board member here has just raised an issue about the local banks. I think the NRC Members should be more conversant with what is happening in the field. When the Bank of Uganda closes up some of these local banks, they always give you reasons and I would not like Members to wait for statuses like the one for the few Building Societies, the Teffe Bank.  Bank of Uganda must take care of the interest of the citizens.  

So, it is not a question of them not wishing the local banks to survive but if they are going to make the citizens lose, the Bank of Uganda will be to blame and the I think my Brother Rev. Atwai - every Ugandan is free to take on loans but if you go to the bank and they give you certain conditions and you cannot fulfill them, they cannot go to risk.  A bank is a business.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Could you wind up hon. Kabuubi.

MR KABUUBI: Mr Chairman, since those have been so many information, I think you better give me at least 2 or 3 minutes so that I can -(Interjection) I would like to talk about these contracts.  A hon. Member has reminded me of a point about Wade Adams. If you look at the profile today of how many contracts Wade Adams has won in the whole country, it is almost 60 per cent of the whole entire contracts. Now, here is a company which is being doubted and they have already paid them advance to do the job and they cannot do any good job.  As you know our road going to Gulu, it is not even done.  

Now, there is another organisation which my Colleague talked about yesterday and which I wanted to give information.  This is regarding this oil exploration at Lake Albert and they have been given a contract to explore oil for 25 years.  This company I am told Uganda Investment Authority wrote to find out their credentials back in the United States; to find out whether this was really a genuine company and they got nothing up to today, Uganda Investment Authority has not got anything.  So, we are in danger.  I personally feel because this oil exploration is in my district.  So, we could be conned because these people are not known anywhere.

BRIG. KYALIGONZA:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, in a way of reinforcing his point, I would like to inform the hon. Member and the House that this same company actually has now working capital.  They are raising funds by creating shares which are not voting and each share is 5,000,000.

MR KABUUBI: So, my appeal here - I think there must be another committee should be instituted by government which should vet some of these contracts which our officials make.  I have had the privilege of looking at the various contracts. Say, for example, Sheraton Management Contract but when you look at it, you find Uganda Government is not getting anything out of it.  The Contract is quite onerous.  So, I think it is high time now that whoever is posing as a foreign investor, government must set up another machinery of checking, of vetting some of these contractors, some of these companies - because our officials are - our officials who negotiate these contracts, I do not know whether they have Uganda at heart or they think of themselves because when you look at the Management Contract of Sheraton, you cannot believe it, we are not gaining anything out.  You can verify this information, you can use any other method to find out.  

So, I am saying such a company which has been taken to Bunyoro to explore oil which has no proper papers, no address, it has no bank it has no what and yet our Uganda Ambassador is the one who introduced this company.  So, really some of these things should be vetted.  Otherwise, Banyoro will lose, even the Uganda.  I would also like to talk about VAT because VAT is a good thing that is going to be introduced next year but the problem of VAT is our people.  Our people do not keep records.  It is going to be rather difficult.  They have no accounts.  Our businessmen have no records and it is going to be extremely difficult to administer this system.  So, I would call upon the Uganda Revenue Authority to intensify classes, training so that our people can and  -(Interruption)

MR KASSAJJA: Point of information.  Thank you very much Mr Chairman. I would like to give information to hon. Kabuubi, that VAT is one of the simplest taxes to collect because it needs only two things.  That is the purchases which is the invoice - if you are purchasing something and then the output, those are the sales.  In fact, they are two things.  You have to know only your purchase , if you have purchased a car and you intend to sell it. You know how much you have paid for the car. Then you know how much you are going to sell it if you are retailer.  Then you just apply the percentage on that one.  If it is 20 per cent and then you get.  In fact, it is the simplest.  It is just a matter of telling the Members to get the issue. 

MR KABUUBI:  Mr Chairman, the hon. Member is misleading the House.  So, I do not need to elaborate on that point because he does not seem to know.  In fact, he is a director but he does not know the mechanism how it works.  (Interjection) 

I am winding up by saying that much as taxation should reduce - taxation is a good thing but one of the aims of taxation is to reduce the inequality of income between people.  You find today many of our Ugandans are too rich and then you find others are too poor.  They cannot even afford a meal.  There is that gap.  I urge government to try and reduce the gap between the poor and the rich.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  With that, we come to end of today’s Session and we adjourn the Council until next Tuesday at 2.30 p.m.

(The Council rose at 4.50 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 18 July 1995 at 2.30 p.m.)

 
