Tuesday, 10 July 2007 

Parliament met at 2.52 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you. It is with deep regret that I announce the untimely death of our colleague, hon. Francis Kabagambe Mugarra, Member of Parliament for Ntoroko County Bundibugyo District. Hon. Mugarra passed away yesterday evening at Kampala International Hospital where he had been admitted for the last two weeks.  The details of the burial arrangements will soon be released but we have decided that the body be brought to Parliament tomorrow, Wednesday, 11 July 2007, at 10.00 a.m. for viewing and in the afternoon we shall have a special sitting to pay tribute to our friend who has passed away. I think it is appropriate to stand up for a moment of silence.

(The Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are now receiving a number of documents especially the policy statements from ministries in respect of the Budget.  Therefore, I urge you to try to empty your pigeonholes today so that these documents can be put in your pigeonholes. There are many documents to be put there. 

This afternoon in the gallery we have our brothers and sisters from Nakasero area. These are traders doing many activities. They have come to see what we are doing.  You are welcome. (Applause) We also have students from Holy Cross Lake View Senior Secondary School in Jinja. You are also welcome. (Applause) 

I will be adjusting the Order Paper. This is because tomorrow we shall not have any other business apart from paying tribute to hon. Mugarra. I am constrained to adjust the Order Paper to accommodate some business, which has to be done today.  

2.58
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibaale County, Kamwenge): Mr Speaker, thank you for giving me this opportunity.  I rise on a matter of concern from my district and constituency. It is a matter that has caused a lot of worry and panic. This is about the disappearance of our leader, a former District Service Commission, Chairperson and Catholic Priest of the Catholic Church, Rev.Fr Tonny Kiiza. 

I am raising it here because his disappearance raises a number of unanswered questions.  When you read from the press and the information we keep on getting, we have no option but to appeal to the Minister of Internal Affairs and the relevant security organs to beef up our local efforts to search for his whereabouts and to send us a team to coordinate the different stories so that we can know whether Rev.Fr Tonny is living, abducted or dead.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Sorry about that. I hope the authority has noted and will take necessary steps to find out.

2.59
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (NRM, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I rise on a point I feel is of national importance, a point that concerns the integrity of this House. It directly concerns some Members of this House, including the Vice President and by implication the President.  There is a local newspaper that is widely read in the Western region, which happens to be one of the sister papers of the government newspaper, The New Vision. This local paper is called the “Orumuri” and covers the whole of Western Uganda. This morning an article appeared in the said newspaper talking about the visit that was organised by some of the Members of this House for the Vice President to visit Kigezi region on his famous Bona bagagawale programme.

In that newspaper, which I have and will soon lay on the Table, one of the Members of this august House, a junior Minister of State for Local Government refers to the people of Kabale who received the Vice President, the local leaders and the Members of Parliament who organised the trip as “abayayi” which is the equivalent of lumpens.  The person who is reported to have given the story has not yet disputed what is written in that story. (Interruption) 

MR BANYENZAKI:  Thank you honourable member for giving way.  Not only has this matter been written in the “Orumuri” but also sometime back she was recorded on air and she is on record for calling Members of Parliament from Kabale hooligans.  So, this is a habit that has been going on and needs to be addressed very urgently.

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you honourable member for that information. I would have expected the Minister to call at least one or two of the MPs concerned either to deny the story or to retract it. But apparently, there is no retraction and I am made to believe that that story is true. 

The importance of the visit of the Vice President and the Office of the Vice President- Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, you see you are talking about a paper. When was it published? Is it today, tomorrow? Which day was it?

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Speaker, the paper is dated today, on page 5. It is a big headline in Runyankole-Rukiga saying, “Abaatayayise Bukenya nemiyayi - MP Hope.” (Interjections) I beg to lay this paper on the Table. (Laughter) While I conclude, I wish to make a point of inquiry from the concerned Minister on this particular article that appeared in that newspaper and if her response is not satisfactory, I beg this House to refer the matter to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are the one who has said this was in today’s newspaper. I have not seen it myself and may be others have not. Since the Minister is here, she will tell us.

3.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mrs Hope Mwesigye): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a bit disappointed. First of all, I have been out of the country for the last three weeks so what was taking place here in Uganda and specifically in Kabale I am not aware of. I am not aware whether or not the Vice President went to Kabale and who received him - (Interjections)- and who did not receive him. I am not aware of who organised his visit, who received him, who did not receive him.

Mr Speaker, I happen to be a Member of Parliament for Kabale District and the only woman. I would have expected my colleague brothers to give me a call when they read such an article and ask me to respond to it, if it is in good faith. Sincerely none of them has given me such a call. I was in Nebbi and have just come back today. I have not read the Orumuri and I do not know what is in there. I have not even talked to any staff of the newspaper. They have not asked me about these matters. Mr Speaker, there is no way I could retract something I have not read about.

Having said that -(Laughter)- I would really implore my colleague brothers not to try to make political capital out of matters that we could settle out in our district. Thank you.

MR NIWAGABA: Since she has not retracted the statement, I beg to move this House to refer the matter to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, this is what I am going to do. Now that you have tabled the publication, I will make an inquiry from the person implicated to give me a response. Following the response, that is how we can move on. We cannot immediately take it to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline; at least it is fair that way. I will be able to handle it.

3.07
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg your indulgence to comment on a matter that was raised by hon. Tumwebaze regarding the disappearance of his constituent. It is not just the resident of Kamwenge that has disappeared. Many people have disappeared. I laid here a list of over 200 people 10 of whom were reported having disappeared. Among them is Ndawula, a youth from Nansana, who has disappeared for now several years and many others. The list is available.

I would, therefore, like to broaden the issue of the disappearance of people so that the Ministry of Internal Affairs actually comes out with a statement or an investigation into the matter of disappearances of people in Uganda. It is more serious than we think. Thank you.

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. What hon. Niwagaba raised is very important because it concerns about six Members of Parliament. I respect your ruling but we need a time frame. When is she going to respond? If she does not respond, we shall then know when this matter should be taken to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline.

THE SPEAKER: Now that I have got the publication, I will seek a response to it. You will know the reply and consequent to that, we shall decide how to handle it very soon.

3.09
THE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Mr William Oketcho): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to bring to the attention of the House the fact that we have been expecting ministerial policy statements which were supposed to have been presented to this House by 30th June as per section six of the Budget Act. Up to this day, these are still coming in. Really we have waited for a bit of time and it is now the 10th July. We expected these much earlier and my office has already circulated some guidelines to the various sessional committees on how to analyse these statements but they are all asking for the statements to be brought to the House.

So, please, I would request that the ministries submit these statements as soon as possible because we are late and we are waiting for them. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Now, I want to adjust the Order Paper to allow a Member to make a statement in respect of tomorrow’s day.

STATEMENT

3.11
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much Mr Speaker and honourable members. I am the Chairperson of the Parliamentary Forum on Food Security, Population and Development. It is in that capacity that I stand here to give a brief statement because tomorrow Uganda will join the rest of the countries in marking the World Population Day. 

In this Parliament, we have a Parliamentary forum, which brings together over 150 Members of Parliament. Before I read the statement let me take the opportunity of introducing the Executive: Chris Baryomunsi – Chairperson, Jane Alisemera – Vice Chairperson; Mathias Kasamba - Secretary General, Florence Sekabira – Treasurer; Sylvia Namabidde - Publicity Secretary

We also have committee members who represent the four geographical regions of this country. Hon. Ruth Kavuma, Woman MP for Kalangala, represents the Central Region, hon. Herbert Sabila, MP Tingey County, Kapchorwa, represents the Eastern Region. Hon. Silver Bahane, MP for Bufumbira North, represents the Western Region, and Prof. Anokbonggo Washington represents the Northern Region. 

Let me also say from the onset that this is an all-party Parliamentary Forum and all the members participated in electing the leaders, and these are the leaders that emerged.

Mr Speaker and members, on 11 July 1987, the world population reached the 5 billion mark, and as you know, on 12 October 1999, the world population hit the 6 billion mark. Today, we project the world population to be about 6.5 billion people. This was a landmark in the demographic history of the world, and the UN designated this day of 11th July as a world population day to be observed annually by all member states. 

And as we all know, since 1989, this day has been observed in Uganda, and the day has been used to raise critical awareness to mobilise commitment and support among the country’s Government leadership, the civil society, professionals, the private sector, the donor community, the media and the general public about the country’s population issues that need attention. I did provide copies, and I hope they have been circulated to Members to follow the statement.

The occasion is an opportunity to take stock of the achievements so far made by each member state towards improving the quality of life and standard of living of their population, and to reflect on the challenges that confront each country regarding the population concerns with a view of addressing these issues. 

The national activities for observing world population day in Uganda have been hosted by various districts giving the local governments a chance to raise the profile of the population concerns and also to put them to the public and policy agenda. 

This year’s world population day, which will be marked tomorrow, will be the 14th to be observed outside Kampala since 1993 and will be hosted by Gulu District. Therefore, those who thought that population issues are for Government side alone should take note. The opposition Members predominantly represents Gulu District, and that is where the national celebrations will be marked. And as a forum of Parliament, we would like to extend an invitation to all the Members to join Ugandans in Gulu to mark this important day. Our forum has already sent a delegation to represent the members of Parliament in the celebrations, which will be take place tomorrow in Gulu, Northern Uganda.

While we mark the world population day, we as Ugandans need to renew our commitment and resolve putting in place policies, programmes and strategies aimed at dressing population concerns with a view to improving the quality of life of our population. A population that is healthy, educated, skilled and engaged in economic and productive ventures is an asset that can propel national development. As Members of the Eighth Parliament, we have a duty to do whatever it takes in ensuring that the standard and quality of our population is made better than it is today.

The global theme for this year’s world population day will focus on men as partners in maternal health. And for Uganda, the theme has been domesticated to read as, “Involving men as active partners in maternal health.” 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, Uganda today faces dire population and development challenges. We have some of the worst population and development indicators in sub-Saharan Africa and globally. For instance, Uganda’s population growth rate is one of the highest in the world, currently standing at 3.3 percent per annum, and by any standards this is a very high population growth rate because it means that the Ugandan population adds by about 1 million people every year and that it doubles every 21 years. 

You can prove that because in 1986, when the NRM Government came to power, the population was estimated at around 14 million Ugandans and right now, which is about 21 years later, we are 28.4 million. That is the projection that we have. So, our population right now is estimated at about 28.4 million basing on the 2002 census projections.

There are usually three main factors, which affect population growth, and that is movement of people, mortality, which is death but also fertility, which is reproduction, but the major factor, which drives our population growth rate is the high fertility of the women in this country. 

This means –(Interruptions)- I am hesitant to talk about the fertility of men because we do not usually measure it. I know that men’s can be higher, but we usually focus on the fertility for women and this means that Ugandan women are producing many children in their reproductive lifetime. 

Our estimates as a country show that the total fertility rate, which is a measure of the children women bare in their lifetime is now estimated at 6.7 children per woman and this is approximately 7 children per woman. When you disaggregate, according to different profiles in some districts like Kanungu, the fertility is about 9 children per woman and this is because most of the women do not have access to family planning services and information, and they also start producing children at a young age. 

Most of the pregnancies we see are teenage pregnancies which are sometimes unplanned and unwanted. In addition, Ugandan women produce at very short intervals, they do not do child spacing because they do not have access to information and services on family planning. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the maternal mortality ratio, which is a measure of the mothers who die as a result of pregnancy or childbirth related causes is unacceptably high. About five to six years ago, it was estimated at 505 deaths of mothers per 100,000 live births, and this has reduced to about 435 deaths per 100,000 live births in 2006. 

While we appreciate this achievement in the reduction, it is not statistically and programmatically significant. The figures show that we lose about 16 mothers everyday due to pregnancy and child-birth related complications in this country, yet we know that pregnancy is not a disease and therefore show not be killing the mothers. It is a normal physiological process, which a mother goes through and both the mother and the baby should remain alive after that process.

 Other population and development indicators also show that a lot need to be done, but a number of things are not improving. As I stated earlier that the theme for this World Population Day is, “Involving men as active partners in maternal health.” This should including men who sit in this Parliament.

For a long time, the African society has been viewed as a patriarchal society. And in our setting here in Uganda, men are usually the key decision makers in their households. So, involving men as active partners in maternal health will reduce on the delays of mothers during labour, and both the health of the mother and baby will be considered as a key priority within the households. Bringing the men on board will ensure community empowerment towards a better health and quality of life.

We would like to state that men’s involvement and participation in maternal health and maternal survival programmes can make all the difference in women’s lives because:

i) 	Fathers and men often decide whether a daughter will marry young or have a chance to complete her education. And we know that early marriage can lead to high-risk pregnancies, and this justifies why men should be at the center of promotion of maternal survival.

ii) 	The husbands play a key role in deciding how many children a couple will have, and when to have these children. I see some men shaking in disapproval, but these decisions can shape the future of the whole family and therefore the whole country.

iii) The men often make financial decisions, including whether to pay for a mid-wife, or transportation of the mother in labour to a hospital, and when complications arise, these decisions can be a matter of life and death. Therefore, men are central to the survival of the mothers.

	As political and religious leaders in our communities, men shape public opinion. So their support for women’s health and well being can affect the care that pregnant women receive in this country and else where.

	On matters of HIV/AIDS and other sexually transmitted infections, men’s behaviour is very crucial in the prevention of these diseases. When we look at the epidemiology of most of these illnesses, women are increasingly at risk of these infections.

Therefore, the Uganda Parliamentary forum on Food Security and Development, would like to call upon all Ugandans to take cognisance of the high and alarming population growth rate that is being fuelled by our sexual and fertility behaviour. 

As a medical doctor, I get worried when it gets to evening time because Ugandans then start manufacturing children; they start engaging in sexual activities which result in over 1 million babies every year, but also result in over 130,000 new HIV infections in this country. So, we call upon the partners and couples to always produce children by choice and not by chance.

We also note that the high population growth rate continues to undermine our development efforts in this country, and therefore, as Members of Parliament, we must take note of that and integrate the question of population in the planning and budgeting systems.

We would also like to appeal to all the men in this country to support their spouses in order to attain better quality maternal health and survival. We would like to call upon Government to ensure that all men, women and young people have access to information and services and enable them make informed sexual and reproductive decisions.

We would also like to urge the government to expeditiously pass and begin the process of implementing the revised population policy, which we are told is supposed to be before cabinet. We have a National Population Policy, promulgated in 1995, which has under gone revision and the cabinet should be considering and passing it. 

As a forum of Parliament, we would like to call upon the members of Parliament and other elected leaders at various levels to be change agents in our communities, but more particularly to speak with one voice on the negative effects of the rapidly growing population in this country. 

We still hear a different voice from political leaders, including the President and some cabinet ministers. But we would like to have one voice on the issue of population so that we can guide the country in terms of how we check the rate at which our population is growing.

Above all, as elected members of Parliament, we need to do all it takes within our mandate and functions to make a formidable contribution towards improving the quality of life of the Ugandans whom we were elected to serve in this Parliament. Thank you very much Mr Speaker and Members for listening.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

3.28
MR BEN WACHA (Independent, Oyam County North, Apac): Thank you Mr Speaker, and I thank the chairman of the forum for this statement. This is perhaps the most important statement that has ever been made to this House. We have been skirting around the issue of population explosion in Uganda without coming to the gist of the explosion.

I have noted the suggestions of the chairman on how to check the population growth. But I think we are still falling short; we are still shy about telling the truth. I hear incredible statements, which are attributed to some of our leaders about the population explosion in Uganda. For example, the President is believed to have said that a big population is good for Uganda – for the market of Uganda. I shudder at that; the population is exploding, and we are not doing anything to improve the well being of the people who produce. In effect, we are going to end up with a big population of very poor people. Is that good for Uganda? We should be serious. 

It is time Government came up and said, “A population growth of 14 million people within a period of 20 years is simply not possible for a country like Uganda.”  Government must come out and say, “We must try to find ways of checking the population explosion.” 

The reason I say that this is a good statement is because at least some fora in this Parliament are starting to talk.  This is one step; if Government cannot act, Government should be forced to act because the people who will eventually be faced with the problems are not the top leaders, but our people in the villages. 

How many children does President Museveni have? I know hon. Janet Museveni has four children, but I do not know how many His Excellency has. (Laughter) However, the point is, we simply cannot afford to have a population that we cannot take care of; that is the bottom line of the issue. So, I thank you very much, Mr President of the forum, and I want to end that should you have another election next time, let it reflect the membership of this House. 

3.32
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank my brother hon. Chris Baryomunsi, the Chairperson of the forum, for the statement. I plan to start where hon. Ben Wacha just ended, that when it is a Parliamentary Forum, whatever board it is, that board must have a conscious commitment to reflect the diversity in Parliament. It is, therefore, a little inappropriate for the forum that deals with a very important matter like this to have a composition that is extremely skilled.  

We have seen the Uganda Women Parliamentarians Association.  They have a body where they distributed leadership amongst the political groups and this allows everybody to focus on what they should be doing rather than me standing up to talk about the composition of the leadership. That is the first thing and probably the only thing that the press can easily pick and write about rather than the message that your association has given. So, let all the Parliamentary associations or fora that we have put it within a law that no political party shall hold a certain number, say, not more than 50 per cent. It allows you to spread out without undermining participation. However, I stood up mainly because –(Interruption)

MS NAYIGA: Mr Speaker and honourable members of Parliament, I thank hon. Latigo for giving way. The information I want to share with you is, when we are here, people pick interest in the different activities that are carried out in Parliament. That is why you find that some people register in some fora because of the interest they have and for this particular forum, people stood and contested and those who wished to be elected were elected.  I still think that members of Parliament should not be compelled to be where they do not want to be, especially when it comes to such fora, which come up to address specific issues. I thank you.

MRS BYENKYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just wanted to inform you that you should encourage Members of the Opposition to contest often. They, at times do not offer themselves, like in this particular case.  

PROF. LATIGO: Well, I had already made my comment on the matter and I am not going to go back on it.  

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, when the chairperson for this forum was introducing his members, he clearly indicated the executive - the Chairperson, the Vice Chairperson and so forth. When it came to committee members - actually the lower cadre - he introduced one member from the Opposition and who is a professor. Does it mean that this professor could not deserve being in that executive position? Is the honourable colleague therefore in order to say that we should encourage our colleagues from here, yet the members are already there but there are no voters? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, honestly, I do not know how to handle this matter. The little I know about this forum is that it was in existence in the Seventh Parliament. I think hon. Kityo, Prof. Mwaka, Prof. Latigo and others were members. The membership to this forum is voluntary. Before you start asking, you must know who the members of this forum are, and unless you know, you may not competently criticise. I think what we should do is to encourage as many members as possible from both sides to be members of this forum and the problem will be solved. However, people have taken note of the reservations.  

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I concur with hon. Ben Wacha that the issue of our population is a very serious matter. However, you are aware that we have a Population Secretariat. The public reports and you read those reports every time they come. You ask yourself, “When will this secretariat address the fundamentals?” I am an ecologist and I am trained in the science of observing living organisms, including politicians, and how they live in their environments. 

As an ecologist, the fundamentals of population apply whether you are dealing with insects or human beings. I get very concerned that each time you read the position of the Population Secretariat, and most likely the policy that will come and the statement of the forum - when you look at it just as a plain scientist, you end up saying this is lamentation because there are certain basic realities about population, which if you know, then you can just focus on what to do. 

Because of the intensive fishing on Lake Victoria, for example, if you go to the fisheries officers, they will tell you that as of now the species, particularly the Mputa, in Lake Victoria become sexually mature when they are still very small. That is a basic fact whether you are Mputa or human beings. If you look at the population statistics in Uganda now, the highest birth rates and the highest population growth rates are in Acholi because that population has been subjected to stress. The immediate response when a population is subjected to stress is to find mechanisms of ensuring that survival is maintained. In other words, while our high population growth is partly attributable to the improved health services, a more critical examination of it will tell you that our country is highly stressed. 

The factor to address the high population growth, therefore, is not in encouraging people to produce less because it does not mean anything to what they must do biologically or innately. We should focus on improving incomes of the population, on improving girl child education; the highest dropout rate of UPE is of girls. Immediately these girls leave school, they turn into wives and mothers - (Laughter) - but we are linking this to reality. Probably, UPE is now ending up as a major contributory factor because it shapes the girl child –(Interruption)

MR KIGYAGI: Thank you very much, honourable colleague. I am also an ecologist at master’s level and I know that a population will increase when the conditions of reproduction are good. In fact, while stress can increase some populations, when conditions of reproduction are excellent the population can also explode. So, it is not the other way round. I wanted to balance it out. Thank you.

DR SEBUNYA: (Applause) Mr Speaker, just a small clarification. Did hon. Latigo say that the Mputa enjoy sex most when they are stressed? I thank you. (Laughter)

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The aspect that Dr Kibirige Sebunya brought up was an aspect that was not in my mind. However, John, what you said merely confirmed that you are also an ecologist except that you were not following what I was saying. (Laughter) If you were, I used a specific example of the Acholi. If I had said that that is the reason why the population has grown in Mbarara, then I would have been saying something that you could challenge in professional terms. However, the point you have raised is one that I was going to talk about. 

I lived and studied in Kenya. In the 1970s, Kenya enjoyed very rapid growth in social service delivery. By 1980, Kenya’s population growth was the highest in the world - it was 4.1 percent - and they were absolutely worried about it. However, because they were investing so much in education, the cycle of those who produced in response to good opportunities passed and the subsequent cycle was of those who produced with knowledge, deliberately planned, and the population of Kenya then dropped. 

Some of these are things that sometimes happen. When they happen and you know why they are happening, you should not cause unnecessary alarm because you will not change them. You will not change the increase in our rates of population growth due to good delivery of health services and social services; it will happen, whether you quarrel about it or not. The only thing that you should comfort yourself with is that you are on the right path when you invest in the right thing.

THE SPEAKER: But honourable members, under our rules we are supposed to take about 15 minutes. I see some people who are interested in making some comments from this side.

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Speaker, I just wanted to bring this up because we end up debating with excitement and we fail to focus. If the problem is because poverty is stressing Ugandans, then let us fight poverty. However, if we are responding to improved conditions, then we should not be exceedingly alarmed because you will bring guys with projects on family planning instead of money that will improve the lives of people, thereby diverting resources. I thank you.

3.47
CAPT (RTD.) GUMA GUMISIRIZA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Mr Speaker, I want to agree with hon. Wacha that hon. Baryomunsi’s statement was very good and perhaps the best. I do not know if it is the best so far since we came here in the Eighth Parliament, but it is one of the good statements pointing out real issues for discussion, real issues that affect and afflict the Ugandan society. I therefore want to thank him in that regard.

When you get a challenge or a problem, in normal circumstances you must think harder to come out of the challenge. If you fall in a military ambush, you use all possible drills to come out of the ambush quagmire. We have one of the highest rates of population growth in the world - he talked of about 3.5 percent according to the 2002 population census, but it could be higher now. What worries me is our sluggishness, our lack of quick response as a country and as a leadership to this challenge. This challenge means that we have more mouths to feed than we had yesterday. In which case, people who are in positions of leadership and people who are in charge of deployment of scarce resources must be at a higher level in terms of addressing this issue. 

To me, the worry is not about the population growth, and this is where I want to differ from hon. Ben Wacha. China today is a giant principally because of its population size, as well as other Asian countries like India –(Interjections)- You can say “No”, but I am entitled to my view. Of course, I do not want to quote Britain because it is an ancient society in terms of development of the human race although it is the same geographical size as Uganda and its population is 60 million people.  

My worry is how we deploy the scarce resources to satisfy man’s needs in this country; our ability to look at the resources at our disposal and deploy them to address the ever-increasing population. Thank you very much.  

3.50
MRS MARY KAROORO OKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me also add my voice in thanking the chairman for this very comprehensive report. It is in the rural areas where we find couples having so many children and then they have problems of fees and so on and so forth. In the rural areas there is no recreation, there is no electricity and so they cannot watch television. So what do they do when night falls? –(Laughter) Mr Speaker and honourable members, this is not a laughing matter. This is why, honourable members, when we are considering the next budget we should seriously look into subsidising items like paraffin as we take services to the poor. This is serious. 

The report talks about almost 16 women dying per day in childbirth. I am appealing to the media to please take up this cause. Sixteen women dying in childbirth everyday is equivalent to one kamunye crushing everyday, and if that happened it would hit the front pages - “16 people died in car crush.” However, when it is about women dying, it does not even make it to page 3 and yet this is happening everyday. So, if the media can pick it up, then our policymakers would also take it up more to see that the situation is dealt with.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, this committee has started very well. One of the issues it is supposed to look at is the issue of food security. There are so many countries in the world, for instance Israel, where they have kept food enough for the next almost 50 years, and yet sometimes for us here when there is famine in Karamoja we cannot get enough food to feed our own people. Since this forum has started on the right footing, can they seriously study the issue of food security? Can we make sure that in Uganda we have enough food in case of a crisis?  

During the 60s, even though I was still young and hon. Wadri thinks I was an old woman then, every household had three granaries. It was supposed to use two of the granaries but keep one granary for a rainy day in case there was famine. I hope this forum will look into those very serious issues of food security in Uganda. I thank you, Speaker. 

3.55
MR TOSKIN BARTILLE (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I quite agree with the concerns of the forum but there are only two issues I want to comment on. As we look at the population increase, we should also be looking at the distribution and the density of the population all over the country. As you look at it, what message will you take, for example to most of Northern Uganda? When you move through Northern Uganda, say in Kitgum from Palabek up to Agoro and down, the place is completely empty; there are no people. This was the case even before people went to camps. 

I look at a place like Karamoja; the Karamoja region is very big but what is the population there? The population is less than one million in the whole of Karamoja from Nakapiripirit up to Kotido. Now, what message will you take to those places? (Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. Mr Speaker, I grew up in Acholi and I live there. I am very familiar with the areas that the honourable member holding the Floor is talking about. There is no land that is not occupied in Acholi. We toured the entire Acholi sub-region last November. It would appear to me that while people are living in the camps, the honourable member holding the Floor was in the countryside surveying land. I would like to seek clarification from him as to when he was in those areas where he did not find people and what he was doing there –(Laughter)   

MS JANE ALISEMERA: I just want to give you information. For us we are not looking at the land to be occupied by a certain number of people; we are looking at the women who die during labour and childbirth. We are looking at the number of children who would be produced by that particular woman who will eventually die because of pregnancy related problems. A man can produce 20 or 30 children from different people, but we want to make sure that the woman is kept safe and at the same time the children are well catered for and given all the basic needs at the same level. That is the information I wanted to give you.

MR TOSKIN: Mr Speaker, I thank the members who have given me information. For hon. Okello-Okello, what is true and what I am talking about here is the population density - how many people we have per square kilometre. I am talking about the whole of Karamoja region, which has less than one million people; what message are you going to take to these people? I thought that as we look at this we should look at these other variables as well. It would help us and it would make it meaningful.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Thank you for giving way. Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the honourable member that it is not actually true that Karamoja has less than one million people. As per the 2002 census, we were about 1.2 million people and I think from the current projections we could be hitting two million. So we are not that few. Thank you.

MR TOSKIN: Mr Speaker, the information from the honourable member of Karamoja does not help us much because he is not giving us the population density of Karamoja. What I know is that it is very low. 

I thought that the most important thing that we should be addressing as Ugandans is ensuring that we have enough social services knowing that the population is growing; I would not want to use the statement that it is getting out of hand. This is a very small population, what we need to do now is to begin to prepare for social services. We should have enough social services to cater for the people that will be born. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think that we should give the Front Bench a chance. Honourable members, we will have an opportunity to revisit this matter when we debate the State of the Nation Address and when we deal with the budget. I will give you time.

THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Omara Atubo): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I thought that the information I am going to give to the House would enrich this paper, but first, I want to thank the Association of Members of Parliament, 150 of them. I want to inform the House that two weeks ago I had the pleasure of being invited to launch the State of the World’s Population and concurrently the State of Uganda’s Population at Hotel Africana. I think I only saw about 10 Members of Parliament. 

I am inviting my colleagues to read this report because it gives you the projections of the population up to the year 2050. Uganda, for example, will have a population of 130 million people by the year 2050. Hopefully, you will be dead. (Laughter) By the year 2020, Uganda will have a population of 50 million people. 

Now, the theme of the Ugandan population report and the world population report was based on urbanisation. That is why as the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development I was invited to launch the reports. They were looking at the way urbanisation is going to be extremely useful in terms of serving humanity in the face of a population explosion. For example, only 12 percent of the population of Uganda is living in the urban centre at the moment, but it is expected that within the next 20 to 30 years it is likely to rise to about 50 percent. 

Mr Speaker, I invite every Member of Parliament to read this report. I think it is possible through the Clerk to get a copy of the State of the World’s Population and the State of Uganda’s Population. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us end this debate. I want to thank the forum for the statement and I also want to thank you for your contribution. As I have said, very soon we shall visit this matter when we have two general debates on the budget and the State of the Nation Address. Otherwise, I think your points have been noted and those concerned should work to effect the necessary changes in this particular report. Thank you very much.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT SEEKING TO BORROW $ 27,440,000 FROM THE INTERNATIONAL FUND FOR AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT (IFAD) FOR FINANCING THE DISTRICT LIVELIHOOD SUPPORT PROGRAMME

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will excuse me; before we proceed to this motion, I have received the following communication under rule 136 and I want to carry out my role on that one. It is a letter that was addressed to the Clerk to Parliament and it concerns the reorganisation of the NRM representation on some of the standing committees. Committees have started work and therefore I will need to state the position. The communication to the Clerk reads as follows:
“I am writing to you in accordance with rule 134 and 136 of our Rules of Procedure. After carrying out wide consultations, I would like to bring to your attention that there are vacancies on standing committees as mentioned below, because of the withdrawals of the following members: hon. Dr James Makumbi from HIV/AIDS, hon. Kyamulesire from the Rules, Privileges and Discipline Committee, hon. Oketta Julius from the government Assurances Committee, hon. Tinyefuza from the National Economy Committee, hon. Aronda Nyakairima from the Public Accounts Committee, hon. Dr Lyomoki from the Science and Technology Committee, hon. Lubyayi Sseguya from the Science and Technology Committee and hon. Banyenzaki Henry from the Budget Committee. 
I therefore designate the following to fill the above vacancies:
Hon. Lubyayi Sseguya to the HIV/AIDS Committee, hon. Mpairwe Beatrice to the Rules, Privileges and Discipline Committee, hon. Lagada Beatrice Amongi to the government Assurances Committee, hon. Kabanda Sabano to the National Economy Committee, hon. Wonekha Oliver to the Public Accounts Committee, hon. Kibwika Nyago Lydia to the Science and Technology Committee, hon. Banyenzaki Henry to the Science and Technology Committee, hon. Akol Rose Okullu to the Budget Committee. 

Further, I would like to designate hon. Akol Rose Okullu, Woman MP Bukedea District, as the Vice Chairperson of the Budget Committee.

Hon. Princess Kabakumba Labwoni Masiko
Member of Parliament”

My role is just to announce under rule 136 -(Laughter)- and after the announcement the position stands as stated here. Thank you very much. Now we can proceed with the motion, honourable Minister of Finance.

4.07
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to move for a resolution of Parliament to borrow US$ 27,440,000 from the International Fund for Agricultural Development for financing the District Livelihood Support Programme. 

This is an anti-poverty programme. It is a programme to improve the livelihood of communities in 13 districts. It will improve access roads and water infrastructure. It will improve agriculture and land management. It will improve community mobilisation and savings, and support the management of these communities by local Government. So, I beg members to support this motion.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

4.09
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Ibrahim Kaddunabbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is the report of the Committee on National Economy on the government’s proposal to borrow US $27.44 million from IFAD for financing the District Livelihood Support Programme. 

Background 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, over the last 10 years, the government of the Republic of Uganda has received considerable support and co-operation from the International Fund for Agricultural Development, which has been heavily invested in service delivery through local governments and this has made tremendous improvement in the quality of life and welfare of the people. The just ended District Development Support Programme (DDSP) covered the districts of Kibaale, Hoima, Kyenjojo, Kabarole and Kamwenge and it was financed by IFAD. 

Following the high success and achievements registered by this project, the government of the Republic of Uganda has proposed to IFAD to find a successor project to DDSP, named the District Livelihood Support Programme (DLSP), to ensure the smooth transition from DDSP to DLSP. The programme will cover the districts selected by the government of Uganda and IFAD basing on factors such as the incidence of poverty, the state and extent of the road network and coverage of water and sanitation. 

Thirteen districts have been selected and these include: Masindi, Buliisa, Bundibugyo, Kamwenge, Kyenjojo, Mayuge, Bugiri, Busia, Yumbe, Apac, Oyam, Luweero and Nakaseke. The project is expected to last seven years. 

The strategic objectives of the project are:

1. 	To reduce extreme forms of poverty, disease and hunger
2. 	Increase farm productivity, food security and household yields
3. 	To step up production of food at household level for family consumption and a surplus for sale
4. 	To ensure that rural communities are more self-reliant
5. 	To ensure the increase in productivity and incomes of households and make them more sustainable
6. 	To ensure rational utilisation and protection of national resources
7. 	To critically improve or provide rural infrastructure
8. 	To address governance issues of the districts and sub-counties in order to deepen decentralisation and local democratisation.

The committee met with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Minister of Local Government. 

The committee also perused the following documents: 

•	A brief by the Minister to Parliament 
•	The District Livelihood Support Programme appraisal document 
•	The District Development Support Programme Mid-term Review Report 
•	The District Development Support Programme Completion Evaluation Report 
•	Loan Agreement 
•	The District Development Support Programme Completion Report. 

I would like to lay them on Table. 

I would like to lay on Table the following: 

•	The Financing Agreement between the Republic of Uganda and the International Fund for Agricultural Development; 
•	The District Livelihood Support Programme Appraisal Report dated 20 April 2007 for the completed programme; 
•	The District Development Support Programme Mid-term Review Report dated November 2003; 
•	The District Development Support Programme completion evaluation report dated July 2005; and 
•	The completion report for the District Development Support Programme dated March 2007. 

Terms and Conditions of this Loan

The lender is the International Fund for Agricultural Development. The amount is US $27.44 million with a maturity period of 40 years, including 10 years of grace, a service charge of 0.75 on disbursed and outstanding amounts. Others include grants of US $4.8 million from the Belgium Government, a grant of US $0.4 million from IFAD, and counterpart funding from the government of Uganda of US $4.95 million. 

Observations

1. 	This is a pro-people project, which is targeting the rural community enhancement and is in line with prosperity for all.

2. 	The project covers only 13 districts leaving the majority of the districts not covered and DDSP covered only five districts.

3. 	Improved productivity of bananas, pineapples, upland rice, maize, groundnuts, beans, vegetables, fruits and local cattle is emphasised.
4. 	Community mobilisation to foster community participation and support by enhancing community rights and responsibilities through strengthening the self help groups and SACCOS is timely.
5. 	The committee observed that the project will provide critical administrative and logistical support to districts and lower local governments by way of computers, bicycles, motor vehicles, motorcycles, access roads and water infrastructure. 
6. 	The use of existing local governments is welcome, as it will allow continuity even after the completion of the project.

My committee therefore recommends as follows:

1. 	That Government should attract more projects that are intended to increase productivity of its people.

2. 	Government should provide pro-people projects in the remaining districts of Uganda with due emphasis to quality and supervision.

3. 	Simple technology to assist in value addition should be emphasised.

Lastly, the committee requests this House to pass this loan request considering that it is targeting the majority of Ugandans who live in the countryside. 

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairman of the committee.

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of procedure. The chairman was making his submission and I did not want to interrupt him, but my understanding of committees of Parliament is that they work on behalf of Parliament. We therefore expected that the Committee on National Economy, mandated to scrutinise requests for loans from the government, would do their work. Amongst the things they are supposed to do is consult the Minister, look at the documents and then write a report, which should be convincing to all of us.

I saw the chairman laying on the Table documents that he used to justify the loan request. If we have to debate this loan request and to take advantage of the documents he has laid on the Table, obviously we will unduly delay the process of considering this request. 

This is a process that I am seeing for the first time. I have been in the Seventh Parliament and I was a member of the National Economy Committee, and on many instances I helped to prepare the report. The salient features that would convince members of the validity of the loan and the circumstances of the loan were always included in our report. Does it mean now that I will be justified in requesting for an opportunity to peruse through this document before I consider this report or should we just say that this report is adequately presented? I need your guidance on that, Mr Speaker.

MR SPEAKER: It is like when a report is presented after a committee has interviewed a number of people, members of the House will not call for those same people to be interviewed. You leave it to the judgement of the committee, which assesses the usefulness of the testimony given, and then you believe in their judgment and their response to you. Should you want more details, you are free to seek them but definitely the witnesses that appeared will not come back. In any case, they cannot come here. 

In the same way, you may ask why you are convinced with one document or another; we give some confidence to the committee itself to make an assessment and then recommend to us. 

MR KADUNABBI: Mr Speaker, I need to add that it is the practice of this Parliament that all documents which are considered by the committee are laid on the Table so as to give any member an opportunity at any one time to refer to those documents. All our members have these reports that I have laid on the Table. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, this is to avail them to you in case you want to study the documents. We need to put some confidence in our committees. Otherwise, we will be doing the work ourselves. 

4.21
MRS BEATRICE BYENKYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Hoima): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am glad that Hoima District is one of the districts that have been a beneficiary as far as the IFAD programme is concerned, and we really did benefit in phase one and two.

I wish to refer to page 2, strategic objective No.8. It says: “To address the governance issues of the districts and sub-counties in order to deepen decentralisation…” My emphasis is on deepening decentralisation. My observation has been that of late, the government has not been so serious in decentralising some of the things it has been centralising. I hope if it states “to deepen decentralisation”, that is what should happen.

Another thing I need to be clarified on is on page 3, and that is in relation to the crops, observation No.3. It says: “Improved productivity of banana, pineapples…” Some of the crops that are mentioned are crops that Government has been hitting at as far as Bonna Bagaggawale programme is concern. These are crops like maize, beans and groundnuts, which the government says we should not grow because they do not yield highly. They say if they should be grown, the acreage should be big. So, I want to find out what measures Government has put in place to ensure that the high acreage is there so that there is prosperity for all. Thank you.

4.24
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I want to thank the chairman and the Minister for this report and the committee as well. My only concern is Government policy. I support the report and I beg that we do not spend more time on it.

My concern is Government policy because we are on budget support. This kind of loan request still pushes us to project support, which is costly and not very friendly in terms of promoting development. So, the Minister of Finance needs to guide us; where are we moving? Are we moving backwards or forwards with budget support?

Secondly, other countries in the world have renegotiated the concept of service charge on undisbursed funds. If today you went to Standard Chartered Bank and processed a loan, the loan is transferred to your account. It is up to you to use it or not. This arrangement with ADB, IFAD and the World Bank of releasing money piecemeal based on their conditions and then imposing charges on the recipient is illegal and criminal. Africa must reject this and we must be united. 

We want to request the Minister to go and renegotiate this position. The Minister is an experienced professor; he should know that if the Third World refuses to access loans from IFAD and ADB, the team at ADB and IFAD would be unemployed. If you work in these banks and you do not promote or sell money to the tune of 70 percent, you lose your job. When we go to negotiate from a very weak position as if we are dying tomorrow, we shall continue being poor and enriching ADB and IFAD officials among others. This is my appeal. The earlier we take this forward, the better for this country. I beg to support.

4.26
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The report for the loan is talking about the previous project that has just ended. As my colleague, hon. Ekanya, has said, this issue of projects is very bad because they are mostly for project coordinators, management and the like. This project of US $ 27.4 million is going to be implemented over a period of seven years. What are you going to implement in seven years with this US$ 27.4 million? Why don’t we look at a project, get money and complete it in one or two years? But you are talking of seven years; to do what? I think this is for other workshops and capacity building, which we have been building all around.  

We believe the best way to go over this is to move away from projects to budget support, and that is the only way this country can develop. Failure to do that will mean that this same project is going to be useful to few. I will give an example. You can see the same districts appearing again, for example Kyenjojo and Kamwenge. First of all, what did the first project do? They say poverty was reduced; how many people are no longer poor and how many are you targeting now? If this was budget support, we would have known that we took water to this region and finished and we are now going to roads or maybe schools, and there would be no duplication. 

This project is under Ministry of Local Government and it is also going to handle roads, which are under Ministry of Works. In the Ministry of Finance, we are talking about SACCOS. You were talking about improvement of the productivity of bananas, which Ministry of Agriculture is also doing. All this is because we are having disjointed programmes. We do not know who is implementing what. Eventually, somebody will shift responsibility.  

If we were coordinated, we would say Ministry of Agriculture is supposed to deal with productivity, and then they would be held responsible. However, this project may be handling productivity on bananas but the Ministry of Agriculture will also show that they are the ones who did it when they did not, and they were also given money in the same area. So, I think the way forward is budget support.

Secondly, I have seen so many loans. I think the Ministry of Finance should come out now and say, “We need a billion dollars” and we give it to them, and then they tell us what they are going to implement and we put it in their budget. Now they are complaining, saying that this commitment fees which we are having is because of Parliament, that they are not implementing projects because of Parliament.  

For those who were in the Seventh Parliament, you will recall that we approved a loan for fisheries and livestock in 2001/2002. Up to now, the landing sites which were supposed to have been built have not been built. Maybe they are in the air, but I do not see them. Those are now how many years? Five years down the road, there is no landing site and yet the money was approved in 2001. You come to livestock, they were supposed to have been delivered in 2002 but we do not see the cows and here they are talking about the cows. So, all these are problems. If we are going to hide behind loans for projects, we are finished. I think Parliament should come out seriously on this issue. (Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Maj. (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Mr Speaker, I wish to inform hon. Nandala-Mafabi that the programme is ongoing and we have already started working on those fish landing sites. As for the animals, we have procured them and we are about to deliver them. The delay of the project has been explained to this House; there was some structural rigidity which we have corrected. (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: But why don’t you allow him to finish? You cannot ask for a clarification in the middle because what you are seeking for may be in the last sentence.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, sorry for interrupting the honourable Minister, but I want to give information. Kiyindi, where I board from before going to Buvuma, happens to be one of the beneficiaries and you will realise that I even raised an issue that there is nothing going on there. There was a condition that before they work on landing sites, you are supposed to work on the road. As we talk today, the road to Kiyindi is impassable. Therefore, unless they have worked on it overnight, as far as I know at Kiyindi landing site there is nothing. They even promised a cold room, but there is nothing and yet this Government and our people are paying penalties on this loan. Why should we suffer? If we are going to borrow in order to eradicate poverty when we are still paying interest on the money we borrowed five years ago, are we adding value?

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, in an attempt to defend the agricultural sector the Minister has tried to inform this House that there is some work going on in delivering the livestock. The truth of the matter is this: The objective of the Livestock Productivity Improvement Project was to give us better breeds and improve their health for export, and there were zones for this project.  

In the Seventh Parliament, this House was deceived that we were getting very improved breeds of goats from South Africa. We got 330 goats and they were sent out to the west. The next item was to get a few, sent to the south and southeast. Unfortunately, even the ones in the west are concentrated on a few farms. Now, I am not sure whether this is the kind of work that the Minister is telling us is going on with a sum of US $34 million from the same source. We went to launch this project in Soroti, now here we are again borrowing more money for the stated objective.  

I see the words “productivity” and “production” being used repeatedly here. These were the same objectives used to defend the previous loan. So honourable minister, we need to seriously investigate the performance of that project before you continue to defend it on the Floor of this Parliament. Thank you.

4.35
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Independent, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Sometime last week somebody asked the Minister of Finance to bring a list of the loans that we have so far approved. The response was that the report has already been circulated to the members. However, it is important that for every borrowing, we should know how much we have borrowed in that line of credit and what progress has been done, how much has been done and what is still yet to be done. I think this is important so that we know whether we are effectively utilising the money that we are borrowing. That is one observation that I would like to make.

The second observation I would like to make on this report, Mr Speaker, is the criteria the committee or the government  used to select the benefiting districts; I would like to know the criteria used. I believe that the government might have persuaded the committee to choose these 13 districts but what is the criterion? If it is based on what is stated here on page 2, which is based on poverty -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The clarification I am seeking from my colleague is whether it is information or she is submitting so that I can make a decision? (Laughter) Thank you very much. (Laughter)

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, is it in order for hon. Nandala to behave as if he had finished to speak and giving room to the Speaker to choose another speaker and then he comes back on the Floor? Is it in order? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: So you are saying that by conduct, hon. Nandala had concluded his speech? Okay, just wind up.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I was taking information. I think I got a problem when I took the information from the Minister of Agriculture then it brought a lot of queries. But what I am trying to drive at is that the Ministry of Agriculture is the biggest problem in absorption of the money we borrow. 

If we talk about - I will give another example, we got a loan in 1998 when I was not also in Parliament. It is called Northwest Small-scale Holders. It is supposed to have been implemented for a period of four years but up to now it is still going on. And you know even when you approve a loan for a period of four years; they even extend without again coming to Parliament to tell you, “No, we could not finish it in four years, so we need an extension.” They do it in their own way. That is the problem we are having -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No. There is a problem in the sessional committees. When we grant a loan and it is approved to be managed by a ministry, the sessional committee should be interested in following up and monitoring what is going on. When the budget time comes they should be able to say confirm what we have got so that it is not a common pool. It now goes to the sector committees to monitor, approve and advise us. I have advised before that the work of sessional committees does not end with passing the budget. It should be continuous; to monitor what is going on in their ministries and report to us. If we do that we should be able to know what is going on.  

MR OKUPA: I agree with you, Mr Speaker that the sessional committees should be able to follow up this matter. To quite a large extent, some of these committees have tried to follow up and not only the committees, but also individual Members in this House have tried to follow up and put up questions. I remember hon. Okot Ogong raising an issue under the Ministry of Works regarding the funding of the Soroti–Dokolo-Lira road. But we are always only promised that they are going to bring answers and explanations, which we do not get. That is why we need to put it squarely to the Executive - the ministries responsible. 

It is not only limited to that; there are a number of ministries and loans that have been passed even as way back as 2001. But when you look at the policy statements, you do not get the answers. We put it to the ministers but do not get the answers. So, our ministers should help us to have these answers in order to be able to inform our constituents because when we pass these loans we inform them. And they keep following us asking, “What has happened, you said you have passed this loan for this road?” You have heard of recent the people of Kabale and Kisoro complaining because we even went and launched that road but now there are articles in the newspapers – the Fort Portal–Hoima road; people have been demonstrating, including the bishops. We have been following up these issues but we are not getting the answers. So the Executive must help us. 

THE SPEAKER: Now this has resulted into a general debate on loans and so forth when we have a specific motion on this particular loan. Why do we not concentrate on this specific motion for this particular loan, clear it and tackle the matter which has brought half of the population of Kampala here?

MR BYANYIMA: Mr Speaker, I feel it should not go down because at the beginning of this session we all agreed that when a loan comes here, the papers should be laid on the Table. The Chairman of the Committee on National Economy should consult the chairperson of the sessional committee so that they sit together. But if the chairperson of the committee sits quietly without consulting the sessional committee - quietly really – because some of these loans come almost every other day, we would expect the committee to liaise with the sessional committee so that  they could be in tandem and we move together; it is not a monopoly. Thank you.

MR KADUNABBI: Mr Speaker, we have been inviting line committees through their chairpersons each time we are considering a particular loan request. 

MR NANDALA–MAFABI: Thank you for inviting me but the most important thing is what the Speaker has said that the sessional committees should be able to monitor. Mr Speaker, you will note that in this project there is what we call monitoring and evaluation. Those resources go back to the ministry, which is implementing, in order for it to monitor and evaluate itself. Here in Parliament of course if you do not want a dog to bite you, you make it weak so that it guards the neighbour and not you. So that is the problem we are having in these projects. As much as you will say that those sector committees could do it but they do not have the capacity unless we push that all the money involving monitoring and evaluation in these projects comes to Parliament. Short of that, we are finished.

You can see that the issue is not the loan for today. The issue is that: why borrow a lot of money; put it down and we do not utilise it? At the same time we are paying what we call commitment fees and penalties for unutilized money. Our absorption capacity is too low. In the Ministry of Agriculture it is worse. In the Ministry of Works it is dangerous. (Laughter) Having said that - (Interruption)

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Clarification.

THE SPEAKER: As I said earlier, let us not create a general debate on loans. Let us address ourselves to this particular motion.

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, I want to make a small clarification. Two honourable members have hinted on the loan, which was given for agriculture on productivity improvement. I want to inform hon. Nandala that what he said is true that we had a credit component, which was not able to be implemented by any of the banks around. We have since redesigned the project to channel this money through micro finance institutions while targeting the same group it was originally intended to target.

Secondly, we have appeared before the Committee of Agriculture and explained the case telling them the development and the levels we have gone into to implement this project and they were satisfied. I want to set the record straight that next week I will make a report about these projects so that Members can appreciate what is going on. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, since we have not addressed the motion I hope you do not have issues to raise. I want to put the question to this motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: In spite of that, I think in future let us say that when these kinds of loans come, Members of the  Ministry concerned should be co-opted as Members of the committee to consider the matter. I have a note from hon. Beti Kamya that the Buganda Caucus has an urgent meeting at 5.00 pm; I think you know what it is about. 

Before we go on to the next item, let us consider this matter of the motion, which we were debating last time, the Nakasero report. (Applause) Mr Chairman, do you have a position on this report because –(Interruption)

4.50
THE CHAIRPERSON, LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Geoffrey Ekanya): Mr Speaker, I want to request the circulation of an addendum to the report –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Maybe you would like to get information from me on this matter since we last adjourned. I have received complaints from the people mentioned in your report that they were not given an opportunity to put their case. The Principal Clerk, Tumwine has written to me to say that he was called by your committee and he came specifically to deal with the accounts because of the audited reports, which were before you. When he came he says he you told him that you would call him later. 

I have a long letter from him and he says that as far as Nakasero is concerned, he has never discussed this with you and you never questioned him about it. I have received another letter from the principal party in this matter, that is, the company. They say that they were never given an opportunity to make their case before you. You heard last time when hon. Byandala was debating. He also raised this issue that he was never given the opportunity to make his case. I understand that during this week you have been able to interact with him; this is from the paper. 

If it is still the case that you are continuing to interview people who have raised complaints because they were not heard then I do not know what advice you can give me. Should we proceed with the debate or suspend it? I want to know from you.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, thank you very much, I got copies of those letters. Under our Rules of Procedure, the Constitution and the Public Finance and Accountability Act, in such matters we deal with accounting officers. However, the committee has the liberty to invite anybody as provided for in the Constitution and to access any document. Therefore, the precedent and guideline, which we have is that accounting officers take liability for their actions. We have been dealing with accounting officers throughout this country and in some cases the accounting officers appear with other persons. If the matter is so grave we invite those persons; that is the civil servants or Government workers. 

Regarding companies that deal with Government, the accounting officers must defend their actions with those private companies. If we are to change policy to now start dealing with private companies that deal with Government then we may never move. This is because if you read Article 164 of the Constitution, the instruction is to Government civil servants to follow the government established procedure in managing Government property and their offices. Despite the fact that Parliament under its rule is open to the people, we never invited the vendors for example when they brought their complaint. 

In the letter, which Sheila Investments has written and which was copied to all Members of Parliament, they stated that they were aware of what has been happening but they sat on their right to petition while the committee was going on. Despite the fact that they sat on their right to petition, we still took the opportunity and invited them to appear.  When they appeared in front of us they said they were not ready –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Let me make myself clear on this. I know you are a Standing Committee on the Local Government Accounts Committee but then we had a problem with Nakasero Market and whoever was here decided that he gives the assignment of looking into this matter to your committee. Therefore, when you are transacting business like in respect of Nakasero Market and you are a special committee, you are not doing it as the Public Accounts Committee for Local Government but as a committee with a special assignment. Therefore, when dealing with special assignments, you have to separate the procedure so that when carrying out the special assignment you interview everybody fully and then come and make a report. Your work ends there and thereafter you can continue as a Public Accounts Committee looking into the accounts of whatever you were looking into. I thought that was the position. 

MR EKANYA: Based on that wisdom, we –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: If you want more time so as to give opportunity to others, there is no harm because your report may be undermined by people coming and saying, “You never gave them an opportunity”.

MR EKANYA: Based on that, I want to – (Interjections)- let me respond to the Speaker that based on his advice, we have no objection if you recommend that we listen to all the witnesses. Within a week or two we shall be ready.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I happened to also get the letter from Sheila Investments but when I looked at it, there was no name of the person who signed it. They just put the word “director”, and some initials. Who is the director of Sheila Investments? We saw Mr Basajjabalaba masquerading around here. This is just an anonymous letter. I think we need to look at this critically. 

Secondly, -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see that issue of authenticity is another matter. What I have here is Sheila Investments Uganda Limited; letter dated 5th July, signed by a director and copied to all of you. I also have a letter on the Kampala City Council letterhead dated 9th which was yesterday. It is addressed to me and is signed by Mr William Tumwine, acting Deputy Town Clerk. It is copied to the Ministry of Local Government, the acting Town Clerk and the Clerk to Parliament.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I got both letters and my concern is on the one from Sheila Investments because we are getting information that when the committee went to the Registrar of Companies, their file was not there. They also went to Uganda Revenue Authority and their file was not there as well. 

Secondly, I need some clarification concerning accountability issues where the accounting officer has not followed the procurement law, the PPDA, to deal with certain investors. Do we also call that person who he has dealt with despite the fact that he has not followed the law to give that person the tender? I just need that clarification.

THE SPEAKER: I said that you have two assignments in as far as your mandate is concerned. You can deal with the accounts of the City Council but I think that was a special assignment to you arising from the complaints we received from Members of Parliament and our brothers and sisters in the market. You shouldn’t handle this as if you were dealing with accounts. You are dealing with the complex matter of Nakasero Market. When you are making inquiries on it, you have to give an opportunity to whoever has some connection to give evidence on this. 

What is transpiring now is that people are coming up and saying that you never gave them the opportunity thereby undermining the report. That is why I asked the chairperson to tell me what he thinks. You are the chairperson of this special committee, please, advise me.

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Speaker, taking into consideration your explanation, when you read the Constitution Article 90(4) regarding committees of Parliament, it says: “In the exercise of their functions under this article, committees of Parliament may call any Minister or any person holding a public office and private individuals [Hon. Members: “May!”] Yes, I am emphasising this; “…and private individuals to submit a memoranda or appear before them to give evidence.” Therefore, if you are giving a report to Parliament to debate as an investigative committee you must exhaust it. The moment you give a half baked report, it is biased because it does not exhaust the information. That is why you have the petition, which was written to the Speaker saying that the committee did not exercise its function.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I have a concern. I can appreciate the need to consult and the need for this report to be as credible as possible and that is healthy. However, my concern is: what do we do in the meantime as we extend the time to provide direction on how to resolve this conflict? This is because the present situation in that market is pathetic. Is it possible for Parliament to call on Government to stop the deployment of Police and the harassment of the vendors? Is it possible to save the situation as we work on what should be done, that is, the consultation?

THE SPEAKER: Well I don’t know much apart from what I am reading in the papers and hearing on the radio. However, what I hear is that the intention of the Police was to protect the people who are there so that they can carry out their work until the matter is resolved, otherwise they would be disturbed and they would not be there. I think that was the role. However, I think this matter should be handled expeditiously to prevent riots in the town.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, what I saw yesterday and what is prompting me to say this was actually what I saw in the news that the market was blocked and sales couldn’t go on. Is it the Police who blocked the market and stopped business? That is my concern because I would like business to go on in the market.

THE SPEAKER: The business people were there but I think people couldn’t gain access to them because they feared the Police that had been put near the market. However, the intention was to protect those people and enable them to carry out their work.

CAPT. (RTD) GUMA: Hon. Ekanya, the Chairperson of the Local Government Accounts Committee, I have also seen the letter of Mr William Tumwine the acting Deputy Town Clerk making a complaint that he was called then told to come back again to clarify certain things. This is an official from KCC. There is also another official called Mr Basil Bataringaya who is a Deputy Director of Finance from KCC with a letter also saying that he had been invited and he wrote requesting to be rescheduled because he had an exam and Lumumba - not hon. Justine Lumumba but our clerk assistant Lumumba Obatre - was supposed to reschedule the meeting with this man and he was to come. And it was noted by the clerk that the meeting was to be rescheduled.

Again on Sheila Investments, when you are investigating such a controversial thing that has been appearing on TV and radios, Sheila is a central variable. It is such a central variable! How do you omit the invitation to this company and you wait for the company to apply to come? You colleagues, be serious about this, this is a serious matter. How could you have, you know, jumped the invitation to a company that is the centre of this controversy? –(Interjections)- no, colleagues please, I have no side on this matter but I want fair play. The rules of natural justice are: listen to everybody.

Senior people in KCC are saying that they have not been heard; Sheila Investments, which is oscillating at the centre, is also saying they have not been heard. So, how can we discuss and adopt this report?

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, you had advised and I have documents here to prove that Tumwine, the deputy town clerk appeared before our committee twice. We have the Hansard because whatever we do, we record it. Tumwine appeared and he was not responding properly so we told him, “Mr William Tumwine, go back and make a written submission.” We wrote a letter to the town clerk to compel Tumwine to respond to our directive of making a written submission, to date he has not done so. We have evidence.

No. 2, Basil Bataringaya appeared twice in our committee – we have the Hansard recordings. The second time he appeared he said he was busy with exams. We told him, “Go and make a written submission.” None of them has made a written submission. 

Another person, the third one is Eng. Byandala. We wrote to him; he replied to us in a hand written statement that he will appear. When he came that day we were having the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Local Government. And we told him, “You stay around. If the permanent secretary concludes, then you will come in.” But I want to thank him the other day he came.

Regarding Sheila, they do not have a clear address. The letter they have sent to you, if you now call those telephone numbers, they do not exist; the persons have left offices. (Laughter) Yes. Mr Speaker –(Interruption)            

MR SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, unfortunately, I believe that you should have made your comments in your report, which we are handling. You could have said, “The committee was unable to get useful information because of this and that,” so that whoever now complains, they do so when actually the matter has been addressed because they did not cooperate and, therefore, you did not –(Interjection)- if the addendum is to come now, then we have to address the report with the addendum. My worry is: do you think we can really continue with the debate without that? That is the question but it is up to you really.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I have taken your advice that we can again listen to these people. However, I wanted to set the record straight and that is why I was giving those aspects. Regarding Sheila, let me just conclude on Sheila; when they appeared even yesterday, the team that appeared had no documentary proof to confirm that they were from Sheila. We had a company lawyer; we asked him, “Where is the authority instructing you from Sheila Limited for you to respond?” He couldn’t produce it. He said, “If you give me five minutes I will bring it.” 

Besides that, Mr Speaker, during our investigations we sent a team to the Registrar of Companies and to URA to find the records and file of this company; they are missing! And it is no wonder that even the letter written to your office does not indicate the person who has written it. Nonetheless, I want to agree with your proposal that we meet them again but I wanted to put the record right that we followed the procedure, and we invited all of them.

The other issue that opened this debate was when I said, “hon. Kahinda Otafiire”. Hon. Kahinda Otafiire was invited with the last letter, when we had closed meeting people. We said, “We are closing further meetings and further discussions.” Initially we had met the minister but in that last letter we said, “No, the minister should have an opportunity to defend himself because our meetings are open.” Whatever we discuss, KCC and other people go back and try to redo it so you see another letter. (Laughter)               

THE SPEAKER: Let us do this, honourable members –(IMr Lukwago rose_)- the area MP; okay. 

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, I am worried that there is too much dilly dallying on this matter. It has been going on for quiet a long time and there is too much tension in the market there. As we talk right now, I cannot even be allowed to go into that part of my constituency, why? It is a right and actually a command to us as Members of Parliament to always lead by consultation. Right now what is in the market is too much tension caused by some people who claim to have been denied the right of audience and what is happening –[Mr Kigyagi: “Information”]- information will not be taken. The people who are claiming that they were not given a right of a fair hearing –[Mr Kigygagi: “Order, order.”]- are right now plotting to invade the market –(Interruption)  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us not misuse the Rules of Procedure. If you stood to give information and somebody under his right resisted it, then you should not immediately turn it into a point of order. (Laughter) What we want now is to solve this problem. But we can only solve it by using proper procedures. This is what we are examining: we are concerned about the tension at Nakasero because our friends there cannot work under that tension. We want them to work; they have been there since 1937 or is it 1931? They want to work but if we are handling this, let us properly handle it. 

And when we debate the report, let us have a report that is not going to be undermined that, “You did not do this and you did not do the other.” I would rather we take two days or so to improve it so that eventually we put it on record that, “That is the report we had and we followed every procedure”, and so forth.

We sympathise with you, we sympathise with the people of Nakasero, and the city itself. This matter should be resolved but we have to use the proper procedure. Let us give them two days or so to continue to have an addendum to the report so that we get a proper conclusion. But since I had given an opportunity to the area MP, please, finish what you want to say.

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, I am seeking guidance on what should be done under the circumstances, if we are to go by that position.

There are plans by these very people who are seeking for the right of audience, Sheila in particular, to invade the market and take it over. There have been incidents of violence: on Thursday last week, with the assistance of the Regional Police Commander, Ochom, these people of Sheila invaded the market, and there was chaos, violence, and we almost lost lives there. It has ever happened in Owino Market. The same people went to the market and we lost people there. I don’t want to see bloodshed in Nakasero Market.

We shall be doing a disservice to the people of Nakasero Market and Ugandans at large, if under the circumstances we continue postponing this matter without putting in place necessary safeguards that will protect the lives and business of people in Nakasero Market. So, the guidance I am seeking for, if we are to go by their pleas, whatever merit there is in whatever they want to say – because I know there is the Auditor-General’s report on the matter, even on the sale of the market there is the Auditor-General’s report, which is incorporated in this report. It is on that premise that those people were given a right to be heard by the Auditor-General. 

This report, which comes before the plenary here, the recommendations, which are going to be made, could be that, “Police, do a, b, c, d, investigate.” If there is a crime that was committed say by hon. Byandala, the Police will investigate. This Parliament is not going to convict him. He will defend himself before the Police. This is what this Parliament should be doing; but I am saying that history will not exonerate us, and neither will posterity if we sit back, in the face of this problem we are facing. Tomorrow – because these people are saying they will invade over the weekend – this is information. Over the weekend they are mobilising kiboko squad, they are mobilising several people to come and invade the market. Over the weekend –(Interruption)  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, Government does not sleep over the weekend. What we are expecting is that the status quo will be maintained. And the status quo as I understand it is that the hundreds or thousands of people operating in that market will continue until the matter is disposed of. (Applause) 

MR LUKWAGO: I rise to thank you for that position, Mr Speaker, and I hope the authorities in charge of security will take it up and protect my people in Nakasero Market. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ekanya, let us give an opportunity to these people who said they were not given a hearing although they are named in the report, to come and give their account. Then you will make an addendum to the report – or an adjustment – and then we will handle it that way. One week?

MR EKANYA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker, I think one week is enough. The information I want to give Members is that the actions of Sheila are really impunity because the Town Clerk, Kampala City, has written to the Inspector-General that Sheila has no right whatsoever to interfere with the market. According to records they have not even been paid money, but there is fraud in this country that now they are in court –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: The Leader of Government Business is here, and action will be taken.

MR OCHIENG: I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I am seeking guidance from you on this very matter. The reason is that you are giving us one week but I know, I sit on that committee and we have a long programme as an NRM caucus, which has the majority Members of that committee, and the programme is starting on Thursday. I really do not know how best we are going to do this [Hon. Members: “How long is the meeting?”] it is for seven working days.

THE SPEAKER: Your chairperson asked for one week, do you want us to give you two weeks? Okay, two weeks. But the status quo remains.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Mr Speaker, I think the concern of the Members is that there are individuals who are taking it upon themselves to do things that are not right in Nakasero Market, particularly Sheila Investments. If we are going to give our committee two weeks, I think the issue of the status quo remaining should be very emphatic. We would kindly request that the Rt. Hon. Speaker formally writes so that these people do not say, “We were not told”. The way they are operating, they are just using any means to do what they want.          

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, to whom should I write? The Government is here, the ministers in charge of Police are here, to whom do I write? They are part and parcel of this Parliament. This matter is closed here for now.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT SEEKING TO BORROW UA 30 MILLION FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK AND US $15 MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL FUND FOR AGRICULTURE DEVELOPMENT FOR FINANCING THE COMMUNITY AGRICULTURE INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENT PROGRAMME, PROJECT I

5.20
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament, seeking to borrow 30 million UA from the African Development Bank and US $15 from the International Fund for Agricultural Development for financing the Community Agriculture Infrastructure Improvement Programme, Project I.

This programme will address agricultural infrastructure in 26 districts and will, therefore, have an improvement or an increase over the other districts, which were mentioned earlier on. There was a request that more districts should be included and this takes care of the request for increased coverage. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

5.22
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Ibrahim Kadunabbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This the report of the Committee on National Economy on the government proposal to borrow US $60 million from the African Development Bank and the International Fund for Agricultural Development, to finance Community Agricultural Infrastructure Improvement Project Programme, Project I.

The Government of Uganda in November 2001 received two loans worth Shs 27.2 million from the African Development Bank and International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) for financing area-based agricultural modernisation programmes in 16 districts of South western Uganda. The programme was conceived and implemented in order to support Government’s efforts to reduce rural poverty, consistent with the Poverty Eradication Action Plan (PEAP). The programme was highly successful because it achieved its intended objectives. It made a big positive impact on the lives of people in the mentioned districts.  

The high success of this programme has made it gain popularity. As a result, many district leaders are demanding that it be replicated in their areas. It is in response to this call that the government of the Republic of Uganda through the Ministry of Local Government, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, and that of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, with the support of the African Development Bank, has developed the Community Infrastructure Improvement Programme (CIIP). The programme is intended to cover 26 districts.  

Phase I of the project will cover Central and Eastern Uganda consisting of the districts of Rakai, Lyantonde, Masaka, Sembabule, Mpigi, Mubende, Mityana, Kiboga, Nakasongola, Kibale, Mukono, Kayunga, Iganga, Namutumba, Butaleja, Tororo, Kamuli, Kaliro, Pallisa, Budaka, Mbale, Sironko, Manafwa, Bududa, Kapchorwa and Bukwa. 

Phase II, which is to start in 2008, will cover 13 districts both in Northern Uganda and Teso region.  The target districts are: Gulu, Amuru, Kitgum, Pader, Lira, Dokolo, Amolatar, Soroti, Katakwi, Kumi, Kaberamaido, Amuria and Bukedea.  

The intended achievements for these projects are:

•	To improve the rural road infrastructure;
•	To increase agricultural productivity;
•	To improve incomes of the rural communities;
•	To establish rural market infrastructure, produce stores, grain millers, cold rooms, mill coolers and rural electrification equipment;
•	Improvement on water and sanitation management; and
•	To strengthen research linkages on agricultural productivity and markets.

In doing this work the committee interacted with both the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and that of Local Government. It also perused the following documents:

•	The minister’s brief to Parliament;
•	The project appraisal documents;
•	The project implementation completion report;
•	The loan agreement between African Development Bank and the government of Uganda;
•	The ANNP and United Nations supervision report, and maps showing the intended implementation areas of phases I and II of the project;  
•	The loan agreement between the Republic of Uganda and African Development Fund for CIIP;
•	The Community Agricultural Infrastructure Improvement Project Appraisal Report dated November, 2006;
•	The implementation completion report dated 23 November 2004;
•	The area-based agricultural modernization programme mid-term review report, dated March 2006;
•	The supervision reports, one for May, 2006 and another one for March, 2007; and
•	The programme impact in pictures, for March 2007.  

We have also been given a draft agreement between the Republic of Uganda and the International Fund for Agricultural Development. Mr Speaker, allow me to lay these documents on the Table.

The terms and conditions of this loan are:
The Loan from the African Development Fund of the Africa Development Bank will have the known amount of US $40 million. The maturity period of this loan is 50 years, including ten years of grace and a service charge of 0.75 percent on disbursed and outstanding balances. It will also have a commitment fee of 0.5 percent per annum on un-disbursed amounts.

The terms from the International Fund for Agricultural Development are as follows: 
The loan amount is US $20 million. Its maturity period is 40 years, including ten years of grace and service charge of 0.75 percent on disbursed and outstanding balances.

Observations

Mr Speaker and honourable members, it is the committee’s observation that this is another pro-poor project. It is also the committee’s observation that the project is intended to support Government’s efforts to reduce rural poverty given the fact that about 80 percent of the people in developing countries live in absolute poverty.

The committee also observes that the project is in line with efforts to attain the United Nations Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) by the year 2015. Uganda being a predominantly agricultural country with a large proportion of its population living in the countryside, the committee observes that more focus on this sector should be encouraged.  

Recommendations

The committee recommends that supervision should be emphasised in order to achieve the desired goals. 

The committee also recommends that the government should focus more on projects, which are intended to improve the lives of the majority of Ugandans in the countryside, and in line with the government’s anti-poverty slogan, “prosperity for all”.  

It recommends that Government provides pro-people projects in the remaining districts of Uganda with due emphasis on quality and supervision.  

In conclusion, Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee requests this august House do approve this loan request considering its targeted beneficiaries.  Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: We have had a general debate on processing the loans and I think that debate applies to this one too. So, what I expect is a specific contribution on this particular loan, which should, however, be limited.

5.31
MR WILLIAM OKECHO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Mr Speaker, this is yet another project loan and it is not intended to support the budget. This time round, since the committee is emphasising supervision of this particular loan, I request that Parliament and MPs from these areas get involved in the supervision of this loan. 

If you may recall, Mr Speaker, the Budget Committee had recommended that some amount of money be put a side for the committee to oversee the various projects, which had taken off in the country. We had actually proposed Shs 5.0 billion to be given to the Parliamentary Commission for this purpose. We hope that that will be honoured when we look at policy statements. 

Therefore, it is my request that the various Members of Parliament from these areas closely supervise this particular loan. I am saying this because when I looked at the project documents, I realised that the work of identifying areas where this project is to be implemented has been left to Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs) and LCV chairpersons. I would recommend that area MPs get involved in this exercise as well.

Secondly, I want to request the minister to tell the House what will happen to all the other programmes, which are covered by the budget. I am saying this because unlike the other programmes, this is a project loan. It is important to know this because we do not want duplication of projects. If we are to duplicate, then there should be great impact on the ground. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Following what you have said, I think the gentleman’s or “gentlewomen’s” agreement is that we request Members of Parliament from concerned areas to also take part in the supervision of these projects. The minister concerned should give them the details of when the projects start. I think it is a fair request.

MRS BYENKYA: Mr speaker, the information I want to give relates to the fact that when these projects get started, Members of Parliament are informed. For example, at the launch of ANNP in Mbarara, all Members of Parliament from that district were invited. I witnessed it! However, after the launch of such projects, MPs do not keep monitoring them.  So, my request is that MPs should include monitoring of such projects on their routine constituency programmes.

THE SPEAKER: You are actually sensitising them about taking interest in these projects?

MRS BYENKYA: Yes, they should. 

MR KADUNABBI: I just want to correct one typographic error, which was made. The money we are borrowing from the African Development Bank is 30 Units of Accounts which is equivalent to US$ 45 million and the one from the International Fund for Agriculture Development is US$ 15 million. 

5.35
MR JOHN ARAPKISSA (Independent, Kween County, Kapchorwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the minister and the chairman of the committee for their pro-people report. I specifically want a comment on the intended achievements. Let me particularly start with achievement number two - to increase agricultural productivity by supplying improved seeds to rural farmers so as to improve their agricultural yield.  

Mr Speaker, though in the districts of Kapchorwa and Bukwo we grow a lot of maize, we do not plant seeds from Namulonge or Kawanda agricultural research stations. We import our seeds from Kenya Seed Company. So, I wish to propose that some of this money be retained for improving highland seeds so that we can start producing our own seeds from the maize that is locally grown on the slopes of Mt Elgon. Government should not be worried about the issue of land because we have, I think, about 3000 acres of land at Kabyoni farm, which is located at the Uganda border with Kenya. Actually, across River Swamu, the Kenyans produce hybrid seeds from highland areas, while Kabyoni farm on the Uganda side is producing nothing, yet the climate is the same. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, we also have the Kapchorwa District Farm Institute, which can be used for processing these hybrid seeds. So, it is my prayer that some of this money goes into the production of hybrid maize seeds within the districts of Kapchorwa and Bukwo. This will save our people from frequent arrests that come about as a result of them smuggling these seeds from Kenya. Even if there were no arrests, I think that travelling to another country for mere seeds makes it very difficult for an ordinary farmer to ably do his farming.

My second comment relates to improved infrastructure as another intended achievement. I think that this achievement relates to improvement of feeder and commuter roads. Like it was raised in the other motion for the IFAD loan, I hope that this money will not be misused like that of Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture (PMA). 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I want to inform the House that while PMA is operating in Kapchorwa, I am not aware of any feeder or/and commuter roads that have been constructed under this arrangement as was earlier on planned. 

In the same vein, I also hope that this money is not going to hide under the construction of feeder and commuter roads yet most of these roads are supposed to be constructed by the Ministry of Works and Transport through the Ministry of Local Government.

Lastly, let me also comment on the achievement of acquiring rural electrification equipment. I request Government to be clear on this. Is it going to provide rural electrification, or just to buy rural electrification equipment? 

Much as I hope that Government will probably finally extend power to the rural areas, I request that they should be specific on the ministry under which this programme is going to be implemented. Will it be implemented under the Ministry of Natural Resources, which handles electricity or another ministry? I am saying this because without this clarification, this money, like that of PMA, might hide under the construction of feeder and commuter roads.  I think Government should be clear on this because we do not want to have two projects doing the same thing; it will be wastage of resources. Those are the clarifications I request the minister to make. I thank you.

5.39
MR DEUSDEDIT BIKWASIZEHI (NRM, Buhweju County, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I also thank the chairman of the committee for presenting this report. Mr Speaker, I further want to thank Government for coming up with programmes that are pro-poor people. However, I want to caution that if these pro-poor programmes are not focused, we may not achieve much; they may not answer people’s problems. 

Mr Speaker, I happen to be the Chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture in this House. In doing my work, I handle the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. It is true that this ministry has developed and put up a development strategy and investment plan, which investment is expected to boost the agricultural sector in this country. However, can the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development tell this House how much money Government intends to consider for this project? 

Secondly, does his ministry liaise with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries in fulfilling such investment plans? This is very important because it guides us on duplication. I actually asked the Minister of Agriculture whether he was involved in discussing these loans. I did not ask him this question not because I do not support the motion, I actually support it, but my problem is duplication. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, you all know that NAADS projects are covering the whole country. So, the question is, how are we going to draw the boundary for this NAADS projects, and other projects? 

The other issue is the one that my colleagues have talked about; that is projectisation in this country. When you over projectise, you may not achieve much. It is better we draw programmes for such money. We could have money going into, for example, that Ministry of Agriculture Development Strategy and Investment Plan. This will save us from misusing our limited resources via duplication. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.42
MS FARIDAH NAJJUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the motion, but before I support it, I need some few clarifications. 

It is said that the project will initially start with three sub-counties.  One of the clarifications that I seek relates to the criteria that will be used to select these sub-counties. Also the proposal is very silent on what the extent of this project is going to be. I am raising this because some of our districts are really very big. We might begin with only three sub-counties here but on the way we might stop on only those. For Mubende, as I talk, we have 16 sub-counties. If we stop on only three sub-counties, the impact will not be felt. What is this project going to be run like? Is it going to cover all the districts including all sub-counties? I need some clarification on that.

On the activities, there is on the table number eight as community mobilisation and capacity building where we have a lot of money – over Shs 2.6 million. But I think we have had a lot of community mobilisation and capacity building. I think if we are talking about pro-poor, we had better talk about tangible things. When you talk about over Shs 2.6 million, when programme equipment is less than Shs I million; rural electrification equipment for markets is just less than the other – I think it is better we look at tangible things.

We have a problem in our local governments in our districts, especially when it comes to the infrastructure. If we can build their capacity such that these projects that are taken to them can be sustained, I think it will be better for us and it will be good for our people. There, we shall know that we are at least doing something for our people. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.45
MS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the Chairman of the committee on National Economy for these recommendations and at the same time thank the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for these good intentions. If only they could do what they are intended to do this time.

I am looking at page 2 of this report - intended achievements: I am happy they have indicated here that they are intended. Honestly, if you look at what is happening, a lot has to be done in the agricultural sector in order to serve the common man. One of the intended achievements under No.1 is movement of agricultural produce from the rural farm to the market. But we are not going to look at a wholesome country. Definitely, each region has particular crops that they grow. You are talking about marketing what has not even been produced. How will these people this time round identify the crops that each region is supposed to produce if they are to help the common man?

We are talking and crying about the cotton we used to produce in the eastern part of the country. Up to now, three quarters of the cotton are produced; when they are beginning to prepare the fields, they are told that it will be marketed at Shs 800 per kilo. When the time comes for it to yield and it has been sorted and processed, they are paid Shs 250 per kilo. What has the ministry responsible done to prepare the farmers and make sure that this time they are not promising shells in this case?

The other intended achievement is to increase agricultural productivity and improve seeds to the rural farmers. I want to bring this to the attention of this House that some of these projects come and as little and minimum supervision is accorded to them. Recently, I visited my constituency and the NAADS group was distributing cassava cuttings in the month of December and January, at a time when not even one dot of rain can be seen. I told them that when they come, politely advise them to go and freeze the cassava stems and when the time comes, they can bring them back. It operates as if there is no one in the whole country to supervise and coordinate their movements. How will the common man intended to benefit from this at the end of the day benefit? At times, a lot of money is poured outside there and no follow-up is made not even in one single sector.

Lastly, this still concerns the issue of improved seeds to the farmers. When you follow this up, you will find the rich – true to say that water flows where there is already water- are the ones given the seeds. If you are a “nobody” at the countryside, you completely do not receive these seeds. How sure are we this time that when this money is released, it will be followed up and the poor grass root man at the end of the day is going to benefit? If this was said and done, I would be one of the happiest people this country can produce. Thank you.

5.48
MR JOHNSON MALINGA (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Mr Speaker, I wish this programme would reach Amuria very quickly. I have only two issues of concern: Issue number one, when you look at the intended achievements, they are basically four although they are duplicated - improvement of road infrastructure, then rural infrastructure. But my concern is that we normally borrow money in lump sum and the problem we have had with projects is that you are not told what ratios are going to be used to divide this money when it comes to implementation.

I will give one example. We got money worth Shs 18 billion for the resettlement of IDPs in Northern Uganda. From the time we got the money, we knew it was Shs 18 billion until recently when there was a conflict between the ministry and the leaders on the ground that is when we got the breakdown of how the money was used. We were very shocked to find that out of the Shs 18 billion, only Shs 2.0 billion reached the IDPs. And it reached the IDPs in form of rotten seeds and broken axes. In the end where did the Shs 16 billion go? 

I would like to know from the minister, what is the structure of expenditure so that when we come to evaluate this thing, we should know that maybe 20 per cent is going to infrastructure, 15 per cent is going to seeds? I know this will cut across all the districts.

My second and last concern is the intended achievement number five. I do not agree with the ministry on this one. Education takes 32 per cent of the national budget. Agriculture takes only three to four per cent of the budget -(Interjections)- it is now 4.5 per cent. Thank you! You are at 4.5 per cent then you are getting the little money from that and taking it to education to provide boreholes, for digging pit latrines in USE schools. Why is the Ministry of Agriculture running away from its own responsibility? 

We have schools directly under the Ministry of Agriculture. We used to have farm schools in this country; we have the research stations, why should this money again be taken? Is this what the Bible says, that those who have, more shall be given to them and those who do not have, even the little they have shall be taken away? 

We have a big farm school in Amacho in Amuria District redundant. It closed. Even during the days if Idi Amin people were trained there. I am a teacher and I know that to create change in society, the first thing you must change is the human being. You can create infrastructure but if you do not change the knowledge, the skills and the attitudes of the people, then you cannot improve their livelihoods. 

I strongly recommend that this intended achievement No.5 be amended so that this money goes directly to improving the knowledge, the skills and the attitudes of our people. If this is not the intention of the project, then you should increase on the resources that the local man gets other than taking money from the agriculture sector, which is under funded to education, which has a lot of money already in our national budget. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.53
MR JOHN ODIT (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Mr Speaker, I want to thank the committee for this precise report. It does not bother us with lengthy literature and a lot of reading. But I have a few concerns. 

On page 1 paragraph 2 of the background, there is this opinion of the committee, which states: “The first programme was highly successful as it achieved its intended objectives and has created a big positive impact on the lives of the people in the programme districts.” One would have expected to get a few examples of whether poverty now is not an issue in the initial districts. That would be reasonable because we need to get some performance indicators and how they have been evaluated so that we can for sure support this new programme with a lot of hope. 

Secondly, most of us have dwelt on this intended achievement and this is how we are going to evaluate this new project. When you talk of establishing rural market infrastructure, produce stores, grain millers, cold rooms and so on and so forth, these are supposed to be the activities of the private sector. But I would like to know from the minister, what kind of agricultural market infrastructure are we talking about? 

Clearly if you go across the border in Kenya, there is a very simple but sustainable agricultural market initiative, which is called Agricultural Commodity Exchange. You see, maize can be produced maybe in Lira, and the fellows there may not have the market, yet there could be market in Busia. The poor farmers in Lira may not know this and they may not have the technology, yet this kind of agricultural commodity exchange is the one that brings the producers and the buyers on a common platform and that way, the poor farmer can be able to get the best market possible within the country. They do not necessarily need, as producers, to travel and look for this market. This commodity exchange brings them together and they can organise how to get the two parties, that is, the buyers and the sellers together without travelling across the country and yet they are able to get the right price for their commodities. So, you should think about researching on that initiative and selling this idea to our farmers so that they can be able to benefit from the market available especially for the producers.

Finally, like hon. Johnson Malinga indicated, item No.5 in the intended achievement, I would differ a little, in that Government is emphasising digging of pit latrines in USE schools. Now, you dig a pit latrine, the school is in poor shape, but has a very shining pit latrine. Later on this pit latrine gets full and they require another intervention again. This is happening in primary schools where there are tenders for just digging latrines, and also a separate programme for putting up school blocks. 

In circumstances where like in my constituency there are three very big schools, there is a girls’ school called St Catherine Senior Secondary School, there is another one called Dr Obore College, and the third one is called Comboni College, these schools are in dire need for rehabilitation. They may not necessarily need the pit latrines because they have water systems, which have totally broken down. Definitely National Water and Sewerage Corporation has a functioning system in Lira, but what they need is the rehabilitation of the sewerage system in these schools. 

However, funny enough, when you design this programme for digging pit latrines, definitely there will be a tender demanded and these people will go and look for sites for digging the latrines instead of improving the water system which is more sustainable. So, I think we should be able to review this programme as time passes by.

I would also like to draw the attention of the minister to the fact that this project is very sectarian.  Phase one is going to some districts in some regions and phase two is going to districts, which would actually at this time be in dire need for this intervention. In a situation where we are not certain of the next day, we live on the daily bread. We are not sure whether tomorrow will come and this project will survive. How on earth do you lump the North and this Teso area and wait for them -(Interjection)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, for giving way. There are several criteria, which are usually followed when districts or communities are being considered for programmes and one of them is the existence of other interventions. So, it is not true that when a project is earmarked for districts A, B, C and D, that the other districts do not have anything on the ground. So, when it shows that it will go into these districts, it does not mean that your districts are very dry. Usually the presence of other similar interventions is taken into consideration like NUSAF and others. Thank you, very much. 

MR ODIT: Honourable brother, if I were to give you some data on some of these projects and where they are concentrated, you would really think twice. There are certain areas, which no longer have room for projects and still the projects are there. What we are saying is that, the whole world knows that the North and North East now require this kind of intervention, why do you put them in phase two? Really, that is my position as a Member of Parliament from that area. Do you think 2008 is different from 2007? Madam Chief Whip, these are two different years and if you gave us the 2007 and you hold on for the 2008, you would see the difference. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

6.02
MR JOHN LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Mr Speaker, my contribution will be on point 4, that is, the intended achievements. The committee talks about establishing rural market infrastructure. What are these things? Are they the roads or open market places? What are they and who is supposed to establish them? Is it the government or the local Government? What kind of market anyway? –(Interruption)- Can I finish then you come in? Let me finish; two minutes are very few. (Laughter) 

Produce stores: Mr Speaker, we are going round in circles. Produce stores were conceived and established a long time ago. Go to Nalukolongo, we have stores set up many years ago. For the western region, go to Kasese, the produce stores are there. Go to Gulu for the North, and to Tororo for the east. These are not new things; they were foreseen many years ago but what are they being used for? For the one in Gulu, even the roof, the asbestos, are being removed in full view of the government, and here we are, talking of establishing produce stores as if there is nothing in place! Are we serious? 

We talk about cold rooms. Mr Speaker, cold rooms in rural areas, for what? There is no electricity even in the towns upcountry, and now you are talking about cold rooms in rural areas. I think the committee should be more serious. The committee and I seem not to be living in the same country, because if you were living in Uganda, you would know that even here in Kampala there is a power problem. Setting up a cold room in Lukum near the Sudan border? You cannot be serious! 

I think what we should do is to go back and set up cooperative societies as they were before, to look for markets for our farmers and to buy produce and sell it on behalf of our farmers. Mr Speaker, last Tuesday on my way back from the North, I stopped in Bweyale in Masindi District. I have some relatives living there. They are now harvesting a lot of maize although they still have maize for last year rotting in their stores with weevils infesting it. Now, they are going to throw away the old maize to create room for the new harvest. You harvest and then you wait for the next year to throw away and then you do it again and again.

We must be serious, particularly as Government because the biggest problem now is lack of market. Uganda farmers are ready to produce but they have no market. If you see how our people are cheated with the cotton they are producing now that it is privatised, you find somebody coming with their lorries saying, “I offer you this or I offer you that,” as if we do not have a Government in place. Our people are being cheated in broad daylight and yet their Government is there. It is unbelievable! I think the government should wake up. I thank you.

6.06
MS RHODA ACEN (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuria): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been reading this report with keen interest and concern like my honourable colleague from Amuria, Kapelebyong County, has already said. We are waiting patiently. Amuria District happens to be in phase two. 

I would like to bring to the attention of this House the many times that His Excellency has visited Amuria as a district and Teso, as a region, and he has always talked about production and productivity and value addition. At the end of the day, our farmers are taken all the way to Rwakitura to go and see modernisation of agriculture. 

Hon. Malinga has just said that in Amuria we have got one DFI which has been vandalised and when I look at the intended achievements here, there is, No.1: to improve the rural road infrastructure so as to facilitate the movement of agricultural produce from the rural farms to the markets. Many times our farmers have been cheated. Eligible buyers go all the way with their trucks to follow them, appreciating the bad roads, and because of the bad roads, they cheat the farmers because they say they cannot take their produce at a higher rate just because the roads are bad and yet they come and buy the produce anyway. But then if they say this is going to happen, we pray that it happens. 

Let us look at the second intention, that is, to increase agricultural production by supplying improved seeds to rural farmers so as to improve the agricultural yields. His Excellency launched a programme on livestock production and productivity. I happened to host him in the organisations I was working with before I joined politics. However, I am yet to see the improved seeds. We are also praying and waiting patiently for these because we have been promised that NAADS is unfolding from Soroti District to Amuria District. 

I also support my honourable colleague Mr Odit that the districts that have been named in phase two need this programme much more than these other districts. We would have loved to have exchange programmes within our region; Teso region visiting Lango and Acholi because we have got similar ecological systems. You cannot take me from Amuria to go and see how an apple is grown in Kabale. How do I get this apple to the market in the supermarket? So, in a bid to improve agriculture, I am saying that let us not talk about -(Interjection)- the infrastructure like roads is inevitable, yes, but our people can carry these things on their heads to the market because they are already doing it anyway. 

But we also need to improve - hon. Malinga talked about attitudes, capacity building. We cannot talk about modernisation of agriculture, you cannot talk about the national agricultural show that is being held in Jinja. How many of my farmers from Amuria can afford to come and see what is happening in Jinja, for example? So, we really need this infrastructure to move a little more to the district such that our community members can access this and improve their agricultural production and productivity and hence improve their livelihood at household level. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: I want to thank you honourable members for the very good ideas that have gone in the Hansard. But I also want to advise that having seen the intended achievements and you are in a district that is affected by this loan, there is no harm in supplementing what you have said here. A district can say, “As far as we can see, the best for our district should be this and this.” They can then write to the minister concerned so that eventually when they are drawing the final plan on this they take into account what you have said rather than saying, “Well, it has gone in the Hansard and they are going to read the Hansard.” What if they do not? But if you write then I think they may specifically address the issues that you have raised. This is my humble view on the matter. But I think -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the chairman presented documents and among those documents there is the project implementation plan. That means that they have already drawn a plan. 

THE SPEAKER: You mean plans can never be adjusted?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I hope they will do so.  (Laughter)

6.11
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members for your contributions. I want to assure you that we will take these contributions into account even if the implementation plan has already been made; it is not written in stone and can be changed in order to improve the plan and we will do that. So, I will just make a few comments.

There was a concern about the relationship between this credit and the Prosperity For All programmes that are already ongoing. I would like to assure the honourable member that we will coordinate the two so that they complement each other. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to welcome parliamentary monitoring and Members of Parliament getting interested in what is happening particularly in their own areas. I think we would very much welcome that to complement what we are doing and to increase accountability. So, I want to say that I welcome the point that you have also made, Mr Speaker. 

Mr Speaker, I want to assure the honourable member from Kapchorwa that we are flexible. We will make sure that the people in his area and his constituency are able to procure seeds whether from Kenya or elsewhere so that they will not be disadvantaged in any way. 

Similarly, for the rural electrification and for the roads, I think that we should be open-minded. We all realise that many rural roads are in a very bad state and it is important that our people have access in terms of transporting their produce. I think it is not fair to say that your constituents can carry things on their heads and therefore, they do not need a road. I think this is not being open-minded. I think that the programme is seeking to improve the access roads so that vehicles can reach these areas and people do not have to only grow what they can carry on their heads, but they can use vehicles. Human beings are not beasts of burden. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, I sought clarification as to who was going to do the infrastructure. I never said that I would prefer the people of Chua to carry their produce on their heads. I know it is not possible. The honourable minister should –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you have clarified. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: The minister should be courteous with us.

DR SURUMA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, I think that it is clearly very important that we maintain these roads, particularly in very distant areas so that people can carry their goods on motorcycles and on trucks rather than on their heads. I hope that you will welcome this and make sure the service reaches your areas.

The issues of markets – ANNP - the previous programme was used to construct markets and this meant that some of these are still being constructed. 

I do agree that the Uganda People’s Congress Government constructed some produce stores but I do not think that means that there should be no more produce stores constructed. I think that there is a need for many more throughout the country, in fact in all the sub-counties. Surely, we should be fair. Our agricultural produce are perishable and they get spoilt. So, to say that you do not need a cold room in your area is really not being fair to the people whose produce is getting rotten. If it can be preserved then this becomes an improvement and a service to the people. 

I think that this programme will go a long way in making sure that we can have good standard stores, where maize can be preserved from the time of harvesting and it can be sold when prices improve, it does not have to be sold there and then. These are important advantages that a programme like this can bring and should bring. 

There was a question concerning the structure of this programme. I believe this was in the brief, which was distributed. However, for information, district roads rehabilitation takes $12.5million; community access roads take $19.7million, so roads rehabilitation is a big chunk of the credit. Routine maintenance takes $1.7million; construction of markets $9.8million; rural electrification equipment for markets $2.2million; agro processing and storage equipment is $9.7million; community mobilisation and capacity building is $2.6million; programme monitoring, evaluation and audit is $1.3million. That totals to $60million, Mr Speaker. 

In conclusion, I am not able to address all the issues; maybe the chairman will address some of them but let me address the issue of sectarianism. Mr Speaker, I think to say that 2008, which is five months away, it is not sectarian; it is within this very financial year. I do not think it is sectarian to say that some will start now and others will start next year. I think we should be looking for inclusion and the fact that this programme includes 39 districts, and then you add on the one, which we just looked at, which is 13 districts. I think an attempt is being made to address it and I want to assure Members that this is not the end of the road. I hope there will be more programmes so that everybody can be included. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for a resolution of Parliament seeking to borrow US$30 million from the African Development Bank and US$15million from the International Fund for Agricultural Development for financing the community agriculture infrastructure improvement programme. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: But as I said, let us now take interest in these loans. I think we have done what we can and I think we should end here. Today’s proceedings are concluded. Therefore, i adjourn the House to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. for the special sitting in respect of our friend who passed away. The House is adjourned until then. 

(The House rose at 6.20 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 11 July 2007 at 2.00 p.m.)

