

Wednesday, 15 July 2020

Parliament met at 2.57 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. First, I will be altering the Order Paper to create room for a motion to be presented on the issue of sugarcane, as we discussed yesterday.

Secondly, I would like to remind the Minister of Works and Transport about a petition by hon. Michael Timuzigu, which was first presented on 16 May 2019 from the residents of Karagama Town Council in Ntungamo. It was about compensation of the project affected persons on the Ntungamo-Kagamba Road. We sent that to the minister in May 2019. 

On 11 July 2019, the honourable member again rose to remind the House that he had not received a response on the issue of payment of compensation to the project affected persons. I directed the minister to respond urgently but to date he has not yet done so.

The Minister of Works and Transport is therefore directed to present an action-taken brief on this particular issue by Thursday next week. This is the last time we are going to ask you. After that, we shall consider other options.

Secondly, some time back, honourable members had requested that the Ministry of Health organises mass screening for COVID-19 among the Members. I am glad to inform you that they have now completed screening the Cabinet. Starting tomorrow, we shall be able to do the screening here, starting in the morning. We shall first screen Members of Parliament (MPs). After that, we shall deal with the staff and others. 

Starting tomorrow, at our medical centre, you can go and get tested. We shall have to cluster you because we do not want all of you to be there at the same time. The Clerk will organise how you can get in.

There are a few matters of national concern. 

3.01
Mr William nzoghu (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am one of those who is excited about the announcement that you have made, particularly about the need to screen Members of Parliament and staff. However, I would like to seek clarification on that. 

Members of Parliament and staff come from families with more than one person. During the day, they are here, but in the evening, they go and interact with their family members. I would like to know whether there is also a way that this could be extended to the immediate members of our families. A Member may be fine today and yet he or she will go back and still be infected by a relative. Thank you. 

The Speaker: Let me first deal with my immediate constituency here. However, I am going to engage with the ministry to see what else can be done to protect the ones we live with.

3.03
Ms esther anyakun (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of national importance that I would like to raise is on the resuming of open markets in Karamoja sub-region.

The people of Karamoja have sent this concern because you know very well that these are markets where the locals in Karamoja sell their goats, cattle and chicken so that they are in a position to get some food stuffs from the market. At the moment, we are in a lean season since all the seeds were planted and there is no food. 

We should have it at the back of our minds that Karamoja is an area with a 60.8 per cent poverty level. Therefore, the people of Karamoja have requested that the district taskforce members work with the sub-county taskforce members to help them observe the Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs). 

This is a very big problem. People cannot sell chicken to be able to buy grain for their families. I brought this up as an issue of national importance to request that the Ministry of Health and Government allow the people of Karamoja to have their markets opened. After all, we do not have coronavirus in the region. Thank you. 

The Speaker: We shall ask the Prime Minister, who is the leader of the national taskforce, to come and advise us on the livelihood of the people of Karamoja in view of the long lockdown.

3.05
Mr George ouma (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. 

This afternoon, I got a message from the people of the islands that some unidentified people who are calling themselves “the army” are confiscating their engines under the pretext that their lifejackets are old. They take the engine in the middle of the lake and leave you to continue floating. Almost seven boats are on the lake; their engines have been taken and they do not have oars. They are stranded.

My prayer would be that the ministry concerned comes and clarifies who these people are and why they are arresting people under the guise that their lifejackets are old.

Secondly, it is also my humble prayer that the Government of Uganda - because people are suffering on the lake - provides lifejackets at subsidised prices so that fishermen can continue surviving. They do not have to go through these barbaric, archaic and inhuman practices, which leave them floating on the lake when they do not even have food in the boat. Thank you. 

The Speaker: The minister in charge of fisheries, who I know is still on a tour of the fishing areas, is directed to address this situation on the islands and come and update this House as soon as she comes back from the familiarisation tour.

Also, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should come and advise us on how the islanders can secure lifejackets at subsidised prices.

3.07
Mr gilbert olanya (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable member has raised very important concerns. He says that currently, there are some people who are floating in the middle of the water. We need immediate intervention to save the lives of those people on the water. If you are to wait, as you directed, until next week or any other day, I think those people may perish on the water. Let us look for immediate interventions to rescue those people. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, last time we had the issue of the floating islands and I believe the Prime Minister’s office arranged to go and rescue those people. Therefore, I direct the Office of the Prime Minister, especially the minister in charge of disaster preparedness, to arrange and rescue the people whose engines have been confiscated and they are floating in the middle of the lake. Give us an update by Wednesday next week. 

3.08
MR OKIN OJARA (Independent, Chua West County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me start with the obvious – I would like to thank the security forces for restoring hope, confidence, security and peace in northern Uganda. However, there are some elements of the security forces that have started to again destabilise the peace that was brought in. 

On 27 June, eight armed security officers went to Lamwo District and disrupted a council meeting that was organised under the instruction of the Minister of Health, under the guiding force of the Ministry of Local Government. The same thing happened again on 10 July; 15 security people again went and disrupted council proceedings. 

This has caused a lot of anxiety and problems with the people of Lamwo. Therefore, the people of Lamwo request that the Minister of Internal Affairs comes and explains to this House why there is persistent disruption of the council meetings taking place in Lamwo. A thorough investigation should be done and those who are – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, does a soldier just go to a council meeting? Is it a district council meeting? 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, colleague, for giving way. Kitgum borders Lamwo. In this House, we have representatives, including a minister, from Lamwo District. We actually interact with most of the people there. 

What my brother is presenting to this House concerns a political war arising from a decision on the location of the constituency and they want to use the district council to turn it around. I would like to pray that since we have representatives - the woman representative and the minister - they should be in a position to give us clear information. However, the fact is that there are political wrangles in Lamwo; the local councils want to seat outside the established arrangements and make decisions against what has been brought to this House to create constituencies. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will invite the Members from -  

MR OKIN: Madam Speaker, just give me one minute. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes. 

MR OKIN: Madam Speaker, I gave her the Floor to give me information and she has given it to me. I would just like to summarise now – 

THE SPEAKER: Maybe we can get information from the Member of Parliament for Lamwo.

MS MOLLY LANYERO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here to inform the House about the exact situation in Lamwo.

Right now, we have the issue of the constituency on the ground; that is true. However, the correction I would like to make is that the people of Lamwo requested for a constituency of two counties, which was submitted. However, the Minister of Local Government said Lamwo cannot be given two counties because of our population; so, we were given one county. I do not think the people of Lamwo are against the county that is being given to them. 

Madam Speaker, I heard about what happened in Lamwo the other week through rumours; I do not have official communication about any attack from the army against the district council of Lamwo. 

Some other misinformation is that the council of Lamwo is not against the creation of another county. I would like the House to record this right: Lamwo is interested in another county but the issue here is that when they requested for two counties and were given one, the council of Lamwo then wanted to be given the opportunity to do the demarcation and decide which subcounties go where. That is why they wanted to meet as a council. 

However, to my knowledge, the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) and the security organs blocked the council meeting before it took place, before they sat in the council hall. I do not have any information about the army going to disrupt a meeting that had not even started yet. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is a local issue and it should not even be here as a matter of national importance. First sort it out there. Okay, let us hear from the minister who comes from Lamwo.

MR HILARY ONEK: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. What is happening is that the council meetings in the border districts are supposed to take place after the ministers of health and local government have cleared them and given them SOPs. We are a border district and with COVID-19 there – (Interjection) – I do not accept the point of order. You are a liar and you are fighting us. 

The point is – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please respect one another. Allow the Member of the local area to speak first. 

MR ONEK: The point is, he is not from Lamwo District; what is he after? You do not come from Lamwo District and I am talking with authority. For four terms, I have represented that constituency, so I know what is good for my people and what is not.

The clarification here is that the RDC had not received clearance from these authorities in order to hold council meetings. So, the police were asked to preserve the COVID-19 laws and not to allow this meeting to take place. That is what is on the ground. If the Minister of Health and the Minister of Local Government give us the authority, they will have the council meeting. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members; that is a local issue, sort it out from there.

3.17
MR LAWRENCE SONGA BIYIKA (NRM, Ora County, Zombo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent importance concerning the plight of the refugees that the Government of Uganda allowed to enter Zombo District. These refugees are now living in fear of relocation to an unknown destination

Madam Speaker, Uganda is a State Party to the 1951 Refugee Convention and its 1967 protocol, as well as the 1969 Organisation of African Unity (OAU) Convention Governing the Specific Aspects of Refugees in Africa. The universal human rights that are most relevant to the refugees are well known to Uganda. The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) on the other hand promotes three durable solutions: voluntary repatriation, local integration, and resettlement. 

Uganda went ahead to develop the Refugee Act, 2006, where Uganda’s asylum policies allow aliens who have lawfully entered Uganda to move freely in the country and to live where they may choose with rights, including freedom of movement and expression. The refugees who entered the district are currently at the District Farm Institute (DFI). 

Madam Speaker, you came for my thanksgiving; they are just on that land in Alur Kingdom. They fear that they are going to be relocated. Therefore, their prayers are as follows:

1. His Excellency the President of Uganda should prevail on the Office of the Prime Minister, UNHCR and other humanitarian agencies to allow the refugees remain where they are now in Alur Kingdom.

2. The Prime Minister should come and clarify to this Parliament so that the refugees who think they have found a safe haven do not continue to live in distress and in fear of getting relocated outside the kingdom.

3. The UNHCR and other humanitarian agencies should come to the rescue of those in Zombo District and Alur Kingdom. They should also reach out to other countries to match Uganda’s generosity by increasing funding.

Finally, should this position be the position of the Office of the Prime Minister, UNHCR and other humanitarian agencies to cause this kind of forced migration outside Zombo District and Alur Kingdom, we would like them to know that the host population prefer to keep the refugees with whom they share the same traditions, culture and identity.

I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Can the refugees demand on their own? Can they say, “we want to be in the city of Kampala; don’t touch us”? 

MR BIYIKA: The clarification I would like to add is that from 1960 to 1965, there were many Congolese refugees that entered Uganda and they were relocated to Acholi-Pii in Agago District, and most of them lost identity. This time, the local population have decided that instead of living with these refugees in their homes, they would offer them land where these people can remain with the same people.

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Biyika; are you telling me that a refugee can come and say that they want to be here in Kampala? This is the responsibility of the Government.

MR BIYIKA: That is why I have put it as a prayer to the Government.

THE SPEAKER: I think what you should do is to inform the Government that there is a huge number of refugees that have come into Zombo, can they address the situation? However, for you to say that you people want them, they should live near you because you dance like them, no.

MR BIYIKA: Madam Speaker, hon. Hilary Onek can confirm this because he is the one who received them on behalf of the Government. He even directed the place to have permanent infrastructure. Thank you, very much.

THE SPEAKER: Even that is wrong. Honourable members, I went to Zombo and we have a brand-new wonderful district farm institute that has never been used. Now, we are being told that the refugees can stay in our new DFI, no. Sorry but – 

3.22
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES) (Mr Hilary Onek): Madam Speaker, it is true that due to COVID-19, Government resolved that no refugees or foreigners are allowed into our country. The refugees we are talking about are about 3,016 people who had camped at the border and they were there for months. Out of courtesy, our President became sympathetic with these refugees who had camped at the border. He gave me strict instructions that we simply get those refugees camped at the border inland, screen them and then accommodate them, but we close the border and should not allow more refugees to come in.

Therefore, we went there with the UNHCR officials and other officials, including the area Member of Parliament who has just presented the case. Alur Kingdom gave some land in a place called Atiak - it is 17 kilometres from the border - and they wanted these people to be hosted there. However, the place is not prepared. To host refugees in one location, you need to have a water system in place, you need to have clinics because they fall sick, and you need to have all the facilities that require hosting of refugees. They are currently kept at the DFI awaiting screening. 

Currently, UNHCR has run out of money because the donors have not given the money that is needed to improve on the location in Atiak, which they gave us. Therefore, temporarily, UNHCR has gone to Zombo to meet and discuss with the king. We have spaces in Rhino Camp and other places where there are facilities. For now, they will ask him to allow them to shift the refugees there until such a time when they have enough money to prepare this place he gave them and then they would take them back. There is no conflict there and I do not think Parliament should be brought into this; this is a small matter. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I would like to remind the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries that when I came back from Zombo, I informed the House about that new facility, which we are not using, and I even put in writing. I think we should not just waste money; our children should be studying there.

Honourable members, on the other issue about hailstorms, please hon. Angiro, write to the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees. Hon. Franca Akello, your issue will come up because two other Members have asked about honoraria for councillors. Therefore, we shall not take it up as a matter of national importance.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your indulgence. I again rise here on a procedural matter. 

On 26th of last month, the High Court of Uganda asked the Attorney-General to produce Simon Peter Odongo whose human rights have been violated. To date, he has not been produced. Last week, the Attorney-General promised that he would come back yesterday but he did not give us a response. 

Over the weekend, the Mr Odongo’s wife managed to access him but she found him in a very terrible situation in Bombo Hospital. Madam Speaker, I do not want to labour on this so much; can we know why the Attorney-General has defied the court ruling? Also, the family would like to know the crime Simon Peter Odongo committed that he cannot be allowed free access to the family and his lawyers. They want to know what crime he has committed to undergo such humiliating abuse on his body.

THE SPEAKER: The Deputy Attorney-General is here.

3.27
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I appreciate my senior colleague’s concern. Actually, yesterday, I had a chat with him about it.

I would like to bring it to the attention of the House that the Attorney-General’s Chambers instructed the Inspector General of Police (IGP) to locate this person. We also instructed him to respect the court order and have this person released immediately.

As of yesterday – and I remember talking to hon. Okupa about the same - I needed some clarification because my senior colleague, the Attorney-General, had been in court and we had not discussed it. He simply sent me a text message. I only got more information from hon. Okupa and got in touch with the IGP. I can assure the House that Mr Odongo will be released.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know why you are addressing the IGP. I thought the young man is in the hands of the army. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, allow me provide more information. The people who were directed to produce Simon Peter Odongo in 48 hours are the Attorney-General, the Chief of Military Intelligence and the Inspector General of Police.

I gave the Attorney-General the documents, including the medical reports from the police hospital in Naguru. They were given 48 hours on the 26 June 2020 to produce him in court. It is now about 20 days since that time. The Attorney-General received these orders on 29 June 2020 and acknowledged receipt. All the information has been furnished. I even gave another copy to your senior colleague from Parliament here, five days afterwards. 

Hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, if you saw what this boy is going through and what the family is going through, it is so – If you would like me to give information, Simon Peter Odongo is in custody at Bombo Military Barracks. I even gave the contacts of his wife and sister to the Attorney-General and the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs.

Madam Speaker, I plead with you; if the Attorney-General is taking 20 days to respect the court order, if it pleases you, let the parliamentary Committee on Human Rights and the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs visit Bombo and see what is really happening. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I will give my ruling when I have established exactly where he is. I do not know whether he is in the hospital or in the barracks. I will give my ruling on that tomorrow.

3.30
MR JULIUS OCHEN (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Kapelebyong): Madam Speaker, I seek for your indulgence to allow me raise a very urgent matter that cannot be skipped because of its importance. I am raising a matter concerning the plight of Ugandan soldiers serving in the African Union Mission in Somalia. Over the last one month, there have been increased cases of attacks on the Ugandan soldiers serving in the African Union Mission in Somalia, yet there is hardly any information on the same from the Government of Uganda. 

Currently, there are two contingents of Ugandan troops in Somalia - the Battle Group (BG) 27 and 28. The tour of duty of BG 27 expired in April while that of BG 28 expires on 31 July 2020. However, both BGs were granted four months extension. This extension has implications on the eligibility of soldiers to benefit in case of any eventualities of war, say a disability or death, as has already occurred in the case of five Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces (UPDF) soldiers that lost their lives on Sunday, 12 July 2020 and one whose body was dismembered on Tuesday, 14 July 2020. The UPDF only recovered one leg of that Ugandan soldier in Somalia.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not know if those details are palatable to be put on the Hansard. Just talk about the principle; I think you are going to injure the families.

MR OCHEN: Allow me make the prayers, Madam Speaker. The uncertainty of the entitlements and the soldiers receiving the emoluments for the period of the extension is something that needs to be clarified.

In addition, I am aware that Uganda has been involved in various peace support operations in various parts of the continent in the recent past, notably South Sudan, the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) and the Central African Republic. However, this House has not been availed with information on the status and implications of these international engagements. 

I pray that – 
1. There is regular briefing of Parliament on the situation in Somalia. 

2. There is need for comprehensive progress updates to Parliament on Uganda’s engagements in peace support operations overseas, to aid Parliament do the valuation of the efficacy of these overseas engagements.

3. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs should formally update the House on Uganda’s foreign policy in respective countries that are hosting Ugandan troops in peace support operations. 

Madam Speaker, these are matters that require urgent attention for the situation to run normally in the country. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have noted the concerns of the honourable member. The Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs should brief us about the prayers as moved by the honourable member. 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to raise this point of procedure. 

The matter I wanted to raise, which I have raised before on this Floor, has become so difficult, especially for the councillors of Agago. I have raised this issue not once, not twice, and I even wrote, following your guidance, Madam Speaker, to the ministry about the same. 

All the councillors of Local Council III (LC III) have been receiving less pay for their honoraria. They were supposed to be paid Shs 35,000 per month but they are being paid Shs 19,000 and they wait until it has accumulated for the whole year so that it can attract tax. The councillors would like to understand these two matters. I wrote to the ministry but up to now, I have not received any reply. 

The councillors have become impatient because this has been going on for the last four years. It is not fair for someone to miss their entitlement for four years. We are now in the final year of our term. The councillors would like to know their fate. 

I would like to pray that the Minister of Local Government comes clear on this matter on this Floor of Parliament. He needs to clear the air on the measures to ensure that these councillors get their payments in arrears, including the taxes that they were not supposed to have paid. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it is important that the Government responds to the concerns of the Members who are representing those who cannot come here. Honourable Minister of Local Government, this matter has come many times on the Floor of this House. We are giving you until Tuesday to come and give a response. 

Let us go to item No. 3. 

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION OF MEMBERS OF MATONGO LOST LAND RECOVERY FAMILIES’ ORGANISATION (MLLRFO)

THE SPEAKER: Is hon. Muhumuza here? Is there anyone to represent hon. Muhumuza? Okay, let us go to item No. 4.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION UNDER SECTION 8(3) OF THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS ACT, 2005 (ACT NO.17 OF 2005) FOR REVIEW OF THE REPRESENTATION UNDER ARTICLE 78(1)(b) AND (c) OF THE CONSTITUTION

3.37
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi):  Madam Speaker, this is a motion for a resolution of Parliament, moved under section 8(3) of the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2005 for the review of the representation under Article 78(1) (b) and (c) of the Constitution.

“WHEREAS during the Constitution making process, the people of Uganda emphasised that one of the main principles that should govern the composition and functioning of Parliament is participatory democracy and inclusiveness and that whereas the Legislature should be composed mainly of representatives directly elected by the people, due regard should be made for the representation of special interest groups that had been marginalised by society;
 
AND WHEREAS Article 78(1) (b) and (c) of the Constitution provides that – 
‘(1) Parliament shall consist of- 
(a) Members directly elected to represent constituencies; 
(b) One woman representative for every district; 
(c) Such number of representatives of the army, youth, workers, persons with disabilities and other groups as Parliament may determine.’;

AND WHEREAS Parliament in 1996 determined, through section 37 of the Parliamentary Elections (Interim Provisions) Statute of 1996, which is now repealed, that the numbers for the special interest groups would be as follows-
(a) Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces – 10 representatives; 
(b) Youth – five representatives; 
(c) Workers – three representatives; and
(d) Persons with disabilities – five representatives;

AND WHEREAS, subsequently, Parliament through section 11 of the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2001 (Act No.8 of 2001) made provision for the district women representatives and for the representation of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces, youth, workers and persons with disabilities as follows-
    (a) one woman representative for every district; 
    (b) ten representatives of the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces; 
    (c) Five representatives of youth, at least one of whom shall be a woman; 
    (d) Five representatives of workers; 
    (e) Five representatives of persons with disabilities, at least one of whom shall be a woman;

AND WHEREAS section 8 of the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2005 provides for the following representation in respect of Article 78(1) (b) and (c) of the Constitution:

    (1) District or city women representatives - one woman representative in Parliament for every district or city. 

(2) Special interest groups- 
(a) ten representatives for the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces, at least two of whom shall be women; 
(b) five representatives for workers, at least one of whom shall be a woman; 
(c) five representatives for the youth, at least one of whom shall be a woman; 
(d) five representatives for persons with disabilities, at least one of whom shall be a woman;

AND WHEREAS Article 32(l) (affirmative action in favour of marginalised groups) provides thus: 

‘(l) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the State shall take affirmative action in favour of groups marginalised on the basis of gender, age, disability or any other reason created by history, tradition or custom, for the purpose of redressing imbalances, which exist against them.’;

AND WHEREAS in the past, women, youth, workers, persons with disabilities were denied participation in the governance of Uganda through customs and practices that marginalised their status in society and could not participate on an equal footing with others and yet they have special interests that need articulation and representation;

AND WHEREAS their inclusion in the composition of Parliament is a guarantee by the Constitution of minimum participation by these groups in the democratic processes of Government, and their representation is one form of affirmative action, which the State is required to take under Article 32 of the Constitution in favour of groups marginalised on the basis of gender, age, disability or any other reason created by history, tradition or custom;

AND WHEREAS the representation of the army has been part of historical process for the army to appreciate how the problems of Uganda are solved by civil leaders with the underlying objective of evolving a culture of commitment to the rule of law and constitutionalism; a culture in which the army is subordinate to the mandate of the people given to civilian authority in accordance with the Constitution;

AND WHEREAS Article 78(2) of the Constitution provides that – 
‘(2) Upon the expiration of a period of 10 years after the commencement of this Constitution and thereafter, every five years, Parliament shall review the representation under paragraphs (b) and (c) of clause (1) of this Article for the purposes of retaining, increasing or abolishing any such representation and any other matter incidental to it.’;

AND WHEREAS the period of 10 years after the commencement of the Constitution expired on the 7th day of October, 2005, and Parliament in December, 2005 reviewed the representation under Article 78(1) (b) and (c) in accordance with Article 78 (2) and resolved to retain the representation; and subsequently reviewed the representation again in October, 2010 and October 2015 and resolved to retain the representation;

AND WHEREAS Parliament is required, under Article 78(2), to review the representation every five years after the first review;

AND WHEREAS the review is now due, since the representation was last reviewed by Parliament in October, 2015;

AND WHEREAS it is imperative that the review is done by Parliament in light of the forthcoming general elections of 2021;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament as follows:
That in accordance with section 8(3) of the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2005 and Article 78(2) of the Constitution, the representation in Parliament under Article 78(1) (b) and (c) is reviewed as follows-

(1) District or city women representatives - one woman representative for every district or city;

(2) Special interest groups-
(a) ten representatives for the Uganda Peoples' Defence Forces, at least two of whom shall be women;

(b) five representatives for workers, at least one of whom shall be a woman;

(c) five representatives for the youth, at least one of whom shall be a woman;

(d) five representatives for persons with disabilities, at least one of whom shall be a woman; and
(e) five representatives for older persons, at least one of whom shall be a woman, for purposes of the representation in Parliament.”

It is moved by hon. Jackson Kafuuzi Karugaba, Deputy Attorney-General.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? 

(Motion Seconded)

THE SPEAKER: The motion is seconded. Please, give your justification. 

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, our history tells us that we have had cultures and customs that have been detrimental to some interest groups. Some interest groups have not been able to move at the same pace like the others. The women have, in particular, been selfishly gagged and left behind. Tradition has confined women to the kitchen. 

Since this Government came into power, it embarked on an empowerment move. In so doing, we embedded an article on affirmative action, particularly to deal with these wrongs of history in order to correct them and create equality for everyone and a clear and flat ground for us all to operate.  

Madam Speaker, for that reason, the special interest groups herein named should be considered and granted leave to operate. Thank you.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I would like to appreciate the presentation. However, the minister is emphasising the spirit of gender parity so that the disadvantaged are not left behind. However, the spirit, which the minister shared with us is not in this document. On page (5) item 2, it says ten representatives from Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces, five representatives of workers – you are talking of either two women or at least, one woman.

Madam Speaker, Uganda is a signatory to the European Union Charter, which has already adopted 50 per cent representation on gender basis. Further, this Parliament is on record for having agreed to 30 per cent but in the case of Parliament, 40 per cent of women representation. The spirit of what has already been resolved and practised is not reflected in this document. 

Madam Speaker, for the reasons above, I disagree with the presentation. This document does not take into account the dynamics of how things have changed over the years. The women have developed over the years and so, they cannot just be considered to say “at least one”, when there are 10 positions. Why at least one? You are already discriminating the women.

Madam Speaker, this is completely wrong. The spirit of gender parity and taking care of the disadvantaged situation in our society has not been captured in this document. I am, therefore, asking the minister to clarity why he brought this document with that spirit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you are convinced about something, make your proposal. Do not say “now, you clarify to me” and then we agree.

MS OGWAL: I would like to propose that in all representations, women must be 50 per cent. That is what the European Union Charter mandated us to do and Uganda signed that – (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us be orderly. We have not even started the debate. Please, wait. Attorney-General, yesterday, I indicated to you that the issue of the elderly is not a review. It is about amending the composition of Parliament under Article 78 (1)(c). So, correct that language. It is not review. Let us first amend the composition of Parliament. Otherwise, the review takes place on the existing provisions.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, we have two motions. 

THE SPEAKER: I have seen and read your second motion. You are saying in accordance with Article 78 (2), the representation of Parliament under Article 78 (1) (c) is hereby reviewed by including five. It is not a review. I told you that you should amend Article 78 to create a new category. You are first amending the composition separately and then the review will be done on the existing. Otherwise, elderly is not a review.

MR KAFUUZI: Are you suggesting we –

THE SPEAKER: I want you to amend your resolution – [Mr Ssewungu rose_] Hon. Ssewungu, wait. Honourable members, you have heard the motion and the justification.

BRIG. GEN. BYEKWASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not know whether the Deputy Attorney-General just made a mistake but from what I know, in the last Parliament, the review – originally, there were two female Army Representatives out of the ten Army Representatives in Parliament. The review said that it should be a third and that is when three female Army Representatives in Parliament were included out of the ten Army Representatives. 

So, I am wondering why they are going backward to a position that had been – Instead of actually increasing, they are decreasing. I beg for that clarification, Madam Speaker. I raised this same matter yesterday. Thank you.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I think the Attorney-General must be clear on this. He has dodged a number of Articles of the Constitution. When you read the motion, Article 78 (1) (c) of the Constitution gives the categories of the composition of Parliament. Article 78 (2) does not allow Parliament to add any new category. The only process we can have to bring any change here is by bringing a Bill under Article 259. Anything against that, you will be taking us to Constitutional Appeal No. 01 of 2002, where Kawanga Ssemogerere took Parliament to court and where judges talked about colourable legislation. 

Therefore, anything you do now, by bringing in any new category, you have to amend the Constitution. You cannot use a motion. So, Mr Attorney-General, since you are the legal advisor of Government, I pray that you kindly go and address yourself to this matter. Anything outside that is against the Supreme Court’s ruling. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have jumped the gun. We have not yet gone to that motion. I was only telling them that they need to correct their resolution. We are now dealing with the review. 

MR NIWAGABA: Unfortunately, Madam Speaker, the motion seems to have been consolidated. Going by the provision of Article 78 of the Constitution, however, if you read clearly Article 78 (1) (c) and (2), there is no way Parliament can act, by way of a motion, to amend Article 78 of the Constitution. So, we can only go by the provisions of amendment of the Constitution under Article 259 if we are to introduce any new category. 

MS BETTY AOL: Madam Speaker, I just would like to add a proposal to what hon. Ogwal has raised. If we go mathematically, we have always talked of one third but one fifth is farther to one third compared than to two fifth. That means we should go with at least two women representatives when we talk about the vulnerable classes of people. 

Men will protest when we say 50 percent but at least, we should have two women. We may have all the five members being women but we must make a deliberate effort to put at least two women out of five members because two is closer to one third compared to one fifth. This is a principle, which has to be practised in very many structures of Government. 

We visited the local councils and we found that they are also putting one woman out of five members in the Local Government Public Accounts Committee. So, we advised them that it should be at least, two women on the committee. 

Everywhere, this principle must apply. There should be two women out of five members. It can also be five women out of five members but affirmative action demands that the composition of women should be a third of every membership. So, two third is higher than one third – (Interruption)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Rt hon. Leader of the Opposition. Madam Speaker, for purposes of being consistent, I thought that we should go by what is in the Constitution by mentioning the percentages because when it comes to a group like the UPDF where there are 10 Members, if you say at least a third of the group must be women instead of two out of 10, it will augur well. It will be consistent.

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you for the information. It is still the same, whether we say 30 per cent or a third, it amounts to the same thing. Therefore, two out of five is the best position compared to one out of five. We must insist on that principle.

We may not yet reach 50 per cent but at least, we should fulfil the 30 per cent. That percentage must be fulfilled in every structure of Government. This is what I can say because I see among the workers’ representatives, there is at least one woman and yet, there are five representatives. When you go to youth representatives, there is at least one woman. Why one woman? It should be at least, two women – (Ms Ann Nankabirwa rose_) Information granted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, give the information quickly. I would like to make a ruling. 

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give to the Leader of the Opposition, with due respect, so that we can share as a House as we legislate is that some of these affirmative action groups are voting by regions. In 2000, we faced a problem when we were going to have elections of five youth representatives. When the election was taken to the regions, in determining the number of the female youth representatives, it became very difficult to assert on a particular region to say, “In order to get the one third of the female youth representation, this region must give us a female representative”.  

That is how we reached a consensus that at least, one member should be a female. However, despite that, some regions have consistently sent a female youth representative. That time, I remember, my youth representative was hon. Rose Namayanja. When I look at the youth group now, I am seeing at least, some regions – The next one was hon. Anite, and we have progressed. I would like to share that information so that as legislators, we know where we come from to reach that point.

Ms betty aol: Thank you. We must take that deliberate effort. We should not be satisfied with one woman. Even for the youth, we can still take that deliberate effort to make them two instead of just one out of five. What about when it comes to people with disabilities?

I would like to say that we should keep the principle of 30 per cent. At least, we are moving towards 50 per cent when we make it two out of five. Thank you. 

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, concern has been raised by my senior colleagues on the procedure; how Article 78(1) (c) can be put into effect by this Parliament.

While the article leaves the door open for Parliament to create another or any other interest group, it has not yet been done before and the procedure is not prescribed. I would like to leave it to you to guide in your ruling on whether it should be by motion or Bill. Thank you. 

The Speaker: Honourable members, I would like to propose the following:

Both motions be moved and we send them to the committee. However, I have been asking myself; this is the first time we are adding a new category to the special interest groups. I think it may require a Bill for an Act of Parliament.

Therefore, let me allow the minister to move both motions and we send them to the committee but I am almost convinced that we need a Bill for that particular part of adding a new category. We need a Bill to amend section 78.
Can you complete the moving then we send them to the committee? Yesterday, he moved both of them.

Honourable members, with regard to the representation of the elderly, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is instructed to expeditiously prepare a Bill to amend Article 78 of the Constitution. 

We can now proceed with the review. We shall go category by category. First is the district or city woman representative. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)


The Speaker: Special interest groups –
Ten representatives of Uganda People’s Defence Forces, at least two of whom shall be women – there was an objection. Can someone formally move an amendment? 

Mr aogon: Madam Speaker, trying to go downwards to two out of 10 will be unconstitutional. We can only improve the numbers but not deteriorate them.

Therefore, I move that we stay with the normal of at least, three out of 10, which is one third. That is the normal that it has been. I beg to move. Thank you.

The Speaker: Honourable members, it has been brought to my attention that we need 50 per cent plus one. Therefore, I am giving notice that the vote will take place tomorrow and all the Members will be required to be here. We need 244 Members. Next item.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE PROHIBITION OF IMPORTATION OF RAW SUGARCANE FROM UGANDA BY THE GOVERNMENT OF KENYA.

4.14
Mr john bagoole (IND, Luuka County North, Luuka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I cannot forget to say that I am exceedingly humbled by the opportunity to stand in front of this Parliament to move a motion.

The motion I am moving today is for a resolution of Parliament on the prohibition of importation of raw sugarcane from Uganda by the Government of Kenya.

This motion is moved under Rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

“Whereas Article 40(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides for the right of every person in Uganda to carry on any lawful trade or business;

Whereas under Objective XI (ii), to stimulate agricultural and industrial development by adopting appropriate polices and enactment of enabling legislation and Objective XII obligates the State to take necessary measures to bring about balanced development in the different areas of Uganda;

AWARE THAT the Sugar Act 2020, among others, provides for the regulation, development and promotion of the sugar industry including sugar pricing;

NOTING THAT Uganda being a signatory to the East African Community Treaty has ratified several protocols, including the East African Community Common Market Protocol, which seeks to prioritise importation and exportation of Member states' goods amongst the partner States;

FURTHER NOTING THAT H.E the President of Uganda and H.E the President of Kenya, in addition to the signing of the East Africa Common Market Protocol held bilateral talks, where it was agreed that Uganda sells its surplus sugarcane to the Busia Sugar Factory in Western Kenya; 

CONCERNED THAT following the assurance of the existence of the market for raw sugarcane in Kenya, Ugandan farmers, most especially in the Busoga region, grew a lot of sugarcane;

NOTING HOWEVER THAT on 2 July, 2020, Kenya’s Cabinet Secretary for Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheries and Cooperatives, hon. Peter Munya, made a press statement wherein he prohibited the importation from Uganda of raw canes to Kenya with immediate effect;

AWARE THAT the effect of the prohibition on importation of raw cane from Uganda into Kenya has resulted into the following;
(i) Considering the prohibition was announced abruptly, trucks ferrying sugarcane to Kenya have since queued up at the Busia border point, which has led to significant losses in terms of rotting cane, losses of funds spent in clearing the revenue dues and high costs of hiring the trucks for unforeseen number of days among others;

(ii) As a result of the excess supply, the sugar millers in Uganda have reduced the cost of sugarcane, thereby, resulting in exploitation of the farmers; and

(iii) The sugar cane growers in Uganda are faced with a precarious future, since they neither have permits to supply to the sugar cane mills within Uganda nor do they have market outside Uganda for their cane, which is due for harvesting;

AWARE FURTHER THAT despite this situation, the ministers responsible for Trade and East African Affairs are yet to negotiate with their counterparts on the issues concerning prohibition of importation of the raw sugar cane to Kenya to find an amicable solution;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this august House that -
(1) Government, on behalf of the citizens of Uganda, categorically expresses its disappointment with the Government of Kenya for defying the several bi-lateral trade agreements signed in regard to exportation of Uganda produce and products to Kenya.

(2) Government, through the ministers for Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and the Minister for East African Affairs should urgently intervene and resolve this impasse with their counterpart ministers in the Government of Kenya.

(3) Where the Government of Kenya fails to lift the ban within the agreed period, which will be agreed by this August House, the Government of Uganda should consider banning Kenyan products imported to Uganda.

(4) Government may consider reviewing its trade agreements with the Government of Kenya to establish the practicability of such agreements in the prevailing circumstances.

(5) Government is urged to establish a sugar factory as pledged by H.E. the President of Uganda on several occasions to the people of Busoga. This will consume the excessive sugar cane whose supply cannot be consumed by the existing sugar mills.”

I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? 

(Motion Seconded)

THE SPEAKER: The motion is seconded by several Members. Quickly state your justification. 

MR BAGOOLE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I may not labour so much – (interjections) -  

THE SPEAKER: Please, allow the Member to speak. He is justifying his motion. 

MR BAGOOLE: Madam Speaker, the whole House is aware of the challenges the farmers in Busoga and their neighbouring areas are facing, as far as the excessive production of sugar cane is concerned. 

It needs elementary knowledge to know that the market for sugar, being an essential product for every household, is readily available. The environment of our neighbours in Sudan and South Sudan cannot allow sugar cane to grow; even the Northern part of Kenya itself, which is a desert. The market is available. 

The people of Busoga and their neighbouring counterparts’ soils can only support the growth of a product or rather a crop of sugar cane that produces sugar and some other products. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like to urge this House to support the people of Busoga, who are dying of poverty, yet they can ably produce sugar cane. Sugar cane is not only grown in Busoga but even in Bunyoro, Gulu and Acholi. 

If this Government can properly plan and come up with an appropriate intervention, like what the President has been promising the people of Busoga to set up another sugar mill, I think the Basoga can be empowered to plant sugar cane that could be bought or the supply taken to that sugar mill. As a result, the people of Busoga realise something reasonable from what they are growing. 

Currently, Madam Speaker, the people of Busoga are cutting their sugar cane and have nowhere to sell it. Therefore, as a concerned Member from the region, I was forced to come up with this motion. I request my colleagues in this House to support me so that we urge Government to come up with a serious solution to this problem. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

4.25
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, my colleague is giving me zero distance, which is very dangerous. I have stood to second this motion. Sugar cane is truly one of the major cash crops of this country in Eastern, Central and Western Uganda. 

We all agreed that Ugandans are the lovers, initiators and fosters of integration of East Africa. The major purpose of integration of East Africa was to create a bigger market for our people. This is a very good ideology and I would like to thank my President, that he has really championed the cooperation for this region, for purposes of bilateral trade. 

However, many times, the behaviour of our brothers and sisters in Kenya has not been in good spirit to promote integration. This has hampered trade and relationship on the cross borders among the partner states. 

Madam Speaker, I stand to second the motion because as I talk, you heard news since morning that Ugandan sugarcane trucks have blocked the border. We have almost 1,000 people stuck in Busia and more stuck in Malaba because their sugarcane is drying and the Kenyan Government has refused to heed to their call to sell the sugarcane. At the same time, as this is being done, our people had already signed agreements with the millers in Kenya basing on the trade agreements and protocols that were signed by our Heads of State. 

Therefore, as a Member of Parliament from the border and as a trader, I believe and trust that the Kenyan Government does not have political goodwill towards the integration of the East African region. They started with the milk, saying that the milk from Uganda does not qualify. Members, you all know that our cows in this country feed on pasture that has not been given manure at all. There are cows from other regional countries that feed on maize meal (Posho) as if they are human beings.

All in all, the stopping of Ugandan milk to Kenya was done in bad faith. They have now moved on to the raw cane, which is on demand in their country. I believe that next will be the poultry and poultry products. As Government of Uganda, to have a win-win situation in the cooperation of socio-economic development of this region, I would also second that we, with immediate effect, stop some Kenyan products from coming to Uganda - like Irish potatoes from Kericho, plastics from Kenya since Mukwano, Nice and other factories are producing them here - so that we go on the round table to negotiate when they are also feeling the pinch.

Lastly, it is a very big challenge that whereas we sign protocols, Kenya does not respect them. Whereas our leaders talk, some people - the trade curtails - in Kenya do not respect the protocols and the trade agreements. Therefore, it is high time for the two trade ministers, including the minister of agriculture, to facilitate a quick dialogue and a consultation so that our traders – I have directed the traders at the border not to leave because they have nowhere to take the raw canes because the mills in Uganda are not taking them now. 

The minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, together with the Cabinet Secretary of Agriculture, Trade and Cooperatives in Kenya should sit within 24 hours to find a lasting solution to this problem. 

Kenya has made it a habit to stop our people whenever our people begin doing good business and it is causing a very big problem to the region and causing a danger because we are in the COVID-19 period. A total of 1,000 people are now at the border in Busia. How do we know those who are infected and those who are not? 

Madam Speaker, I would like to rest my case by seconding that Uganda stops with immediate effect the Kenyan goods that were coming to Uganda so that we go on the round table to negotiate and find a win-win solution.  

I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

4.31
MR WAIRA KYEWALABYE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Bagoole, for this motion. The President of Kenya should know that the decision made by his minister was very irrational, irresponsible, insensitive and illogical to the people of Uganda. 

THE SPEAKER: Just comment on the action. 

MR KYEWALABYE: Madam Speaker, if you are to consider the losses our people are going make – the sugarcane takes six days to rot and the trucks are at the border for over a week. That is being insensitive to the people of another partner country. I would like to suggest that the losses made by the people stuck at the border should be met by the Kenyan Government because it is their decision, which has resulted into these people making losses. 

Madam Speaker, you are aware that in Busoga, we have excess sugarcane and this was the only way - and it was after the two countries agreed that Uganda can supply sugarcane to Kenya - why should a decision by the Kenyan Government be made without consulting its partner country? What was done is not in promotion of – (Member timed out.)    

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Mr Julius Maganda): Madam Speaker, I would like to give some information, as the Minister for East African Community. This will help to reduce the debate because I want to give information that may guide the House. 

I know that the Member has a right to move a motion and it is in the interest of this country that we do trade as partners with Kenya, as we implement the common markets. As a ministry, we are aware of the trucks that have been stopped at the border by the Minister of Trade from Kenya. We have been engaging our partners from the Kenyan side on how we can bring this to an end, especially to see that these trucks can move and the trade continues.

We have agreed – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Maganda, we have been waiting for Government to handle that issue and they were quiet until we wrote this motion. Please, take your seat. Let us finish our motion.

MR MAGANDA: Madam Speaker, we had written to Kenya and we got a response today morning.

THE SPEAKER: Why didn’t you come to me to say you have a statement?

MR MAGANDA: We are supposed to have a meeting tomorrow with the Kenyan officials in this country.

THE SPEAKER: I think this motion will help you in discussing with the Kenyans. Honourable minister, please take your seat?

4.35
MR FRANCO CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the way our Government is handling the plight of the sugarcane growers in this country, is very insensitive, as one of our colleagues mentioned here before. 

Honourable minister, it is not right to tell us that you are engaging the Government, even when you are aware that it takes six days for the sugarcane to rot. Those farmers have incurred costs of hiring the trucks. They are paying, as you continue to negotiate. Those farmers are also losing the moisture content and the weight of the sugar cane and you are continuing to engage. I think you should have acted more swiftly than before. These people need to have their sugarcane exported.  

I remember vividly, even during the State of the Nation Address, the President mentioned that we need industrial sugar to support the pharmaceutical industries.  I would like to agree with hon. Bagoole’s motion that Government should invest heavily in establishing an out growers sugar factory in order to absorb the excess sugarcane that is being produced especially in Busoga region, which is our sugarcane producing hub.  

If we do not do that, our farmers will continue incurring numerous losses because the crashing capacity of the established factories is already overwhelmed. If you drive on the road from Lugazi all the way to the eastern region, you will find trucks lined up – when we were in Kamuli, we saw trucks lined up – (Member timed out.)

4.37
MS MARY KABANDA (DP, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to second the motion. 

However, as you remember, the Sugar Bill that was brought on the Floor but was suspended because of the Private Member’s Bill, seconded that we do not have enough cane for Uganda. Even the President signed that Bill. I am not sure that if we allow the minister to go and negotiate on behalf of Ugandans, they will come up with a favourable stand for Ugandans. 

I propose that we get a committee of a few people to go and negotiate Uganda’s position because we cannot know - sometimes ministers work on directives and the President said that we do not have enough sugarcane for Ugandans. However, we stood on our feet and told him that we have enough cane in Uganda. How can we now send only the minister to go and negotiate the position of our people? Let us have a committee to go and negotiate for our people. 

4.38
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the motion but with an amendment. 

It is my appeal to the mover and the House that we amend resolution five to read as follow: “That Government is urged to expedite the establishment of the sugar factory pledged by the President to the people of Busoga within the next 24 months”. 

I am trying to put a timeframe here to guide Government in planning. First of all, I know that it has financial implications but it was already pledged by the President. The issue that I am trying to raise here is that should we leave the motion and the resolution as it is, they can plan for it in the next 10 or 20 years. We need to have a time within which we are going to be tracking this factory.  

We have these factories elsewhere; we have the fruit factory in Soroti and we have other Government enterprises in other places. I think it is better for us to state the time, to within the next two years. We are only urging and guiding Government that we expect you to submit it in the budget – (Interruption) 

MS OPENDI: Thank you, hon. Lubogo, for accepting to take this information. I think we need to get certain things right. It is one thing to push for construction of a factory so that this excess cane can be absorbed but we should also take note of the fact that the demand for sugar is becoming a challenge.  

As we speak, these sugar factories actually have excess sugar – (Interjection) – yes, it is true. The Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives will come and confirm this information. This is the official information that I have; it was given to us in Cabinet. There is excess sugar that is lying in the sugar factories. 

Madam Speaker, let us look at the short-term measures that can be taken to salvage these people. I saw them crying. The cane is actually drying in their trucks. Let us look at the short-term measures and move with those resolutions. Then the long-term issues can be handled at a later time.

MR LUBOGO: Madam Speaker, the motion includes both short-term and long-term measures according to the resolutions that we have in the motion. I am speaking about the ones that are not immediate. I was to submit on the immediate prayers in this motion.  

The issue of the East African protocol remains a matter on paper. The way the East African Community Treaty stands is that it is only seemingly Uganda, which is very serious and determined to see that we work as one region. Other partner states have reservations and now, Kenya has demonstrated it by stopping Ugandan products from entering into Kenya. 

We have been to Kenya and we have visited some companies in Kenya. There is nothing like Ugandans getting employed in Kenya. If you remember, recently, Kenyans were chasing Ugandans who were hawking goods in Kisumu. It became a very hot issue. They said foreigners were invading their country. So, we are not seen as one. There is no free movement of goods across the region. I think it is very important for us to express our displeasure that other people are not reciprocating the steps that Uganda is taking to actualise this regional arrangement. 

I would like to conclude by urging the Government of Uganda, as it is stated in here, that we cannot just sit and think we are being helped by Kenyans. This is trade. We buy goods from Kenya. In fact, we are the biggest importers of Kenyan goods, if I have it right. Why should they restrict our goods from entering their country? So – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to advise that the issue of the sugarcane, if you got information in the Cabinet that there is excess sugar that is information from the millers. Did you get information from the farmers about the amount of sugarcane that is in the country? You did not. It is us who represent the sugarcane farmers who understand their pain and we are speaking from a point of information and knowledge. 

I now put the question that the motion be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.) 

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that this House adopts the motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, you can go and negotiate but in future, please be proactive in the interest of the people of Uganda. Everything we do here is by force. Why? 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE
THE NATIONAL COFFEE BILL, 2018

Clause 8
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we are on clause 8. Should I put the question? 

4.46
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Chairperson. When we left yesterday, on clause 8, the committee had made a proposal of “a diploma in agriculture and related sciences”. We left saying that if you look ahead under clause 9, this inspector even looks at roasted beans, stores and whatever – from growing up to roasting. 

The proposal we had wanted to make is that it should not only be agriculture because if you say, “a diploma in agriculture and related sciences”, it means it must be a diploma in agriculture and related sciences. However, if we say, “a diploma in agriculture or a diploma in related sciences”, it would be far better than saying “and”. 

Madam Chairperson, I propose that we amend the committee’s report to say, “a diploma in agriculture or related sciences and has extensive knowledge in coffee business”. This is because if you again go for experience – if I am leaving a university or diploma school, I may not have experience. 

MS OKORI-MOE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The committee thoroughly argued this proposal and we continue to plead with Members to accept the committee’s proposal that the words “a diploma in sciences” be substituted with the words “a diploma in agriculture or related sciences”. 

Madam Chairperson, the position of “coffee inspector” is not a senior position and we had to take into account the fact that institutions like Busitema University are graduating diploma holders. However, if one has to go up – if there is going to be a promotion where maybe a bachelor’s degree or master’s degree holder is required for such a position, that will be when the person is being promoted from that position to another and that can be captured in the human resource manual. I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 8 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.) 

Clause 9
MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes that we amend clause 9(1) by deleting the words, “or regulations made under this Act”. This is to maintain consistency and the drafting standards. In addition, the provision for the minister to make these regulations is already provided under clause 57. I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 9 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 10
MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes that we amend the provision as follows:
    a. By deleting the word “regional” whenever it appears. The justification is that it is a consequential amendment.
    b. In sub-clause (1) by substituting the words, “fit and proper” with the word “qualified.” The justification is that this is also a consequential amendment.
    c. By deleting the words, “and the directives of the authority” appearing at the end of the provision. This is for consistency. I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you no longer have a regional coffee extension officer? 

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the committee considered that there is no region - if you go by region, what do you mean by the word “region”? Is it “north”, “central” or where? That is why we decided to leave it. Eventually, we shall even go to the sub-counties and parishes. Therefore, the word “region” does not really hold any meaning. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Does the minister agree? 

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We agree with the proposal by the committee that the word “region” be removed. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I had proposed “area” but we can drop it. Sub-clause (2) says, “A person designated under sub-section (1) shall be a regional coffee extension officer for five years or such a period as the authority may determine.” I would like to make an amendment that, one, we insert immediately after the words “officer for” the words, “not more than five years” and delete the words from “years” and add “subject to renewal at the discretion of the Authority, subject to satisfactory performance”. 

Madam Chairperson, the reason it should be at the discretion of the Authority is because it is the one which appoints. Secondly, it appoints somebody for a period. Thirdly, if we insist on saying “five years or at the directive…” they can change. What we are saying is that it should be “not more than five years” but the renewal shall be by the Authority, subject to satisfactory performance. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What other reason will they have for renewing if you have not satisfied? Must you state that in the law? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, if that is the case, we can delete it. What I was trying to put across is that the renewal is by the Authority because if you do not put the Authority there will be a problem. I would like to propose, “…for not more than five years, subject to renewal by the Authority.” 

MR NSEREKO: Madam Chairperson, I also have something to defer. We have passed the issue of the inspectors and the chairperson should give this House the justification for replication of duties to create an extension officer. 

Madam Chairperson, she talked about regions and it was understood. When you remove regions, it is just duplication of responsibilities. As a country, we are grappling with issues of the Wage Bill and public expenditure. We are duplicating roles; regional extension workers are put at Bachelor’s degree level and the inspectors are put at diploma level. You have removed the word “regional”; so, what is essence of them being there? We can have inspectors who can perform the same duties. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, have you checked on the functions of the inspectors of the Authority? Have you also checked the regional extension officer? 

MR NSEREKO: Yes, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are they the same? 

MR NSEREKO: No, they are not the same but they are replicated. Implement and supervise a coffee nursery. Madam Chairperson, the inspector can perform the same duties, this is just duplication of roles. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this Bill has been with us for a long time. There was opportunity for Members to go and express their views in the committee. You also had an opportunity to come for the debate and present your proposals. Therefore, do not derail us now. I put the question that clause 10 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 11
MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes that we amend the provisions in clause 11 as follows:
    a. By deleting the word “regional” appearing at the “sharpo”. The justification is that it is a consequential amendment.

    b. By deleting paragraph (b) of clause 11. The justification is that this is an entry position, which does not require experience. Fresh graduates should be given the opportunity to compete in the job market. 
I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 11 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12
MR OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the committee has a number of amendments on clause 12 -
    a. At the “head note” by deleting the word “regional”. 

The justification is that it is a consequential amendment.

    b. In paragraph (b), by substituting the provision with the following provision: “(b) Oversee compliance with established standard procedures and operating guidelines.”

The justification is to avoid ambiguity.

c. In paragraph (i) by deleting the word “data” appearing at the end of the provision and inserting the words “data for” to appear immediately before the words “coffee and”.

d. To redraft the provision to read as follows: “(i) To provide technical support in the collection of data for coffee production and marketing.”
The justification is for clarity.

e. In paragraph (j), by deleting the words “at the farm”.

The justification is to cater for all the coffee value chain activities.

f. In paragraph (l), to insert the word “any” immediately before the word “other” and by deleting the letter “s” from the word “functions”.

The justification is for consistency in drafting and clarity. Madam Chairperson, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 12 be amended –

MS NAUWAT: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The committee has just deleted, under the head note, the word “regional”.

Madam Chairperson, paragraph (g) talks about the functions, which are related to regions. Again, paragraph (k) talks about the officer that will compile monthly reports on coffee activities in the regions. I, therefore, wonder whether we should maintain the head note to have the word, “regional” or we should delete those activities under (j) and (k), which look at the functions of the inspectors in the regions.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The issue of the regions will be consequential. 

MS OKORI-MOE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. These are all consequential. If we had started with clause 1, we would have seen a recommendation that says, wherever the word “regional” appears, it should be deleted. 
I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 12 be amended, as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14
MS OKORI-MOE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The committee proposes to amend clause 14 as follows:
    a. By redrafting paragraph (g) to read as follows:
“Two representatives of coffee farmers, one of which shall be representing Arabica coffee farmers and the other Robusta coffee farmers, selected from a national association of unions representing Arabica and Robusta coffee respectively.” 

The justification is for balanced representation. Representation should be based on the types of coffee.

b) By inserting a new sub-clause (5) to read as follows:
“(5) For avoidance of doubt, appointment of members of the board under sub-section (2) shall be by the minister and approved by Cabinet.” 

The justification is for oversight purposes. I beg to move.

MS KABANDA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I propose to amend sub-section (2) to delete paragraph (f) and insert a new paragraph immediately after paragraph (k) as follows: 
“Two representatives appointed by the minister from recognised women coffee growers’ associations.”

The justification is that already, there is a representative from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries making the representative from NARO redundant and unnecessary.

Secondly, to bring on board technical capacity to articulate issues of women in the coffee value chain. Thank you. 

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Before we move to additional amendments, I would like to state that when debating here, I disagreed with the issue of having representation based on the type of coffee. If tomorrow we get another type of coffee, that would mean that we would have another representative. Coffee agronomy is the same so we should leave it to two coffee farmers irrespective of the type of the coffee. 

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, thank you very much. I would like to associate myself with hon. Baseke’s proposal that we should have one coffee farmer representative. 

When you look at the trends of boards in this country, we would like to bring every other person to this board. We have too many people - boards like the Uganda Development Corporation Board has about seven members; other boards have nine members but on this board, which has already 12 members, we are still proposing more names. 

I propose amendments on this to delete paragraphs (e) and (f) of sub-clause (2). My intention is to make this board lean. That deals away with the Ministry of Local Government and the National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO) because it is already part of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. How do we bring NARO to appear here again? If the ministry of agriculture feels that NARO is so important, then we should allow the ministry to appoint NARO. 

The bottom line is that we have to make a lean board. The Ministry of Local Government may not have a serious contribution here because the Government is implementing a single spine extension system already. We cannot keep bringing every other person. The contribution of the Ministry of Local Government may not be that important here. Therefore, - (Interruption)

MS NAMUYANGU: Madam Chairperson, with due respect to hon. Patrick Nsamba, NARO is a research institution and Local Government is where the agriculture is done and coffee is grown. The ministry is the one that does oversight, mentoring and lobbying for all the local governments. Is hon. Patrick Nsamba in order to insinuate that the Ministry of Local Government and NARO are useless in the coffee business? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Patrick Nsamba, can you substantiate or withdraw your statement? Are the Ministry of Local Government and NARO useless in the coffee business? 

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, our Government, under the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, has a full directorate of extension services. Where you would think about the Ministry of Local Government in the matter of coffee would be in the matters to deal with extension workers. There is, however, a full directorate under the ministry of agriculture dealing with the supervision and management of extension workers. Therefore, - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: That department is in Entebbe. Is it also in Kassanda? 

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, it is the directorate responsible for supervising all extension workers under the single spine extension system. That is what this Government is implementing. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, do you expect them to travel from Entebbe and go to Kassanda to carry out inspection and after go to Bugiri to do the same? 

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, they have a way they supervise the extension workers. The Ministry of Local Government is not even supervising them. She cannot come here and say that they supervise extension workers. It is under that directorate in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. 

Madam Chairperson – (Interruption)

MR AOGON: Thank you, hon. Patrick Nsamba, for giving way. Maybe to strengthen that position you have raised, under clause 51 of this Bill, there is a provision for research. Clause 51 (1) states that the Authority shall oversee the formulation of the national coffee research and development agenda. So, there is already a provision to do with research to back up what you are talking about. 

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Thank you for the information. Madam Chairperson, I propose that we delete paragraphs (e) and (f) so that we make this board lean and in sub-clause (g), I propose that we have one representative of coffee farmers. There is no purpose in having two representatives at all. We should have one representative of coffee farmers so that we have nine members on this board. I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: May I ask the minister to explain the rationale for his proposals under clause 14? Let me hear from the mover why he wants these people there. 

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The rationale of having a representative of the Ministry of Local Government is that on many occasions, when we are executing our duties as ministry of agriculture. It is true we have the single spine structure but most of the extension officers are in local governments. We work with them directly but also the Ministry of Local Government has a say on this. 

Secondly, it is true NARO is an agency under the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries but it plays a very serious role as a semi-autonomous agency. That is why we thought that it was important they really understand the problems that are brought to the board and the entire organisation so that they can take back the problems for research. It is because in research, they will get the information from the farmers and find the solutions. 

Pertaining to the two coffee farmer representatives, we think that they are key. The two representatives will make a fair representation of the entire farming systems of the coffee sub-sector. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, do you have any objection to the proposal by hon. Mary Kabanda of having two women coffee farmers? 

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal by hon. Kabanda is taken care of in clause 14 (3), where they talk about at least one third of the members of the board being women. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: They may be women but are they coffee farmers? I think that is the difference. 

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Chairperson, the two coffee farmers may be women but we can amend and say at least – (Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we would like the minister to help us. The minister must first deal with the number. This is a very big board –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, be organised. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We are organised, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I am organising the people behind you. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We stay in camps. (Laughter) Madam Chairperson, first of all, a board must not be a classroom. This is where we must begin from.

The reason there is poor performance in Government ministries is because all these civil servants are on boards. They are running here for allowances and not doing their technical work.

First, this number is too big. We would do nine board members from whom we choose the important ones. I made a proposal that of the people to be appointed on the board, the minister should have the authority to appoint the chairperson and the vice chairperson. 

Secondly, what are the most important places here? These are:
    1.  Farmers,
    2.  Exporters, and
    3.  Roasters 

After appointing the chairperson and the vice chairperson, we need one farmer to which I would like us to agree. We do not need to have a farmer for Arabica, Robusta and Clonal Coffee. Here, we need only one farmers’ representative.

About the exporters, for your information, these have their own association. They will choose one person to represent them. The roasters will also choose a representative.

Having said that, I would like to move that people from ministries should be deleted, to begin with –(Interjections)- I will explain. Let us go one by one.

The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives are at the rank of commissioner. Commissioners for cooperatives are supervisors of cooperative societies. Why do you bring them here to regulate the industry of coffee? That must have a body, which has independent qualified persons who can take a decision from an informed point of view.
The second is a representative from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. That one, you do not need to explain – you are right, madam.

We go to the minister representing agriculture. First of all, the minister is the one going to appoint the chairperson and the vice chairperson. Those two must be people who have knowledge in agriculture – (Interruption)

Mr othieno: The clarification I am seeking from hon. Nandala-Mafabi is that he is looking at Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives only in terms of cooperatives. However, we know very well that mostly our coffee is exported. That is the docket of the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives.

If hon. Nandala-Mafabi says we should exclude the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives yet he knows very well that most of the activities of the coffee chain fall under this ministry, who is going to take care of the off-farm activities of the coffee chain? 

Mr nandala-mafabi: I think my brother, hon. Othieno, never read the functions of the authority. That is clause 5. The authority will have technical staff. Let me give you one of them. I would like you to always read. I know that you are very intelligent but today, you have not read.

Function (g) on standards of sale and marketing of coffee, it does not need the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. It is the authority itself to deal with that function.

Secondly, it talks about the international market and even unfair prices. Look at (e) and (g). What I am trying to talk about is already the function of the authority and they will have technical staff to deal with that.

The other issue I was getting to is on the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The other is the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.    

The representative who the minister will appoint as the chairperson and vice chairperson should have knowledge in agriculture. Why should he get a street boy or girl without any knowledge in agriculture?

The Chairperson: Honourable members, I thought this National Coffee Authority is a Government body. If you are chasing away the Government and leaving there the private sector, I do not know what sort of board we shall have. It is a Government board.

Mr bagiire: Madam Chairperson, I would like to make clarification to hon. Nandala-Mafabi that this board does not have a vice chairperson; but you have continued to state that it has a vice chairperson. 

Secondly, you have said it well that among the functions, there is (g), which reads as follows:

“To prescribe the quality control standards for the sale and marketing of coffee, issue indicative prices at which coffee may be traded and protect coffee farmers from exploitation and unfair trade practices.”

The authority does not work in isolation. It works with other agents of Government. Therefore, the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives is key in this. 

On the issue of appointing the chairperson, it is not necessary that the chairperson must come from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. It is not provided for anywhere.

To the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, these are agencies, which are semi-autonomous. You need a representative as a minister to know what exactly goes on in that organisation and come back to report to the top leadership.

Mr nandala-mafabi: We would like to help the minister to know the laws we are making. Every law we are making has a vice chairperson. Why are you shying away from having a vice chairperson in Uganda Coffee Development Authority? 

We are saying that if you go with amendments, you should have the capacity to also appoint the vice chairperson – (Interjection) – let me make a case before you come.

The Chairperson: Let the mover tell us his proposals.

Mr bagiire: Madam Chairperson, I am knowledgeable on the issues that I am talking about. I understand issues of agencies. Under the docket of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, we have so many agencies.

We do not have a vice chairperson in National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS), Dairy Development Authority (DDA), National Animal Genetic Resources Centre and Databank (NAGRIC) and Cotton Development Authority. What agencies are you talking about?

Mr nandala-mafabi: Madam Chairperson, that is why the ministries are failing. What we are trying to do is to help you. If you have been one of those, you should even have taken the chance to say, “We are having a crisis of lacking a vice chairperson.” A mistake made cannot cure another. I think that is why you are failing.

Therefore, we are making a law here to cure the mistakes – (Interruption)

Mr nsamba: Madam Chairperson, I would like hon. Nandala-Mafabi to clarify to us his desire. Do you want the chairperson of the board to come from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries?

Mr nandala-mafabi: No.

Mr nsamba: If it is not your interest, then you will have excluded the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. 
From the earlier statement, I thought you were proposing that since the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has the opportunity of proposing a chairperson, they can have that person from that ministry.

I stand on a proposal that we maintain the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on this board. 

Ms alum: Madam Chairperson, I would like to know whether we are proceeding well. I now see so many issues coming up yet I thought we would move systematically. 

We have talked about the number but we have not resolved it. I thought we should resolve the issue of numbers, then when it comes to which ministry must be represented, we would have either of these ministries: agriculture, local government or finance. We would them determine which one to drop and which one to retain. 

However, I have also noticed that we are already moving to the vice chairperson. I feel this will confuse us. Let us deal with one issue at ago. For example, if we say that we need nine members of the board, then, we will see who of these nine must be on the board.

We also talked about dropping the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. However, when you go to the functions of the board, you realise that under clause 18, they talk about overseeing the management of finances and assets of the authority; we are also talking about assets in this Bill. 

In my opinion, we have to move logically. The first should be the number. If we ascertain that we need nine members, then we can determine which of these should be dropped. After, we can come to the issue of the vice chairperson. Do we need a vice chairperson of the board or not? Madam Chairperson, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, we are moving well. We are moving according to the report of the committee. They had no proposal to remove anyone and so, we are moving well. The owner of the Bill will tell us whether he wants less numbers or not; that is his business. 

Honourable minister, we had asked you about the proposal by hon. Kabanda. 

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I understand some people are making proposals for the board to be more efficient. However, I would like to remind the House that coffee is a very strategic crop. It is one of our highest foreign exchange earners. So, bringing all the stakeholders on this board gives us leverage. For instance, attempting to remove NARO is really not good because we invest a lot of research in coffee to remain – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, you were asking questions and they are being answered. 

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Chairperson, I propose that members agree to maintain the board as presented by the committee and the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

MS WEKOMBA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I stand to support hon. Kabanda on the issue of deleting the representatives of NARO as well. I think the minister has just tried to perhaps educate us more about NARO. 

Under the SDGs, we have gender, equity and equality. In this Bill, we also need to see the women in their coffee growers’ associations being brought on board because they have been in this industry from the very beginning; the farming part of it.  

These women can lead others to access funds. They have been able to also export, under their various associations, and are standing with other women in various areas in this coffee sector. 

The women, in the villages, as you look at them, do not even own land. They have no access to their land to benefit from what they have grown. Even for the coffee itself, it is the men taking all the sales. Women do not feature anywhere. They cannot access the market. 

Therefore, Madam Chairperson, I also encourage the committee to let us have women on this board, instead of having NARO. Thank you. 

MR NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, we have a problem here. Once we start going into those things, we are going to have the next person coming and saying “the youths”. Another one will come with people with disabilities, the elderly and so on. That is not a lane we desire to move. The lane we desire to move is to have a lean board, which is not going to be a burden to the taxpayers.

I would like the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, who sponsored this Bill, to first concede to the desired number of the nine members as proposed in this Bill. We will go to determine who goes and who stays. Thank you, Madam Chairperson. 

MS KISEMBO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. On the number of board members, since the mover of the Bill feels we should maintain all, I propose we do an odd number instead of an even number of 12. 

In that respect, I move that at least on (g), we remove one representative of the farmers, if we have to maintain the number to make them only 11. I beg to submit, Madam Chairperson. 

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank you very much. This issue is very important. In my opinion, this matter is no longer for the ministry but a matter of the House. 

My opinion is that we reduce the number to nine. We do not want to have an amorphous board, like somebody called it, “a classroom.” If we have nine members, from there, we would be able to ascertain – for example, when you put the managing director as an ex officio member, that can always be added. 

I propose that we take up nine members before we begin deleting the one that we feel should be deleted. I thank you. 

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, I would like to clarify on the issue raised by hon. Mary Kabanda. That concern is already catered for under 14 (3), it says, “…at least one third of the members of the board shall be women.” They can even all be women but at least three of them should be women. 

What is going to happen when they source for names is that for every constituency, we shall agree to bring two names; one of a man and a lady? That is how we shall source for those women. Even if they are all women, there is no problem. So, your fears are catered for under this clause. I beg to move.

Madam Chairperson, we are also aware that Cabinet has issued guidelines for establishing boards with odd numbers not even members. So, whether they are nine, 11 or below - like the minister has already said, NAGRC has 11, Diary Development Authority has 11, Cotton Development Authority has 11, UWA has nine and UTB has nine. 

Madam Chairperson, I really do not know who we should eliminate because even NARO is very important in terms of research.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, let us stand over it before we agree on who to go. In the meantime, let us go to clause 15.  

Clause 15
THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 15 do stand part of the Bill - 

MS MARY BABIRYE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. In clause 15, I propose that we substitute for the word “who” with the words “if such a person”.

The justification is for clarity and a better drafting.

THE CHAIRPERSON: “A person shall not be appointed to the board if such a person -
    (a) has been convicted of an offence” etc. She just said, “if such a person”. Is that okay?

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the committee has no problem with that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 15 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 16
MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, on clause 16, the committee proposes that we amend the clause as follows: 
In sub-clause (4) (e), we delete the words “to the satisfaction of the minister and/or absence from Uganda for more than 12 months.”

We redraft the provision to read as follows: 
“…for absence without prior notice to the chairperson of the board or without reasonable cause for more than four consecutive scheduled meetings of the board.”

The justification is to avoid excessive discriminatory powers, which the provision grants the minister. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 16 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 17
MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, on clause 17, the committee proposes that we amend sub-clause (3) as follows: 
By inserting the words “with the approval of Cabinet” immediately after the word “shall”. This is a consequential amendment. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 17 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 17, as amended, agreed to.
Clause 18, agreed to.
Clause 19, agreed to.
Clause 20, agreed to.
Clause 21, agreed to.

Clause 22
MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to amend the provision as follows: In sub-clause (1) by substituting the words “appointed by the minister on recommendation of the board” with the words “appointed by the board.” 

We redraft the provision to read as follows: “There shall be a managing director of the authority who shall be appointed by the board on terms and conditions specified in the instrument of appointment.”

The justification is appointing the managing director by the minister is subject to manipulation. There should be separation of powers since the board is appointed by the minister. 

The other amendment is in sub-clause (4). The committee proposes that we insert the words “he or she” at the caption and delete the words “he or she” appearing at the beginning of each paragraph.

The justification is for proper drafting and to avoid unnecessary repetition.

Madam Chairperson, in paragraph (b), the committee proposes that we substitute the word “insolvent” with the word “bankrupt”.

The justification is “insolvency” applies to corporate entities whereas “bankruptcy” caters for individuals. I beg to move.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. To begin with, appointment by this Bill in sub-clause (1) does not say the minister will appoint. Rather, the minister will appoint on the recommendation of the board. This means that after vetting and the board says you are qualified then they direct the minister to appoint. This is a double check because if we don’t do it, the board can be manipulated. First of all, if you approve clause 14, note that the managing director is part of the board. Therefore, that will bring a huge problem and it is easy to manipulate board members because they come once and approve.

Madam Chairperson, to begin with, among all the laws we have made, we have been saying when these authorities are appointing the MD, it is the minister to appoint on the recommendation of the board.

Secondly, section 22 is talking about the managing director. You are aware that the moment you have only a managing director and not the deputy, we have a crisis. That is where I can decide to make a lower rank person to act when he or she is away. In this same clause 22, we should create a deputy managing director who reports to the managing director. All the laws we have made have deputy managing directors.

Thirdly, under sub-clause (3), they are saying the managing director shall hold the office for five years and is eligible for reappointment for one term. Madam Chairperson, we have been making losses. Contracts are between three and four years. The moment you give five years, it is like the Members of Parliament who hold office for five years and go for elections. This is a very dangerous thing because this one may be sure that a few members will elect him.

I would like to move an amendment that “the managing director shall hold office for four years”.

The justification is not to fall in the same line with the board because the board has three years. Therefore, the managing director should have one extra year so that he can inform the next board of what is happening. This is very good for governance and it builds capacity of other people in an institution. 

Madam Chairperson, those are the proposals I would like to put across. I thank you. 

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank hon. Nandala-Mafabi. I support him on the issue of appointment by the minister although I have my reservations on the deputy director. I will give an example of Rural Electrification Agency (REA). There have been battles between the Deputy Executive Director and the Executive Director.

I do not know whether we can continue making these proposals, which may create another war at UCDA. The experience from REA makes me think twice about this position. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I would like to know whether the minister agrees with the committee’s proposal that you remove the minister from the appointment.

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Chairperson, we, the movers of the Bill, don’t agree with the committee’s proposal. The MD will be appointed by the minister on the recommendation of the board and that is our take.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Therefore, we should retain the original proposal?

MR ABALA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. There is something about clause 22(e). Here we are disqualifying somebody to be appointed on a board because they have been convicted and they have been there for over six months. 

I would like to be helped by the committee because it says somewhere here that the Managing Director (MD) shall cease to hold office where, “(c) he or she is convicted over a criminal offence in Uganda or elsewhere”. I am opposing the last bit here. Just because somebody has been convicted, he or she ceases to hold the office. I would like the committee to help me clarify this one because this one caused - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But we had already passed that. 

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chair, we took time to analyse this Bill and we consulted widely. I do not see why the minister should be the one appointing the board. Then he is also appointing the MD. Where do we get the checks and balances? 

We remain firm as a committee on the proposal that we have made. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: You might set a dangerous precedent where the board tells the minister that they do not know him and tell him not to go there, claiming they do not have any business with the minister. 
MR OKUPA: Before the minister comes in, I would like to bring to the attention of the chairperson that even the MD is a member of the board. Therefore, there wouldn’t be any contradiction. 

We would also be setting a very bad precedent because from the boards we have seen, the MD was always appointed by the minister on the recommendations of the board that conducts the interviews. 

Let us not set a bad precedent. Let us go by what the minister is proposing that the MD will be appointed on the recommendation of the board. Thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I would like to assure the chair of the committee that the board sends the names then the minister writes the instrument.

RTD LT COL RWAMIRAMA: Madam Chair, I would like to make a clarification that the board members are appointed by the constituencies to represent them on the board. I agree with hon. Nandala-Mafabi that the minister should appoint the MD on recommendation of the board.

Traditionally, world over, it is the minister responsible for the sector that appoints the board because it is approved by Cabinet and what the minister does is to implement Cabinet decision.  Thank you, Madam Chair.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister, there is a proposal that the MD’s term should be four years instead of five. What do you say about that?

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Chair, our position is that five years is okay because the MD oversees the strategy of the coffee sector. 

Of course, this is aligned to NDP3 which is a five-year programme. This is the practice in many other agencies. For example, UBOS, CAA, UNRA are all five years. Thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 22 do stand part of the Bill. 
(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Chair, on the issue of the deputy MD, this increases costs and we know that the MD has directors, so in case he is not around, one of the directors can take over. He can act. Therefore, having a deputy MD is a waste of resources. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Can the minister move for the House to resume?
MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME
5.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Thank you, Madam Chair. I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 
(Question put and agreed to.)
(The House resumed and the Speaker presiding_)
REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE
5.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The National Coffee Bill” and passed the following clauses with amendments: 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22 and passed clause 8 with amendments. It stood over clause 14.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE
5.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Madam Chair, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask the minister, the chair and the stakeholders to meet over the downsizing of the board so that when we resume, we do not have to battle over whether it is NARO or agriculture. When we meet, we should know how to move.

Honourable members, I indicated that there will be screening starting tomorrow. It will commence at 9.00 o’clock in the First Aid Room in the South Wing Basement. It will be done on a first come first served basis. They have capacity to screen 20 members at ago. Please go there at 9.00 a.m.

House adjourned to tomorrow at 3.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.53 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 16 July 2020 at 3.00 p.m.)

