Thursday 15th July,1999.

 (Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala).

PRAYERS.

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair).

(The House was called to order).

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS IN CHARGE OF REGIONAL CO-OPERATION (Mr. Amama Mbabazi): Mr. Speaker, I wish to make a statement concerning the cease-fire agreement that was reached and signed in Lusaka on the resolution of the conflict in the Democratic Republic of Congo.  

After thorough and prolonged negotiations by all the concerned parties, an agreement for a cease-fire in the Democratic Republic of Congo was signed on the 10th of this month in Lusaka by their Excellencies, Presidents Yoweri Museveni of Uganda, Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe, Laurent Kabila of the Democratic of Republic of Congo, Pasteur Bizimungu of Rwanda, Sam Nujoma of Namibia and the hon. Kundi Byhama, the Defence Minister of Angola on behalf of President Dos Santos of Angola.  The President of Zambia, His Excellency Frederick Chiluba and representatives of the UN, the OAU and SADC signed as witnesses.  

The Congolese rebels; the Congolese Rally for Democracy (RCD) and the Movement for the Liberation of Congo (MLC) who participated in the negotiations were not able to sign immediately because of the differences within the RCD.  RCD factions - the Kisangani based and the Goma based factions - differed over who should represent them in the signing of this agreement.  Consequently, the Heads of State agreed the that the Congolese rebels would sign after it is resolved as to who has the best credentials to sign on behalf of RCD.  His Excellency Chiluba undertook to establish who is to sign on behalf of RCD immediately he returns from the OAU summit in Algiers.  

The agreement, Mr. Speaker, essentially covers the two primary causes of the conflict in the DRC, namely; the external and internal dimensions.  A mechanism was established to handle the security concerns of the DRC and her neighbouring countries, including Uganda.  

The United Nations Security Council has been requested, acting under Chapter 7 of the UN Charter and in collaboration with the OAU, to constitute, facilitate and deploy an appropriate peace keeping force in the DRC to ensure the implementation of this agreement, including tracking down, disarming, cantoning and documenting of all armed groups in the DRC.  That is to say: The Allied Democratic Forces (ADF); the Ex-Armed Forces of Rwanda (EX-FAR); the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA); the Uganda National Rescue Front (2) (UNLF 2); the Interahamwe, the Former Uganda National Army (FUNA); the Burundian armed group based in Congo (FDD); West Nile Bank Front (WNBF); the National Army for the Liberation of Uganda (NALU) and UNITA.  

These armed groups are expected to comply with the agreement voluntarily but those who do not do so will be disarmed by force.  Mass killers and perpetrators of crimes against humanity or genocidaires shall be handed over to the United Nations Crimes Tribunal for Rwanda.  Other members of the armed groups will be encouraged to go back to their countries of origin which have been requested to create an enabling climate for the repatriation of these elements.  Such measures or such a climate may include the granting of amnesty.  The parties to the agreement shall ensure that armed groups operating alongside their troops or on the territory under their control comply with the process leading to the dismantling of those armed groups.  

On normalisation of the security situation along the common borders between the DRC and her neighbours, each country signatory to the agreement committed itself not to arm, train, harbour on its territory or render any form of support to negative and subversive elements or armed opposition for the purpose of destabilising the others. Particularly underscored was the resolve to address the problem of the armed groups in the DRC in accordance with the terms of that agreement.  

In view of the possibility that the UN may not immediately deploy the peace keeping force, the parties to the agreement established a Joint Military Commission (JMC) to be responsible for executing peace keeping operations until the deployment of the UN peace-keeping force.  The JMC shall be composed of two senior military officers from each party under a neutral chairman appointed by the OAU and agreeable to all the parties.  The JMC shall be answerable to a political committee comprising Ministers of Foreign Affairs and Defence.  

One of the principle mandates of the JMC is to work out mechanisms for tracking and disarming armed groups in the DRC.  In addition to undertaking the role of the UN before the latter's deployment, the JMC is expected to work out more modalities for the peace enforcement mandate under Chapter 7 of the United Nations Charter.  More appropriately, Uganda expects the JMC to establish a special task force for the purpose of tracking down and disarming the armed groups in the DRC.  

Negotiations for the agreement was mainly done by the belligerent forces themselves, that is, the DRC Government, the Governments of Zimbabwe, Uganda, Rwanda, Namibia and Angola, and representatives of the rebel groups RCD and MLC.  

On issues of internal dimensions, the Congolese parties, that is, the Kabila Government, the RCD and the MLC, met alone. They meticulously discussed and agreed on the sticky issues namely; a national dialogue, a new national army and the re-establishment of state administration over the entire territory of the DRC.  They agreed on a method of resolving their political differences and establishing the political future of Congo through inter-Congolese political negotiations.  

These negotiations shall include the Government of Congo, the RCD, the MLC, the un-armed political opposition and representatives of the active civil society.  All participants shall have equal status under the aegis of a neutral facilitator agreeable to all the Congolese parties. The political negotiations shall be conducted within three months, by the end of which the Congolese parties are expected to have produced an agreement leading to the following: A new political dispensation in the DRC, the restructuring and rebuilding of a new national army in the DRC composed of elements from the armed forces of the Government of Congo (FAC), the RCD forces and the LMC forces. The re-establishment of a state of administration over the whole territory of the DRC.  

During the transition pending the outcome of the political negotiations, the Congolese parties shall take charge of the respective areas they control.  There shall be a consultative mechanism by the Congolese parties which shall make it possible to carry out operations of general interest in the fields of public health like immunisation; education, like public examinations; migration and the movement of persons and goods.  The final orderly withdraw of all foreign forces in the DRC shall be within six months.  The JMC, the UN, and the OAU shall draw up a definitive schedule for this purpose.  

Having negotiated and signed the agreement, especially from the point of view of our security concerns, Uganda is committed to the implementation of the agreement.  Uganda naturally expects the same from the other parties to the agreement.  Mr. Speaker, although I have a true copy of the agreement, the only signed copy we had was taken by the President when he went to Algiers and I have not been able to get a copy yet but I undertake to make a copy and present it here for the purpose of availing it to all Members of Parliament, as soon as it is available.  I thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  This is in the spirit of Rule 37.  Yes, hon. Okello-Okello.

MR. OKELLO OKELLO (Chwa County, Kitgum):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the hon. Minister for his statement.  Mr. Speaker, our presence in the DRC has been disturbing most of us.  Mr. Speaker, we have been asking Government to come out with a statement as to how much this war is costing the country monthly. Now that the Minister has decided to come and make a statement, could he be kind enough to let the country know through this House, how much the war is costing us?  

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the Minister made a statement that the withdrawal from that country will take something like six months. Considering our economic situation, Mr. Speaker, are we going to wait for the six months to expire or are we going to start coming back immediately now that we have appended our signature on the agreement?  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. AWORI(Samia Bugwe North, Busia):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would also like to take this opportunity to thank the hon. Minister for Regional Cooperation for informing this House about the peace agreement we have allegedly signed. I deliberately use the word "allegedly" because, Mr. Speaker, I do not see any sincerity on our part in signing this agreement.  

Mr. Speaker, to use the same word I used not to so long ago, I think the advisors of our President are being hypocritical.  We are not serious about this agreement!  Now, my question, Mr. Speaker to support my preamble: Mr. Speaker, if indeed the line Minister on this matter is serious and I presume his boss the President is serious about the matter, how come one rebel group, the MCL led by Bemba Junior is supported by sixteen of our officers in violating the same agreement?  Bemba has never acknowledged that he is a party not agreeable to this agreement.  He has continued to fight since this agreement was signed and yet Bemba on his own cannot fight even a fly without our officers of the UPDF officers.  How hypocritical!  

Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the hon. Minister to tell us, what is Prof. Wamba dia Wamba doing in Nile Hotel?  Who is paying his bills?  I have just seen a helicopter, I think trying to pick him up again, to take him I do not know where this time.  Who is paying that bill?  Is Mr. Wamba dia Wamba -(Laughter)- a signatory to that agreement?  Could the hon. Minister confirm what was in the papers that he is now using our travel documents to traverse the continent?  How did he qualify to get a Ugandan passport?  Could the Minister confirm or deny that he is abusing our passport? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, you see, the questions on this particular item can not be generally, it should be concentrated on the peace agreement signed in Lusaka.

MR. AWORI:  Mr. Speaker, in the preamble I said we are not serious about this peace agreement and now I am trying to amplify why I am saying we are not serious. So I am asking the hon. Minister; is he serious about this agreement in the light of Wamba dia Wamba traversing this place and we supporting Mr. Bemba to violate the terms of the peace agreement; are we serious? 

LT. COL. MUDOOLA(Kigulu North,Iganga):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, I also thank the Minister for informing this House.  My clarification is: It is alleged that the rebels failed to sign because the countries supporting these rebels are divided; that Rwanda and Uganda are divided on this issue and that Rwanda is supporting one group and Uganda is supporting the other. How true is that allegation?  

Another question I am asking is; we know very well that our forces are in the DRC for the protection of our country, who is going to be protecting our country during this interim period?  Is it the DRC, is it the JMC or will it be our forces in the DRC still? - (Interjection) - He has asked me to repeat.  I said, during the interim period when we are withdrawing from wherever we are, who is going to take care of our interests in the DRC?  Thank you very much.

MR. KARUHANGA: (Nyabushozi County, Mbarara):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, before I make my comment on this, I apologise for having been late on the first item and I hope that you will give me a chance after this.  

Statements by Ministers are covered under Rule 37 (1) and (2) and no debate shall follow from these statements except elucidatory points but this is a very serious matter and I think that a mere Ministerial Statement where no debate follows may not be adequate for us to handle this question, considering the interest during the contributions yesterday and the day before.  

We, as a committee on Foreign Affairs, have written to the Minister who has just given a statement, to meet the Committee at 10 o'clock on Monday to discuss one specific question, namely; the peace agreement signed in Zambia and the matters related to the Congo conflict.  I am, through you, Mr. Speaker, sending invitation to Members of Parliament who are interested in this debate to avail themselves on Monday at 10 o'clock to be able to meet the Minister, if he will avail himself, so that instead of closing this debate, we handle it properly via the Committee and then from there, we shall make the necessary report.  

Secondly, it is very important that the President of Uganda who has been participating in these negotiations also meets our Committee, after which we shall advise Parliament adequately and attract him to come and address the House on the question of Congo because this has not taken place. Monies have been expended, we have been sued at the International Court of Justice -(Interruption) -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  But hon. Karuhanga, what has happened  under Rule 37 is without prejudice to other avenues that may be taken by any Member, to address that particular issue.  This one came because the Minister wanted to make a statement. So, if your Committee is of the view that they need to meet the Minister, that they need to meet His Excellency the President to discuss the details about this matter, you are really free to do so. 

The opportunity given under Rule 37 is only for those particular questions. The Minister will answer them, then you can convene your meeting on Monday or on any other day and any Member who may be interested can join but because the Minister has made a statement and questions have been put to him, Members in the House will not be prevented, while they are contributing to this general debate, from commenting on the matter.  It will not, for example, prevent Members, when they are dealing with the estimates of the Ministry of Defence or Foreign Affairs, to comment on the matter. But for now, let us just restrict ourselves to the provisions of Rule 37, then the Minister will reply, after which we will go on to another matter which is actually yours. 

MR. KARUHANGA:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. So, what the Minister is doing now is really organising a kasiiki for the real thing.  

Now, my question is; the Monitor newspaper has been covering the peace-talks in Congo and I read the day before yesterday an article in the Monitor written by the Editor, "Ear to the Ground" which covered the sequence of events.  Would the Minister indicate to us whether he has seen that article, and if he has, whether the statements contained in that article have any bearing on the truth?  Thank you.

MRS. BWAMBALE  (Woman Representative, Kasese):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Let me add my voice to thank the hon. Minister for bringing this report on this Motion to us.  We the people who live along the border with the Republic of Congo, like those in Kisoro, are scared by the Interahamwe attacks on our people.  We  in Kasese, Bundibugyo and Kabarole, are scared by the ADF and the National Army for the Liberation of  Uganda (NALU) rebels.  They are a threat to us just like the rebels in West Nile.  

Now, can I get clarification whether in the provisions of the agreement, you have catered for our security  from these rebel threats from Eastern Congo. For example, for the people in Kasese, these rebels occupy the Congolese towns of Lume, Beni, Butembo; and the mountainous part has caves which are occupied by the ADF and the NALU rebels.  Can we get a guarantee that the peace-keeping force will be effective enough to eradicate these rebels from the other side of the Ugandan border?

Secondly, can we be assured that when our forces are withdrawn from the Republic of Congo, they will be kept alert and be posted on our side of the border so that we can call the ADF, NALU, and the Interahamwe history?  Thank you.

MR. NYAI(Ayivu County,Arua):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am just seeking a simple clarification from the Minister.   His statement is quite clear that Uganda was a signatory to the peace agreement which implies that Uganda is part of the conflict in Congo.  

Mr. Speaker, to the best of my knowledge, this Parliament has been authoritatively told by both His Excellency the President and at one time, the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs that our troops went into the Democratic Republic of Congo only to secure our borders with a prior agreement - with Kabila, I am told.  We have never been told that UPDF went into the Democratic Republic of Congo for war or to fight anybody.  Mr. Speaker, in terms of our Constitution, can the Minister tell us when Uganda declared war on Congo, and with whose authority?  Thank you. 

MRS. AKWERO ODWONG(Woman Representative, Kitgum):  Mr. Speaker, I too wish to add my voice to commend the Minister for bringing this report to the House, but I just wanted to seek a simple clarification.  It is true a peace deal has been signed but I just wanted to know what is there for us; what is there for Ugandans?  The peace deal having been signed, will we just withdraw like that or will we take along something?  

Mr. Speaker, I ask this with a view that we have lost lives, we have lost military hardware, we have lost a lot.  I understand Uganda up to now owes something to Tanzania. Have we just been safeguarding our interest peace-wise, or will we get something in the withdrawal?  Can the Minister clarify?

MR. LUKYAMUZI(Lubaga South,Kampala):  Mr. Speaker, I would like the hon. Minister of State for Foreign Affairs to tell this House why Uganda has been acting unconstitutionally on most of the matters related to foreign affairs, knowing very well that one of our Objectives - (XXVIII) - is very elaborate and is supposed to direct the Government of Uganda on all matters of foreign policy, namely: "The foreign policy of Uganda shall be based on the principles of promotion of national interest of Uganda, respect for international law and the treaty obligations, peaceful co-existence and non-alignment"?  

On a number of occasions, Uganda Government has been acting unilaterally in violation of international charters which we have already fundamentally ratified. I would like to challenge the Minister to tell us why he is only briefing us after Uganda has already violated Article 210 section (d) and Article 124 sub-section (i).  The 72 hours which you are given when you open any war have long lapsed, and you are now briefing this House a year after, what a shame to the Government!  We need an apology as representatives of the people.

MR. AMAMA MBABAZI :  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Hon. Okello Okello raised the question of the cost of the war to Uganda.  I am not in a position to give this information because I am the wrong party to ask that question. The next question was relating to the withdrawal of our troops from Congo that, will we wait until the six months have expired or will we withdraw before?  I stated, Mr. Speaker, very clearly that we intend to abide by the terms of the agreement and if we wait for the six months to expire, we would be acting in violation of this agreement which we have signed so, we shall not do so.  

Mr. Speaker, hon. Awori asked, as usual, questions that have clear answers and, of course, having had a long time association with hon. Aggrey Awori when we used to subscribe to the same principles of fighting for democracy and good governance for this country before he deviated from that path, I would like to say that even the interpretation of this agreement by my Brother is clearly not in line with reality - (Interjection).

MR. AWORI:  Mr. Speaker, is the hon. Minister for Regional Affairs who is a former Friend in order to stand up in this august House and make serious allegations against my person that I have deviated from the principles of democracy and good governance, knowing very well that it is he himself who is a specialist in violating the Constitution?  Is the hon. Minister in order to make such a fallacious and serious allegation against my person in this House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  You see, in the first place you have not told me the details of the principles which were common between the two of you, and I think for him he is saying that as far as he knows, you no longer believe in what you believed in and I think that is why he thinks you diverted.  He may be right.  So, I think he is in order.

MR. OMONGOLE:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I rise on a point of order to the Minister of Ethics and Integrity.  Mr. Speaker, we have an empty Front Bench.  Is the hon. Minister of Ethics in order to undermine the integrity of Parliament by sitting next to messengers of Parliament?  Is she in order, Mr. Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Well, the hon. Minister is in order because she sought my permission to sit where she is sitting because of certain personal considerations.

MR. AMAMA MBABAZI:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to answer the hon. Awori's statements simply.  There is no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that Uganda signed the agreement.  I apologised that I did not have a copy here for the reasons I gave, but when I do, you will find His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni's signature there. On whether we are sincere or not, I find difficulty in answering the point hon. Awori raised because he was stating a personal opinion to which, of course, he is entitled.  I stated very clearly in the statement that having negotiated and signed the agreement, Uganda is committed to the implementation of the agreement.  I have nothing more to add to that.  

I am not aware that Mr. Bemba is acting in violation of the cease‑fire agreement.  I happen to know from hon. Aggrey Awori there that he does not know whether the agreement is being respected or not. I take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to so inform the House. He also mentioned a name of someone he thought the helicopter was going to pick which name I am not familiar with because it sounded like a name from Bugweri. I also saw the helicopter as I was entering Parliament and I was with hon. Aggrey Awori, we entered together and I do not think he is in a position to know what that helicopter was going to do, a better position than mine.  So, for him to say that it was going to pick this Samia-sounding named person, I am not in a position to comment on.

Mr. Speaker, hon. Mudoola raised a question about the alleged division between Uganda and Rwanda being responsible for the failure of the rebels to sign the agreement.  I would like to make a categorical statement on this as the Minister responsible, as someone who has been fully involved in the negotiations. We have had full consultations with Rwanda, both on what is going on in the Congo in terms of the threat against our two countries, and in the negotiations that took place in Lusaka.  

As a matter of fact, the positions that we presented in Lusaka were positions we had agreed on together.  So, I do not have any evidence of any kind that we are divided to the extent that our division has caused the failure of the rebels to sign.  Of course we do not have identical views on everything but I would like to inform the hon. Members, however, as good allies and people of experience on management of public affairs, we have mechanisms in place to resolve whatever points of contradiction may arise in the course of dealing with one another.  

Hon. Mudoola also wanted to know who would take care of Uganda's interests in the interim period.  As I said in the statement, we expect the United Nations to deploy peace-keeping operations,  but as you all know, the United Nations system is very heavily bureaucratic and it takes time to work.  It was in anticipation of this that the Joint Military Commission was formed to carry out the full mandate of the United Nations until the United Nations has deployed its own forces.  

The Joint Military Commission shall be composed of representatives of all the belligerent forces.  It has got its own mandate to form special task forces and to establish modalities for handling the problem of the insecurity of Congo and her neighbours. Therefore, we expect that this JMC will be in a position to take care of our security concerns until the United Nations has deployed its peace keeping force.  

As a matter of fact, the JMC will not cease operating on the deployment of the United Nations forces.  It is expected that there will be two peace-keeping operations:  One peace-keeping operation will be the traditional peace keeping operation where you have two belligerent forces or two sides in a conflict that have agreed to have peace, and then the peace keeper comes to supervise the implementation of the terms of that agreement.  The United Nations is mainly going to perform that function. In terms of the parties, meaning the rebels and the government forces there, this is what will apply. 

The second aspect will be peace enforcement.  As you realise, there are armed groups in Congo who are not signatory to this agreement.  Two things have been agreed on: One, that these armed groups should voluntarily go in camps so that they are registered, they are disarmed and handled in the manner I described.  Under this, all the parties to the agreement have undertaken to ensure that the armed group in the area where the party operates from will comply with the terms of this agreement.  In other words, the Government of the DRC, for instance, has undertaken to ensure that in the area where it has its forces, all the elements of the Interahamwe will comply with the terms of this agreement as if they were party to it.  

The second aspect is that if any of these armed groups does not comply with the provisions of this agreement, then force will be used on them to disarm and encamp them. For this purpose, a regional force is going to be established -  regional meaning Africa.  The main component of this force is going to be the belligerent forces themselves.  Therefore, Uganda and Zimbabwe will be expected to contribute to whatever number of troops the JMC will have worked out as necessary, especially for the purpose of tracking down hon. Awori's friends.

Hon. Karuhanga, Mr. Speaker, extended an invitation to me to meet the Foreign Affairs Committee on Monday at 10.00 a.m.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to respond by saying that at 10.00 a.m, I will be in a meeting of the Ministers of Foreign Affairs and Defence in Lusaka, to work out the rules of engagement of the JMC and other forces in Congo.  So I am afraid Monday is not possible, maybe we can agree on another time.  

I have read the Monitor, of course, as usual, I think I read the "Ear to the ground" article which hon. Karuhanga referred to.   I must say that it has some elements of truth, but a lot of -(Laughter)-  there is a lot of truth in it but I think most of what I saw in that article -(Interruption)-

MR. ONYANGO KAKOBA: Mr. Speaker, I would like to get clarification from the Minister. I do not know whether I heard him properly but he said that this regional force is going to be composed of the countries that have been involved in the war - the belligerent forces.  Mr. Speaker, I do not know what criteria was used to arrive at this but I have a fear because these are the countries that have been fighting and now you are asking them to keep the peace; what if it happens that they go back to war?  Could we not get other peace-keeping forces from other areas?  Because, as it is now, if that is the case, it looks like a big joke right from the start! These people have been fighting and then you are asking them to keep the peace? Supposing they end up fighting again, what will happen?

MR. AMAMA MBABAZI:  To finish the point about the "Ear to the ground article", I was saying that some of it is true, but a lot of it is what I would call creative work.  

Mr. Speaker, hon. Bwambale asked whether the agreement takes care of all the areas that have been threatened by these elements based in Congo like  the ADF and the Interahamwe.  As I said, one; we are going to form special task forces to track them down  but two, even as that is being done, we have provided for bi-lateral arrangements between, say, Uganda and the DRC Government to ensure that this does not happen.  So, we are going to sit with them and agree on how the border can be secured, even before the entire Congo has been fully -(Interruption)-

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, the whole of last year, the Committee on Foreign Affairs failed completely to meet the Minister of Foreign Affairs because he was not available. Now we are informed that last year's opportunities may again occur to our Committee, that we do not meet these people.  Is there any way we can be advised who else we can reach, or do we deal with the Leader of Government Business?  

MR. AMAMA MBABAZI:  Well, Mr. Speaker, as everyone can see, I am here today, therefore it is not true that I am always away.  I was only responding to the invitation on the Floor of the House to attend a meeting on Monday, to say that unfortunately that Monday I will be away and I told you where but it is possible, if there is consultation, for us to find a mutually agreeable and convenient time.  I would invite my Colleague to follow that up.  

Hon. Bwambale asked whether the peace-keeping force shall be effective.  We hope so, we certainly hope it will be effective.  As I said, the belligerent forces themselves have agreed that it must be effective  and let me also answer hon. Onyango Kakoba.  As I said in the statement, I think hon. Onyango Kakoba had not come in, most of this peace deal was actually worked out in meetings by the belligerent forces themselves without any involvement by outsiders.  President Chiluba did a very good job by facilitating that. 

I would like to inform this House, Mr. Speaker, that the atmosphere in these meetings was very friendly and very conducive to reaching an agreement and commitment to coming to peace in the Congo.  Even the Congolese themselves met directly, alone, in fact even without us, and what we have in the agreement is a product of their own interaction.  So, I have no doubt in my mind that Zimbabwe is as committed as Uganda is, for example, to do away with the menace of the Interahamwe in the DRC.  I have no doubt about that in my mind but of course, should anyone not behave according to those expectations, then a new situation will develop but I have no reason to doubt that there is that total commitment on the part of all those that were involved.  

MRS. BWAMBALE: Thank you very much, hon. Minister, for the clarification to my question but I am not satisfied because I know that the Kabila Government in Congo Kinshasha has not been very effective.  They have no administrative impact on Eastern Congo.  What miracle is included in the peace agreement that will make them  effective this time in controlling the ADF which is more effective in occupying Eastern Congo than the Kabila Government?  

MR. AMAMA MBABAZI:  I am sorry my Sister was not satisfied with my answer, but I think I am satisfied myself that there will be a more effective approach to the management of this threat from the ADF and other groups.  You see, what the UPDF has done in the past nine months or so when it went into Congo has been to completely degrade the capacity of the ADF to attack Uganda.  That is why they do not attack military units but have resorted to attacking soft targets like civilians and so on. They have resorted to urban terrorism; they are the ones who have been throwing bombs around.  All that is evidence.  As hon.Aggrey Awori who is familiar with this will testify, that is clear evidence that their capacity to fight has been completely degraded - (Laughter).  The only capacity that remained was -(Interruption)

MR. AWORI: Mr. Speaker, is the hon. Minister in order to mislead this House that I am more familiar with the activities of the ADF than the respective or the relevant Ministries? Mr. Speaker, to supplement my question and order, we have been told in this House by the Ministry concerned with security and even His Excellency the President, the Commander in Chief of the UPDF read to us the names of the people who have been responsible for urban terrorism, and my name was not there - (Laughter)!  Mr. Speaker, the relevant Ministers and His Excellency the President said they have a list of collaborators.  Up to now I have yet to see that list and even if it is imagined, I do not think my name is there.  Mr. Speaker, is the hon. Minister in order to mislead this House by giving such fallacious information and imputing bad motives on my part; is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think my understanding is that the Minister was remembering that in the past, when this matter came up for  debate, you undertook to talk to these people so that peace would be secured.  And this must have taken you to their territories such that you would know what is happening.  I think that is the sense in which the matter was raised.

MR.AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you very much, Sir. You are absolutely right. As I said, of course, I happen to know hon. Awori very well.  So, I was saying that the only effectiveness that remained, even for them to have the capacity to attack soft targets was because they had support of governments, including that of the Sudan and of Kabila and all these that supported Kabila. Effectively, this agreement denies them that support. I therefore expect these groups to be much weaker than they were before the agreement.  I think that we should expect a lot more effectiveness in the handling of this menace of the ADF and the Interahamwe threatening us.

Hon. Dick Nyai raised the question whether Uganda is a party to the conflict or not, and whether we are there to secure our borders only or; when did Uganda declare war on Congo? We have stated over and over again that Uganda is not at war with Congo.  It is not a party to the conflict as such.  I have read the heading of this agreement, Mr. Speaker, as "Agreement for a cease-fire in the Democratic Republic of Congo." I am repeating this for Dick Nyai's ears: "Agreement for a cease-fire in the Democratic Republic of Congo."  

We have stated that we have got armed opposition in Congo and we have gone there to  fight them.  This cease-fire includes the cease-fire between our forces and those we have been fighting. I have stated that all the armed groups in the Congo, even if they are not signatory to this agreement, are expected to comply with that agreement -(Interjection). No, Mr. Speaker, I think I should finish this. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He has declined the clarification. He is entitled to that.

MR. NYAI: Mr. Speaker, it amazes me that a very senior Minister of the Government of the Republic of Uganda takes matters where our sons and daughters are dying as a big joke.  He seems to think that I do not know the English word "cease-fire". You cannot sign a cease-fire agreement when you have not been firing.  What is wrong with this hon. Minister?  Whom were we firing against? If he wants to answer the point I raised, it is a very simple thing. Mr. Speaker, I would like him to tell us when Uganda declared  war on Congo because if we were signing a cease-fire with ADF, it would be in Uganda, Mr. Speaker.  Can he clarify that to me, Mr. Speaker, without being unnecessarily - Is he in order, therefore, Mr. Speaker to ignore these matters of grave concern and treat them with a lot of hilarity and lack of seriousness just as if he is being in contempt of this House? Is he in order, Mr. Speaker, to evade the main issue of answering the question, Mr. Speaker? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I think you just wanted to give yourself an opportunity to seek a clarification which the Minister had refused because what I see in what you  have stated  is that you are saying his answer is not convincing, that is all.  So, that will not be out of order because somebody has given an answer which is not convincing to you, which is exactly your assessment.  So, I think, he can proceed.

MR. AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Hon. Odwong wondered what is in the agreement for Uganda.  Well, hopefully peace;  peace at our borders, peace in the region leading to prosperity for Uganda and for the region.

Hon. Lukyamuzi asked the question why Uganda has been acting unconstitutionally. I would like to state very clearly that Uganda is not acting unconstitutionally, is not acting in violation of any of the two Articles that hon. Lukyamuzi cited.  Parliament has had occasion to discuss that matter before and government made it very clear that it was acting within its full mandate as the Constitution requires it to do.  Mr. Speaker,  is Uganda's involvement in Congo in support of national interest?  I think it is, and I am sure any one can see that - (Interruption).

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, with due respect to the hon. Minister, I think we should be serious about what we are saying. It is true Parliament was briefed after a protest was made that we did not know what was going on in the Congo.  Government came up to give us a briefing. After briefing us, with reference to the Constitution and aware of the fact that our presence in the Congo had long exceeded 72 hours, we were to seek the permission of Parliament for the UPDF to stay on in the Congo.  We have not complied with that challenge.  Now, the clarification I am seeking is; where do you get the moral authority to stay in the Congo without respecting the contents of the Constitution?  

MISS. BIKORWENDA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The hon. Minister has put it rightly that the presence of Uganda in the Congo is for the interest of this nation.  Can the hon. Minister tell me now how these ADFs launch their attacks right deep from Congo, killing my people in Bundibujgyo and then make their way back?  Do they give them a leeway so that they can come and butcher my people and go back to Congo? What is that interest that UPDF is serving in Congo and which border are they protecting?  

COL. OTAFIIRE: I would like to give information to some of these hon. Members of the House who have been wondering whether our participation in the Congolese conflict is in national interest.  In the course of my service as a soldier, I have had opportunity to go into the Congo, and in the process of combat, we have had opportunity to capture elements of groups which have been causing conflict in Uganda, fighting on the side of one of the belligerent forces. So when somebody says they do not know whether our participation in the Congolese war is of Ugandan interest, she is exuding extreme military ignorance. Now, Mr. Speaker, when somebody is ignorant - (Interruption)

MS. BIKORWENDA: Mr. Speaker, is it in order for the hon. Member who is giving information to assume that every Ugandan is a military personnel; is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I think it is because he knows that everybody is not a military person, that is why he is talking about lack of military knowledge.

COL. OTAFIIRE: Thank very much, Mr. Speaker, for your protection - (Interruption).

MR. KAKOBA:  Mr. Speaker, I am standing on a point of order. Hon. Kahinda Otafiire was giving information but what struck me  was a word that he used that appears to me was not parliamentary when he referred to the hon. Member as "ignorant". Hon. Otafiire is on record as having used such words before.  The other time he referred to us as "mavi ya kuku", today he is referring to the hon. Member as "ignorant".  Is he in order to use unparliamentary language?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think what he is referring to is military knowledge. Really, I would think that what he meant was military knowledge.

COL OTAFIIRE KAHINDA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Indeed, it is people whose knowledge of military affairs is limited who can make some of these interesting statements.  One; if we are not pursuing  objectives of Ugandan interest in the Congo, how come we capture or we confront people who have been engaged in disturbing peace in Uganda?  Elements of the LRA, elements of the Rescue Front, elements of ADF, the Interahamwe, etc, etc -(Interruption)

MS. BIKORWENDA: (Interjection) - No, we shall have a dialogue as long as he does not have humane feelings for my people.  Can the honourable informer tell me if it is ignorance of military science that is causing that grave suffering of my people? 

COL. OTAFIIRE: Mr. Speaker, with due respect to the hon. Member and with regard to the suffering of her people, I would like her to know that there is a difference between guerilla warfare, mobile warfare and conventional warfare.  Now when elements of the ADF are conducting a guerilla warfare, there is no army, however mighty, that can control every inch of its territory.  Britain failed against the mau mau; we were here and we defeated a government here as NRA when we were only 42 and just nearby here.  There is no government that can control every inch of its territory and when elements of the ADF engage in bandit activities against civilians - not armed, legitimate armed  targets - there is very little the army, however mighty, can do about it apart from chasing them.  But what is important, what is significant in this regard is the army's capacity to pursue deep into the Congo and break their backbone and disrupt the capacity of their supporters like Aggrey Awori -(Interruption and Laughter) - Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think we have over stretched the provisions of Rule 37 and I would just ask the Minister to answer and we move to another item.

MR. WACHA: Sir, could I seek clarification from the Minister?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On what he has just said or what?

MR. WACHA: On the matter of signing the agreement and in so far as the ADF is concerned.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, the problem is, we had really closed these questions and he was answering the questions that were available but -(Interruption)

MR. WACHA: - but the matter has been raised by way of information or view.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, make it. That will be the last one. You can ask your question, if you want.
 
MR. WACHA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker and I beg for your indulgence. Mr. Speaker, information has been given by hon. Otafiire in respect to the activities the ADF. My understanding of the agreement which has been signed on behalf of Uganda in Lusaka is that, our major concern was the activities of the ADF in the Congo.  Can the Minister now clarify to me, taking into account the fact that hon. Otafiire says, and I think I believe him, that the ADF can keep on entering and going out of Uganda at will, what the purpose of signing the agreement is?  Mr. Speaker, is hon. Otafiire in order to threaten me? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If hon. Otafiire has threatened you, he is completely out of order.

COL. KAHINDA OTAFIIRE: Is it in order for an hon. Member of the House in the names of Mr. Ben Wacha to tell lies openly that I am threatening him, just imputing ill motive on my part?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Could the hon. Minister proceed?

MR. AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have just returned from Lusaka where I spent more than two weeks involved in negotiations for peace over Congo. I would like to inform you and inform this House and the country that it was not easy negotiations.  We hardly slept, we were working for 20 hours  a day, we hardly ate. I, therefore, ordinarily would have taken exception for someone to say that I was not serious but since the allegation that I am not serious is coming from hon. Lukyamuzi and from hon. Dick Nyai, I will not take exception - (Interruption).

MR. NYAI: Mr. Speaker, I think the truth shall set us free.  At no point in time in this afternoon's contribution did I say that the hon. Minister was not serious in Lusaka.  Is he, therefore, in order to stand here for his own egoistical purposes and adduce that motive to me, Mr. Speaker, when I never said that in this House? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister you heard his statement, what is your assessment?

MR. AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr. Speaker, of course, the record is available and that will be determined.  What I heard is what I have responded to; but I was simply answering the points raised by hon. Lukyamuzi - (Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In view of what he has stated, are you still standing with your statement?

MR. AMAMA MBABAZI: Yes, because he did say so. Actually, he said much more than that.  Mr. Speaker, I did not want to make this an issue. 

Our presence in Congo in contravention of international law:  Mr. Speaker, I certainly know that it is not and the Government of Uganda, through its representatives, has addressed the United Nations General Assembly and the United Nations Security Council on this matter, and I must say, the fact of the presence of Ugandan troops in Congo has been recognised internationally as being legitimate. We acted under Article 51 of the United Nations Charter which empowers any state to act in self-defence and pursue those that are trying to destabilise it across common borders. That is precisely what Uganda has done in accordance with international law.

Mr. Speaker, hon. Wacha asked why sign this Agreement if UPDF can move about at will.  I think I had answered this. If you remember, on 13th November, 1996, the ADF attacked Military Camps and they actually overrun Mpondwe. They aimed to capture Kasese and we had to fight them back by military force.  But as I have said, by going into Congo we have systematically degraded their capacity to fight to the extent that they are not able to attack any military unit of the UPDF now.  They only target soft targets like civilians and they have resorted to urban terrorism.  This clearly is evidence that they have lost effectiveness to fight militarily.

What I was saying was that, this Agreement itself further degrades their capacity even to do what they have been doing like in the centre here or in the border areas.  So, I would like to reassure hon. Bikorwenda that we expect, or the Government of Uganda expects that what ADF has been doing against the people of Bundibugyo in the past is not going to be repeated in the future. It may take a bit of time, it may not cease immediately but certainly, if this Agreement is fully implemented, we expect the UPDF to end ADF's capacity to cause trouble.  I thank you very much.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

MR. KARUHANGA(Nyabushozi County,Mbarara): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, while thanking the Government for appointing the Minister in charge of Pensions in the Ministry of Public Service, and while being mindful of the fact contained in Chapter 7 of our Constitution which protects the aged that the state shall make reasonable provision for the welfare and maintenance of the aged, I now take the opportunity to ask the Minister in charge of Pensions in the Ministry of Public Service:  What steps are you taking to implement the current laws relating to pensions in order to address the plight of our distinguished elderly pensioners who have rendered invariable service to our Country?  Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE IN CHARGE OF PENSIONS (Mrs. Mukiibi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I would like to thank the hon. Karuhanga for his concern about the pensioners in this Country, giving me this opportunity to clarify on the pensioners and how we are handling their issue in the Ministry of Public Service in order to address what he has said is the plight of the pensioners in this Country.  

I would like to say from the onset that Government is aware of the plight of pensioners  in this Country and my Ministry in particular is trying to address this problem.  The problem mainly  revolves around the meagre pensions which are being received, especially by the old pensioners.  The other problem is the modality of receiving these pensions.  For example, the distances the pensioners have to travel to come and  get their pensions either from the Ministry headquarters or from the district headquarters.  

In that regard, way back in 1994, there was a revision of the pension formula in the Ministry in order to address the meagre resources of pensioners.  This formula has been around for some time.  It is actually referred to as Statutory Instrument No.6 of 1994. In this formula, the constant of computing pensions was revised upwards from 1/600 to 1/500 and the years taken into consideration where also increased from 12.5 years to 15 years and since then, we have actually been using this formula to calculate pensions, although this did not actually address the meagre pensions, as I will elaborate later.  That Statutory Instrument was approved in 1994.  So, there is something being done about it.  

Now, the problem arose when the calculations for the current pensioners - those who are leaving the service now - was based on the consolidated benefits of the civil servants. This has done since 1996, and it brought about very big disparities between the old pensioners and those pensioners who are coming out of service now. Actually, that is a problem which we are trying to address right now because the difference between those who left the service before 1996 and those who are leaving the service after 1996 is so big that it has brought the old pensioners to complain.  It is very obvious that there is a very big difference between the pensions which are received currently and those which had been received by the old pensioners. 

It was in view of that that this year, in the current budget, Government has put some money to revalidate the pensions, that is, to upgrade the old pensions.  In the current budget, we are having a sum of two billion shillings to address this issue and as I speak now, discussions are going on and we will soon come up with the formula for revalidating the old pensions. I must say that although the amount given is still small, at least there is something being done.

Then there is a problem of where to pay the pensioners from.  The current procedure is that pensioners are paid either through their bank accounts, for those who have them or, those who do not have bank accounts are paid at the district headquarters through the CAO at the district.  But even then, the pensioners are still very far from the centre of payment.  So, there are plans under way to persuade the CAOs in the districts to decentralise the payment of pensions to sub-counties.  I would like the MPs to follow up on this.  

In order to implement the above issues, there was a census of pensioners done. A census of old pensioners was done in 1997.  This was done because there was an outcry that there were many who were on the payroll who were not bona fide pensioners.  A census was done by consultancy in 1997 and the results of that census is being scrutinised and as I speak, we are actually trying to use the results of the census to pay, starting with the current financial year. This was done with the view that when we upgrade the pensions, we do not pay ghost pensioners but pay the real pensioners. The census was done and the results are being used to pay as we revalidate the old pensions however, it has been realised that the current structure of pensions is rather expensive to Government, and there are plans which I found already ongoing to restructure the pension scheme and make it a contributory pension scheme.  

As we speak now, no civil servant actually contributes, although they contribute indirectly.  We depend on the current budget and we depend on the economic status prevailing in the Country.  This has brought a lot of problems to pensions.  So, the plans are under way to change from that system to a contributory system whereby it has been proposed that a fund should be put in place basically for paying pensions when the civil servants retire.  What is happening now is that we depend on the current budget and it is rather difficult to handle.  I think that answers hon. Karuhanga's question.  Thank you.

MAJ. OTOA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, the Minister has said the census for the pensioners was done in 1997, and this is 1999.  She is still scrutinizing and the pensioners are waiting.  I would like to know from the Minister whether the census is done annually and whether when doing it there is consideration for the natural occurrences of death.  How is she sure that sometimes she is not paying pensions to dead people?

DR. OKULO EPAK: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I want to thank hon. Karuhanga for raising this question and the hon. Minister responsible for us, for really doing her best to explain the situation.  I am seeking one or two clarifications from the hon. Minister.  I hope the hon. Minister is aware that there is an Organisation called the "Pensioners Organisation", and that they have been struggling to improve the relationship between the Pension Office and the pensioners, but they have been meeting difficulties.  May I find out from the hon. Minister whether in all these arrangements now the stake holders would also be brought into a dialogue so that we can mutually really agree on the best course of action?  This cry about the formula making the pension too expensive, I think, is a matter which can be negotiated because I do not see any other legal manner in which the pension formula will be revised to the disadvantage of the pensioners.  That would be unconstitutional, and I would want to know whether it is not possible for the hon. Minister to bring on board the stake holders so that we reach an amicable approach to this.

My second clarification, Mr. Speaker, relates to this census of pensioners.  We have a feeling that the number of pensioners has  deliberately been kept high and there must be beneficiaries in the Pension Office.  There has been reluctance in accepting the report of the study to revise or to get the real number of pensioners, and pensioners now are concerned that unless this revision is done, even the little that had been given by the Government will simply be dissipated in the ghost pensioners.  

If I heard you correctly, you said that you will be revising this number, updating it based on the study as you make fresh payments. I find that rather odd.  In fact, a lot of my Colleagues think that the money which Government has given now should be withheld until the pensioners population has been updated and we really know those who will be the real beneficiaries so that we can deprive these fellows of what they have been used to.  Would it be too late for you to consider this request that no fresh payment based on the current Government allocation be made until the pensioners' number has been properly established, and that this number should be established and you should really intervene that it should be finalised as soon as possible?  I thank you.

MR.KYEMBA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to thank hon. Karuhanga also for raising this issue on behalf of all of us who have rendered very useful service to this country, and the Minister for her attempt to answer the questions raised.  

Mr. Speaker, the pride of many a nation is in instilling a spirit of service to the country and when you consider the plight of pensioners, I think you can not separate them from what they have rendered to the country, and I think that is why we must be extremely concerned about their plight.  Mr. Speaker, it is very clear that the question that we are dealing with is really concerned with the formula of calculation,  and until it is addressed, we are going to have this gross disparity continuing.  

The Minister referred to the revision of payments and the calculation formula used to pay these pensioners but the Minister did not add that at the same time, the salaries of current officers have been revised something like seven times, and I think this one does not go down well for those who have retired long before, after rendering service.  I would, therefore, appeal to the Minister to hurry up this review so that, the pensioners case is particularly addressed.  I do not know a single Member of Parliament, Mr. Speaker, in this House  - (Interruption)

MR. WANGUBO: Mr. Speaker, I need to be guided whether the speaker holding the Floor is doing the right thing because he stood to ask a question, but it seems he is making a substantive statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I had the same concern myself and I have seen many hon. Members standing to raise questions but essentially make a contribution to this particular topic. I would advise that since we have a general debate on President's Speech and  also the Budget, this detailed contribution should be made then.  Otherwise, rule 36 is very, very clear; it should be just a question for clarification of the statement which has been made. And because of this, I would say that if hon. Kyemba has got a question, we stop there and then we get the Minister to answer,  and then we shall deal with this in the general debate.

MR. KYEMBA:  Can I finish, Mr. Speaker and put my question?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I think you finish.

MR. KYEMBA:  Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, I really just wanted to put the question to the Minister that the formula used needs thorough examination, otherwise the disparity will continue.  

Mr. Speaker, the other question I wanted to raise is a point to supplement what the hon. Okulo-Epak raised about the updating of the list of pensioners.  The Minister referred to it, but I would like her to state what formula she is going to use because, as far as I am concerned, these lists are continuously changing because people are dying off almost everyday, and you can not have a time when we have a complete list. New and other additional names are always coming on;  when are we going to say we are going to have a complete list of pensioners?  I do not think that is possible.  Thank you.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, would the Minister tell us, now that she is fully in charge of pensioners and pensions, whether there is any imaginative way that is being addressed to deal with Ugandan pensioners with a view to giving them a better package according to the law?  Because, the law is very clear: The Constitution says you can not reduce this amount, the laws are in place for these people to be paid but they are not being paid the adequate amount as described by the law, they are being cheated.  Is the Minister imaginatively  -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  But hon. Karuhanga, do you not think you would perhaps have assisted us and the Minister concerned if you pointed out the provision of the law which is not being complied with so that she can go back and say, we have not been complying with this law?  If you just say "the law", "the Act", it may be a problem. If you have a particular section in mind, why do you not mention it?

MR. KARUHANGA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am referring to Statutory Instrument No.6 of 1994  which amended the Pensions Act  and provided a formula that was supposed to be used to pay pensioners.  This statutory instrument has not been implemented and yet that is the law which should be used to calculate pensioners adequate remuneration. Even the Constitution says that no law should be adjusted to reduce an amount that is due to somebody who is a civil a servant.  The government is saying that  Statutory Instrument No.6 of 1994 put up the amount so high that the government can not afford.  This is in complete contravention of the Law and the Constitution. 

At the same time, the Minister is aware of the plight of pensioners who are former Permanent Secretaries who are getting 30,000 shillings. Even former judges have written to me letters which I have, which they have asked me not to read because it will embarrass the position of judges who are retired, but I have shown some of these letter to my friends and other people.  

So, is the Minister, now charged with pensions - and this is the first time government has given pensioners a Minister - is she imaginatively thinking out programmes, not only of implementing the Statutory instrument, but also of not having to invent the wheel, by looking at how other countries have taken care of their aged?  That is one.  Two: are members of the East African community who are still entitled to their pay ever going to see the light of day when they will get their pensions?  Three;  is the Minister thinking about people like Members of Parliament who are not provided for, by finding ways and means of providing for them; people like the Speaker, people like ourselves?  We work tirelessly. So, is the Minister thinking imaginatively of ways of looking after us when we are unable to work?

Lastly, I am very grateful for the attempt by the Minister to answer the question but I am embarrassed that the census carried out in 1997 is still not being implemented, and we are waiting and looking, and looking in spite of the amount of money that we paid to hire consultants for this census. Now if it is fake, is she planning to carry out another census, and if that is the case, when?  Thank you.

MR. EKANYA( Youth representative Eastern):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Hon. Minister.  My concern as a youth is whether you know that a poor pension management policy and the amount there is has made some people who should have retired to continue to be young everyday by reducing their age after every five years, such that they do not retire and that in turn affects the employment market where the youth would enter?  Are you working out a programme to make sure that people who have reached the retirement age are able to retire because the pension is good, such that the youth can get jobs?  Thank you very much.

DR. KASIRIVU(Bugangaizi County,Kibaale):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Some time back, there was an operation where many District Education Officers were rounded up and others interdicted for having "eaten" the pensions for teachers. I have also met many teachers in my constituency complaining of their pensions, that they are not getting their money.  I would wish the hon. Minister could give us information as to whether that malpractice was curbed, or it is still continuing; and if it is continuing, what should we do to the present District Education Officers who might be eating money for pensioners?  Thank you.

MR. OKUMU RINGA(Padyere County,Nebbi) :  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the government, through the Ministry of Public Service, for having improved a little the situation of pensioners. At least, today, those who have had their cases cleared do get their cheques, even though the amount is little.  I would like to thank the Ministry of Public Service for that  however, I would like to ask the Minister to clarify on the budgetary proposal of only two billion shillings which is earmarked in the current financial year.  

I would also like to find out from the Minister why the government, through the Ministry of Public Service, does not use the system which has been used to pay the UPDF or former NRA soldiers or retrenched soldiers?  Why does the government not come up with that kind of methodology to take a census of the pensioners, and source for funds, both locally and even through donor support, to pay pensioners so that these pensioners can use the money and maybe put it into  micro-economic activities which will then generate what in economics we call "the trickle down effect", hence real development at the micro level?  Can the Minister exploit that possibility?  

The last question, Mr. Speaker, is with regard to the proposal by the Minister that payment should be decentralized to the sub-county level.  In fact, the sub-county level would not help.  The current system should be that once cheques are made available, let the Chief Administrative officers and the political leaders of the district make it known that payments are available so that the pensioners can go all the way to the district headquarters to collect their monies.  The moment you decentralize it that far, with the rampant corrupt tendencies, you will find that the people who are supposed to benefit may not adequately benefit.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. LWANGA( Kyamuswa County, Kalangala):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to thank the Minister. She has made a very good attempt at convincing us that pensioners will be happy in the days to come  but, Mr. Speaker, an increase from  1/600 to 1/500 is, in real terms, an increase of 0.0003.  In percentage terms, it is an increase of 0.03 per cent.  Take that, multiply it by 10,000, for example, Mr. Speaker, I think you get what I am trying to say.  I am just wondering, Mr. Speaker, whether the Minister has tried to work out some figures to see how badly-off pensioners are!  

The Minister has only talked about the public sector, but I would like her to clarify whether she is taking some steps to ensure that NSSF contributions by other pensioners nationally are paid because, really, the civil service employs only about 150,000 to 200,000 people but the private sector employs probably so many times that.  So really, the people in the private sector are also suffering.  I want the Minister to clarify; is she taking any steps to try and liberalize contributions by the private sector, other than leaving the monopoly to NSSF which is cheating pensioners year in, year out?  Many people are not being paid but even when they get paid, it is too late.  I wish to seek this clarification.

MR. MUKASA P.(Nakaseke County, Luweero):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to ask, on behalf of the former or retired employees of the East African Community whose money was passed by Tanzania and Kenya to Uganda but was diverted, their pensions have never been paid in full, they have been given little amounts now and again.  Could the Minister tell us when their pensions which the government converted will be paid to them in full?  Thank you.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA(Kigulu North, Iganga) :  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mine are two clarifications.  The military pensioners:  These people for many years have not been paid.  When they move to Ministry of Defence, they are referred to Ministry of Public Service. Who is supposed to pay these military pensioners?  Secondly, is the calculation for military pension the same as the calculation for other civil service?  Thank you very much.

MR. WANGUBO(Bunya West, Iganga):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, in relation to what hon. Tim Lwanga asked, we have the private sector that is compelled to contribute to the NSSF.  May I know how those that retire from the private sector do benefit from this scheme?  Thank you.

MR. CHEBET MAIKUT(Kween County,Kapchorwa):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the employment situation in this country is very difficult, particularly for a number of graduates coming out of universities. Only two days ago, there was a photograph in the Monitor paper which was showing a young graduate going naked because he was frustrated by not getting a job, having walked for a long time in the streets of Kampala.  Now, may I know from the hon. Minister what steps the Ministry is taking to provide for more exits of the people already in employment so that the young graduates can come on board?  

I do recall that at one time, last year, the hon. Nabisi Nabutaala wanted to move a Motion seeking to introduce a private Member's Bill which will provide, inter-alia, for the reduction of the retirement age from 65 years to, I think  55 years. I also do recall that at that time, the then Minister for Public Service who is now the Rt hon. Prime Minister did inform one of the committees of this House that government was working out an elaborate law to provide for a pension scheme in this country.  Now since that time, I think there has been no such law which has been brought here, and from the whispers of my Colleague who is behind me, hon. Nabutaala-Nabisi, he is again seeking to introduce that motion to this House.  So, could we know what steps the Ministry of Public Service is taking towards this particular direction?  I know there are many people who would like to retire from service, say, after ten or twelve years of service but I think there is no clear provision for their pensions under the current laws.  Thank you.

MRS MUKIIBI:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker and I thank the hon. Members who have raised questions.  The first question was about why there has been a delay in implementing the census results. 

This census was done in the month of October and November, 1997 and since then, what has  actually been going on is the scrutinizing of the results of the census.  We are actually now at the point of implementing the results of the census.  I think the delay of one year is not too much.  What we are saying is that, we are now ready to implement the results of the census. Head counting the pensioners was not an easy job, and the department is not computerized even as I speak now.  So there is a lot of paper work, a lot of manual work which has been going on.  I am just glad that at this particular time, we are able to implement the results of the census.  

The second question was from hon. Okulo-Epak, who was talking about the relationship between the Ministry and the Pensioners Association. I would like to report that the relationship between the Ministry and the association is very cordial, we are working together at various stages to implement the current laws and also to address the plight of the pensioners.  In fact, what we are talking of now is what we have been synchronising with the stake holders. They are aware and we are moving together.  Even as I talk now, negotiations are still going on with them on how to implement the formula.  So the relationship is cordial and we shall improve on it, if need be.  

There is reluctance in applying the current law because of the high pay -  that was the question.  The reluctance has been there  because we are still sorting out the results of the census, and at the same time, Finance has only come up this budget to allocate funds for that exercise.  So, there was no reluctance but rather, we are trying to move systematically. It is only now that Finance has availed us some little money to implement the revised formula. 

Hon. Henry Kyemba was contributing but he eventually asked what formula we are using.  I would like to assure him that as soon as that law was revised, it started being implemented but there were no positive results because of the meagre pensions - because of the low salaries at which the old pensioners came out of the service.  The law has been implemented but using the old salaries and those old salaries, mind you, were also affected by the devaluation of the shilling.  So, we have been applying the law but it has not been meaningful because of the low salaries at which the old civil servants left the service.  That is why we are now going to continue to apply the law and at the same time revalidate the pensions using the consolidated salaries and looking at the equivalent of what is consolidated now, compared with the old salaries.  I think if we implement now what I said  we are going to do, you will see a difference because we are going to equate the old salaries to the current consolidated salaries.  Does that answer your question? 

Then hon. Karuhanga asked what ways I am thinking of improving. Actually, the formula is in place and what we are actually going to do is to apply the formula using the equivalent of the consolidated salaries, and I think that will automatically improve the pensions.  But all this depends on the resource basket. For me I am determined to apply the law and equate the old salaries to the current consolidated salaries. Here, I would also like to answer a similar question which was raised by hon. Tim Lwanga who said that the difference is small that, if we calculate the pensions using the formula, it is not small;  It is substantive.  If we apply that constant of 1/500 and use the current consolidated salaries, the pensions will be greatly improved. But it all depends on the Budget. 

The second question from hon. Karuhanga was; what is happening to the payment of the pensions of the former members of the East African Community?  I would like to say that something is being done. I think, for the past two financial years, there has been something in the Budget for them to cover their pensions, and as I speak now, in the current Budget we have a sum of two billion shillings to pay the former East African Community workers. Last year they had the same amount to pay. So there has been some payment but the problem here is that the amount allocated each year is small. But government has the will and is committed to pay these people. This also answers the questions from Members who have been asking about the former East African Community workers.  Government is committed and each time Government is putting some money in the Budget to pay the former East African Community workers. I must point  out, however, that even this process needs a lot of verification, auditing and so forth. 

I would like the hon. Members also to assist, whenever they are approached by the pensioners or the former East African workers, to direct them to the Ministry.  Hon. Karuhanga is having letters from judges and I do not know for what!  Why are you keeping those letters?  I would like hon. Karuhanga to kindly pass those letters to me so that we can handle them because you are not the pension authority and those people will not be helped -(Laughter).

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to inform the hon. Minister that as a representative of the people, I have access to the people and people also have access to us as Parliamentarians.  When I first put this question in the last session, the question was not answered and when the item appeared in the newspapers, I received a lot of letters from pensioners thanking me for having noted their concern, and pointing out a number of areas where things have gone wrong. 

In fact, in the case of one particular judge who asked me not to mention his name because he is a retired judge, he told me that if it had not been for His Excellency the President who has listened to his plight and provided for him something small to live on, he would not be managing to survive and he was encouraging me to pursue the matter so that they can be adequately taken care of.  My father-in-law who happens to be a pensioner receives 30,000 shillings - he was a veterinary doctor. He cannot afford to come to Kampala to pick his cheque, so he kind of forgot all about that money.  He asked me to see what can be done for these old people to get their money when they are still alive. Many other pensioners have written to me encouraging me to ask the Minister to be -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Karuhanga, there was just a simple observation. The observation was that she is the authority, you are not but you are trying to assist so why do you not pass the information to her so that she can work on it! 

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to get some clarification from my old Friend Elly Karuhanga, Member of Parliament for Nyabushozi. We know there are special interest groups;  there are MPs for the disabled, there are MPs for women, and there are MPs for the youth.  If my memory serves me right, in the Constitution and in the laws, we do not have any Member of Parliament representing retired judges. That is one.  Number two, is it proper for hon. Karuhanga, unless he has other interests, to receive letters that the population would like to be served and deliberately - I will not say maliciously - but deliberately -(Laughter)- refuse to pass them on to the department of Government charged with handling that responsibility, and continue to repeat it on the Floor of this House that "so and so told me but not to tell you"; "I have a letter but I cannot give it to you"? Now how are we expected to handle this matter?  

Is it really proper, Mr. Speaker, for hon. Karuhanga  representing the people of Nyabushozi where pensions are not paid to pastoralists and cultivators, to continue to hang on to letters that are critical to solving the problems of this country? And I would like to use your office Sir, maybe to summon him that these letters be surrendered so that the issues are handled. Unless he wants to appear that he supports pensioners, but then, if we do not solve the problem, then problem remains perennial. 

There is sufficient capacity within the Ministry of Public Service to address those issues within the budget and I would like to use this opportunity to request him to be kind enough, since he sits behind me, to give me or my Minister of State, photo copies of these letters and in confidence, give us the names of these judges because the President will not go on using his fund forever really.  So could he help us Sir?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think those who passed the letters to hon. Karuhanga are listening and they may assess whether he is assisting them to the best of his ability or not. We proceed please.

MRS. MUKIIBI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In view of all that, I would like to encourage all of you Members of Parliament to assist your electorate, especially the pensioners, when they have problems by bringing these documents to us. I think a lot can be done but many pensioners have given up because they do not see a channel which they can use to get their pensions. I can assure you that we are trying our best in the Ministry to address the plight of pensioners, but we cannot do so unless we get sufficient information.  You as representatives of the people should take up this obligation.  I have already said why the census results had not been implemented but we are now going to implement the results of the census and I think that is good enough.

Hon. Ekanya was saying that there are some civil servants who continue saying they are still young. In this regard, I think we should all be responsible citizens. The age for retirement was increased to 60, and I do not think after that increase there is so much of this problem.  I would like to inform hon. Ekanya that many people are retiring voluntarily. I do not think this is a problem really but we have taken note of it and we shall always scrutinize our files.  Actually, we want to make it an automatic way of people's exit so that as soon as someone clocks 60 years, the Permanent Secretary of that Ministry is able to remind him that he is due to retire.  We are going to do that.  

Mr. Okumu Ringa: that we should use the system of the UPDF of paying a package once and for all for the former East African Community workers. Of course that would be the ideal but as I told you, the meagre funds from the Treasury cannot allow us to do that.  As I talk now, we are actually holding discussions with the Minister of Finance to find out a way of paying off these East African Community workers quickly, and one of the ways which you have suggested, we had already looked at.  So discussions are going on. We welcome your recommendation and we shall take it up as we continue with the discussions. We do not want to delay these payments but it is because of lack of funds. 

You say that paying at the sub-county level may not help but of course this is optional. In some districts as I speak now, they are already practising it where they have realised it helps but where it does not help, there is no harm to stick to the district headquarters. It is optional where it works and it can be implemented and where the people are comfortable at the district headquarters, they will continue with that system because there are even people who are getting money through their banks.  So this is one of the ways of improving the situation. 

Hon. Tim Lwanga, I had answered you that although this formula looks small, it is meaningful if we use the consolidated salaries.  As of now, you do not realise the difference because we are still using the old salaries but we shall soon move to the equivalent of consolidated salaries. I am afraid I cannot answer questions relating to the NSSF because it is a separate body and as I was reading in the papers recently that the Minister of Finance is addressing the monopoly of NSSF and he said that he is going to bring a law to liberalise it soon.  So that is already being addressed. 


Hon. Pascal Mukasa, you are complaining why former East African Community workers are not paid.  I have already answered your question that we are paying but the funds are not enough. But Government is committed to pay and at the same time, we are working out ways of improving on the payments. Where can we get a lump‑sum of money to pay?  You have suggested that we could either pick up a loan or sell East African properties. All these are being considered and we shall soon come up with a way forward.  

Then hon. Mudoola was asking where the military pensioners are supposed to be paid. According to the information I have in the short time I have been in the Ministry, these people have got a separate pension authority which is under the Ministry of Defence, so we do not handle them. I think I would encourage you to consult more in that Ministry and find out what is happening because they are not under us.  The calculation they use, I do not know because it is not under us.  

Then there was an honourable member - well, I do not know his name, but his question was referring to the public sector. As I said, I am not in a position to answer matters concerning the NSSF;  all the public sector is handled by the NSSF.  

Hon. Maikut asked, "what steps are being taken to encourage exit so that the young ones can enter in the Public Service?" There are some provisions: Recently, the Ministry called for voluntary retirement, and under that scheme, already more than a hundred people have retired! That is providing exit, and we are encouraging more people to retire under the Voluntary Retirement Scheme and as I said, we are going to monitor the civil servants' payroll and take off, as soon as possible, those who reach 60 years of age.  If we monitor, there will always be some people leaving and some people coming in. 

I do not know whether the Minister for Public Service would like to add on that but we are mindful of this, and many schemes are available to provide exit for some of the civil servants and for the young ones to get on.  But at the same time we must also encourage the young ones to look into the private sector for employment.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

MOTION 
THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY H.E. THE PRESIDENT TO PARLIAMENT ON WEDNESDAY 2ND JUNE, 1999. 

(Debate continued)
 
MR. OKELLO OKELLO (Chwa County, Kitgum):  I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I rise to oppose the Motion.  Mr. Speaker, I am opposing this Motion on one major ground and that ground alone.  Mr. Speaker, it is my submission that this Motion is not properly before this House.  Mr. Speaker, it was only last week when we unanimously agreed here that it was high time we started doing things properly.  

Mr. Speaker, the Presidential Address on the State of the Nation is a very, very important matter, that is why it comes only once a year.  It is a very important statement by Government.  Mr. Speaker, I am embarrassed to see that this Motion has been hijacked by the Backbenchers; moved and seconded -(Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, if I could assist you;  since your contribution, you said, is only based on one point and you have indicated the point you want to raise and it is the question of Backbenchers having spearheaded this Motion,  I think I had made a ruling on this matter, but after that, I also had consultation on the practice somewhere else.  

You very well know that this Parliament is very much linked to the House of Commons. The practice in the House of Commons is that such a Motion is moved by a Backbencher and seconded by a Backbencher because they have two sides. After the two Backbenchers, the Leader of the Opposition will come in to say what he wants to say, then the Prime Minister will come in to defend the government policy and the debate will be opened.  

This matter was raised by hon. Dick Nyai and I think this afternoon I have shown him the authority to back me on this matter.  So, if that is the issue, unless it is a different jurisdiction other than the British Parliament which we are following, then you can proceed. 

MR. OKELLO-OKELLO:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am sorry I did not get your ruling correctly because I thought you ruled that it should be debated and either thrown out or passed. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Dick Nyai, maybe since you are the one who raised this matter on which I made a ruling, you may say something about it. 

MR. NYAI(Ayivu County, Arua):  Yes, Mr. Speaker, I will oblige because I was going to make this part of my submission to the debate.  Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, I had raised a similar objection to what hon. Okello Okello is raising, because in the past, the practice has been that it is the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister who moves the Motion and it is seconded by another Minister and that has happened for two years running.  

Now yesterday, Mr. Speaker, while I was making that objection, the Clerk to this Parliament was listening on his monitor, and he quickly accessed one of the library books in our library entitled  "Parliament: Functions, Practice and Procedures" by J.G. Grifith, Michael Rile and M.J. Willabooth.  He reminded me when I walked out that, on page 189 of the book, the practice in the Westminster which is the mother of Parliaments from which we try to borrow and rest our procedures, it is said that there is an equivalent speech, but normally it is the speech of the Queen. That once the Queen's speech has been delivered, it is two Backbenchers who move the Motion of thanks. After they have had their say, the Leader of the Opposition then makes a substantive statement and after that, the Prime Minister will emphasise any government policy that arises.  

This is the position in the Westminster but it looks like we are now adopting this procedure here. I have no objection to it, only that I hope that it will not be varied next year, and that it would have helped, Mr. Speaker, if MPs were educated earlier that we were going back to the tested practice of the mother of Parliaments. I was going, on that note, Mr. Speaker, to extend my sincere apologies to the Mover of the Motion and the Seconder, hon. Saziri and hon. Egunyu, because it is only somebody who does not respect the truth who does not learn.  I thank you.

MR. OKELLO-OKELLO:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to thank hon. Dick Nyai very much indeed. There was a gap in communication flow.  So, I withdraw, but I will proceed to my points because, Mr. Speaker, even when I am opposing the Motion, I have got to make a point. I think this is clear.  

I would like to start with the economy.  Mr. Speaker, I think the economic situation we have is really nothing to be proud of.  Mr. Speaker, our people are not interested in the GDP, in the rate of growth, in what have you.  What they want is to pay their way;  pay school fees, buy their paraffin, buy matches - their daily needs!  But, Mr. Speaker, I am really disappointed to learn that our economy is now the fastest growing in the whole world - the fastest growing!  

I would like somebody from Ministry of Finance or Bank of Uganda to come here and tell us in simple terms that we can understand, what is growing, where it is growing and how it is growing, when our people are getting poorer and poorer.  This growth is meaningless to us!  Mr. Speaker, shops are being closed, banks are being closed, and even transport operators -  Mr. Speaker, last week I went to the bus park to collect a visitor.  A whole big bus all the way from Kitgum coming with just 12 passengers because the people do not have the money, they cannot travel! And when people do not move, they do not do business;  and when they do not do business, the economy cannot grow!  But our economy is defying all this!  So, Mr. Speaker, this economic growth, to me, is a political figure and it is very abstract.  

I would like to say something about the Co-operative Bank, Mr. Speaker. As a victim of the closure of this bank, I was saddened to hear His Excellency the  President saying that it was good the bank died so we should hurry and bury it to keep the environment clean.  Mr. Speaker, that particular statement was not well received by the people I represent here.  Mr. Speaker, the closure of this bank will destroy some Ugandans for ever, because children are now at home because school fees are not paid;  businesses have been closed, they will not and may not recover.  So, Mr. Speaker, the economy cannot boom without banking facilities.  

The Co-operative Bank was the only viable bank in some upcountry towns but if we are celebrating its demise, then I do not really understand, Mr. Speaker.  To me this bank was murdered, and Mr. Speaker, when someone is murdered, a postmortem must be done before burial.  If we hurry to bury, we become suspects, and the Police should really apprehend the suspects and take them to court.  So, the closure of this bank is a very serious matter.  

I was privileged on the 12th of May to host His Excellency the President in my constituency.  The President talked about quite a number of things, including telling us to grow mangoes as our share to the national cake.  Mr. Speaker, the President also emphasised the need for constitutionalism, the need for Ugandans to adhere to the Constitution, and this is my point, Mr. Speaker. 

In my view, the President should lead the way in promoting constitutional rule.  Mr. Speaker, article 106 clause (5) is very clear, and if I may read it, Mr. Speaker, it states:  "The President shall not hold any other public office other than those conferred by this Constitution; or any office of profit or emolument likely to compromise the office of the President."   Mr. Speaker, as I speak now, the following are the jobs of the our President:  One; President of the Republic of Uganda, and in that capacity, Leader of Government; Chairman of Cabinet;  Minister of Defence;  Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces;  Chairman High Command;  Chairman Army Council;  Chairman of the Movement;  Chairman of the National Executive Committee of the Movement;  Chancellor, Makerere University; Chancellor, Mbarara University;  Chancellor, The Islamic University in Uganda -

AN HON. MEMBER:  No, no! 

MR. OKELLO-OKELLO:  Okay;  it is now alleged - the latest - that the President is also the Minister of Internal Affairs.  Lastly, the President is a prominent dairy farmer.  Mr. Speaker, these are eleven jobs in a small country -(Interruption).

MR. CHEBET MAIKUT: I would like to thank the hon. Member holding the Floor and I would like to inform the hon. Member that farming is not a job.  Let me qualify my statement: Farming is dignified as a honourable activity that can and should be encouraged to be undertaken by any citizen of this country, as it contributes to the wealth of this country.  So, it cannot be qualified as an employment. 

MR. NYAI:  Mr. Speaker, is the hon. Member in order to classify farming as an honourable employment, that the others of being President and Minister are not honourable?  Is he in order to so demean other employments?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Well, I would think that this is really a personal assessment.  As far as he is concerned, his grading is different and his emphasis is on farming and he puts it in the slot.

MR. OKELLO-OKELLO:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I am grateful to the chairman of the Uganda National Farmers Association for having come up with a new definition of farming.  Mr. Speaker, in the two remaining minutes, I want to say something about the April reshuffle.  

Appointments and reshuffles of ministers are completely the prerogative of the President but, Mr. Speaker, sometimes these reshuffles are done in such a way as if it is deliberately made to tarnish or destroy some leaders from some other parts of the country.  The last reshuffle, Mr. Speaker, was good because it was intended to lay off those who had accusations hanging over them but, Mr. Speaker, at the same time His Excellency the President found it necessary to include innocent and clean Ugandans in that bundle and they were thrown away together.  Mr. Speaker, this has raised a lot of questions as to whether these others were also suspects, and yet we know they are very upright leaders and have served this country for a long time. 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say that where we are, a lot of things seem to have gone wrong, and I think it is now easy to ask what has not got wrong, rather than what has gone wrong in this country.  Mr. Speaker, politically the country is lost;  economically the country has collapsed;  socially we are scared - people no longer enjoy themselves.  You go to have some good time in a hotel, as if you are boarding a plane, you are checked as if you are going there to kill somebody, and; militarily we are not apparently succeeding very well since we are not sure what victory we are coming back with.  I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MRS. BWAMBALE (Woman Representative, Kasese):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for this opportunity. I am rising to support the Motion.  Mr. Speaker, I think it was a clear and precise exposition of the state of the economy by His Excellency the President.  There are many positive issues raised in the statement, but the time given will make me confine myself to the statement that His Excellency made about my constituency, Kasese, the Rwenzori Region covering Kabarole and Bundibugyo.  

His Excellency on Page 5 stated that the massive mountain of the Rwenzoris does not have a single road at all.  Mr. Speaker, the Rwenzori Mountains are very, very important to this State.  The ranges go beyond 5,000 ft. high, they are very strategic as far as the environment is concerned, they act as a catchment area not only for East Africa, but also for Central Africa.  

The Rwenzori Mountains are very productive, they are fertile, they have a reach fauna and flora. The mountains produce plenty of water which can be used for irrigation, and it is very embarrassing that this country, at this material time, is suffering from draught when plenty of water is flowing from the Rwenzori Mountains and is being wasted without irrigating the land through which it passes. Mr. Speaker, the Rwenzori Mountains have provided that region with water for gravity flow schemes.  At the time I speak, 50 percent of our people in Kasese District drink clean water. 

I am expounding on the importance of that mountain and thanking the President for having been clear and given policy direction on how that mountain can be developed.  Mr. Speaker, that mountain has got a very high potential for tourism.  I have been informed that in a country like Switzerland which has got similar high altitudes, the electronic industry performs very well.  So, the watch-making industry, for example, could do very well in those mountains.  Alas! the President states on that page, no single road exists.  Unfortunately for this country, this potential I have talked about has hardly been tapped and it is a challenge to this regime that the Movement Government should have a precise policy on the development of highlands, specifically the Rwenzori Mountains that have been mentioned.  

Historically, Mr. Speaker, these mountains that lack roads have also been occupied by bad people whom the President enlisted among the bandits that have affected the development of this country.  The President in his speech talked about the banditry by the Kony rebels, the banditry found in the East as we all know, and the banditry which was meted on the people of Kasese, Kabarole and Bundibugyo three years ago by the ADF.  Mr. Speaker, this strategic mountain covers three very important districts.  I would like to give a historical background to show how the President is concerned about restoring the security of that mountain so that it can realise the development that would benefit this nation.  

Thirty years ago in the 1960s, the Rwenzururu Liberation Movement occupied the mountain for about 20 years, no wonder the Obote Government never made a road, and never developed the area because it was being occupied by the Rwenzururu Liberation Movement which I hope many Members in this House who were old at that time know all about.  It was a Liberation Movement responding to some bad regional and national administration somewhere.  

In 1982, these bandits, as the President addressed them, although I do not agree that the Rwenzururu Liberators were bandits, but the President decided to address them in that way,  handed over their guns to the Government of Obote. That was a challenge to that Government because that is the time when the Government of Obote should have moved in and made roads and harnessed the potential I talked about at the beginning of my debate. That opportunity was lost.  For 10 years, the place remained undeveloped. In fact it should be 30 years. From the 1960s to the 1980s, the place was just occupied by rebel youth, it was not utilised - can you protect me, Mr. Chairman, from the Obote fans around me who are intimidating me? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  You are protected.  

MRS. BWAMBALE:  Mr. Speaker, from 1986 when the Movement Government took over state power, that productive mountain was unfortunately taken over by the National Army for the Liberation of Uganda rebels (NALU), and these rebels also denied us the development of the area up to 1996, when the ADF have come in and occupied the area.  

Now, the question I am asking is; do we not care that this potential should be harnessed and developed?  I am aware that the Ministry of Works, Communications and Transport is coming up with a project called the Trans-Rwenzori Road Construction Project, and I hope that project will come to the Floor of this House for funding in the near future.  

It is in that spirit that I have decided to lobby and inform the august House that there is a potential which we are not harnessing in the Rwenzori mountains.  I know that, that project is a very, very expensive project, even the World Bank is sceptical about allocating funds for it because going over the ridges and mountains constructing roads right from the border with the Congo up to the border with Kabarole, across to Bundibugyo is not an easy task for Government.  But I would like to implore the House and the Committee on Transport, Housing and Communications to give this policy of the President a deeper thought, and support the President's policy insinuated in this statement.  

Mr. Speaker, the President also stated that Government has been absent from those mountains.  It is true.  The first time that a Mukonjo and a Mwamba living in those mountains ever knew that there was Central Government Administration was when the NRA soldiers went into the mountains during the 1986 war. That was the first time the Bakonjo of those mountains felt the presence of Central Government.  They were lacking education, they were lacking transport, they were lacking economic support.  That is why, in my final appeal to the House, I would like to appreciate  what the President has stated on Page 7 that now, Kasese, parts of Kabarole and Bundibugyo make part of the conflict areas where Government is going to concentrate and consider them for the provision of minimum social economic recovery conditions.  

When one talks about Kasese, Bundibugyo and Kabarole, you think about Hima, you think about Lake Katwe Salt Project, you think about Kilembe Mines, but, hon. Members, those industries have never directly benefitted the local population because there is no direct beneficiary from them up to the local population.  The Bakonjo, the Bamba who live on the mountains are as poor as those ones who live in Luwero or in Iganga - Bukanga for that matter, I am being informed - simply because Government goes in, occupies the land with those national industries, the taxes from them are brought in to support the national Budget. 

I can assure you, since I came to Parliament here, we have never voted for a constituency development fund, and I think the only way we are going to develop these rural forgotten areas is for this Parliament to be firm and pressurise Government for a constituency development fund.  That is when we shall fulfil the provision of the Constitution which says that Government has got the obligation to develop this country in a balanced and equitable manner. It is one of the National Principles and Objectives in the 1995 Constitution. 

So, as conclude, I lobby my Colleagues in Parliament that when the Trans-Rwenzori Road Project comes to the Floor or to the Committee, I expect the Members to support it and when a Motion is moved for the constituencies to have a constituency development fund, I will be pleased to support and  to be supported.  Thank you very much.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I think you agree with me that it is the appropriate time to hear from the Member from Mbarara Municipality.

MS BYANYIMA (Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I welcome the speech by His Excellency the President at the Opening of Parliament, and rise to support the Motion.  I was pleased with the style and the manner of delivery.  It was a great improvement from the previous year when the President was almost in combat with Parliament.  This time he showed us that he wants to have a working partnership with Parliament in governing this country, and I encourage him to continue to pursue this approach of seeing us as partners and not protagonists.  

The President, using well established facts, clearly showed us the remarkable economic recovery this country has achieved in the 13 years of the Movement administration and as a Movement supporter and even as a critic, I am proud of that achievement and salute him for his able leadership in steering the economy.  My comments on some aspects of the economy should, therefore, be taken within this context, I mean the context of the overall success.  I will, however, point out some areas where I feel that Government is not paying enough attention, and where these areas, I feel, threaten economic success.  Let us not forget that when we loose our capacity to assess ourselves objectively, we will have lost our way.  I will begin with the financial sector.  

In his speech, His Excellency the President admits to problems of corruption in the financial sector. I first raised this issue about a crisis in banking two budgets ago.  This House has been critical of management at Bank of Uganda for a long time, and this House has exposed cronyism and influence pedalling in the financial sector, and the Select Committee on Privatisation last year exposed incompetence and possible collusion by some Bank of Uganda officials with private banks and other entrepreneurs.  Three important banks have collapsed and up to now, Mr. Speaker, there is impunity. I have not seen or heard of any official from Bank of Uganda - I am talking about the senior or top management of Bank of Uganda - being asked to account for this situation  -(Interruption).

MS KABASHARIRA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I thank my Sister hon. Byanyima for giving way.  The clarification I am asking is that, in the Kinyankole culture, when someone marries or gets married, you have to go for what we call '"kwarama", meaning honeymoon (Laughter).  The clarification I am seeking is, may I know whether hon. Winnie Byanyima has ceased to be a Munyankole so that she comes here and she even gets the guts of speaking in Parliament? May I know, Mr. Speaker?

MS BYANYIMA:  Mr. Speaker, I wish to inform you and the rest of this House that I married a man from Mpororo, and after consulting the Mpororo culture, I learnt that a working woman can have a one day honeymoon and I have had it.  I am back to work (Laughter).  Mr. Speaker, I thank hon. Members for all the kind words they have given to me.  

I appreciate the transitional problems in the banking sector. The fact that we are moving from a Government controlled sector to a liberalised financial sector created a problem of acquiring new skills and so on, but this cannot be the reason why there is gross mismanagement there.  It cannot be the reason why, for more than two years, Bank of Uganda has had no Board, and even despite this crisis, no step has been taken to institute a Board at the Bank of Uganda. Nobody is in charge at that bank, the organisation is full of intrigue and tribal cliques and so on, and yet, Mr. Speaker, without a sound financial sector, the economy is being built on shaky ground.  Mr. Speaker, I urge the Government to take the necessary steps to put order in our financial sector, to recruit properly people with skills to eliminate political interference in that sector, to punish officials for the mess that we have seen and to take the right steps to bring back soundness there.   

I also took exception to the fact that tax payers are going to pay for depositors of the private banks when the owners have gone away with the money while the supervisors were turning a blind eye, maybe in collusion with the private owners.  I take exception to that.  We need to amend the law so that money from the reserves or from wherever it is coming from is also under control of Parliament because I believe that this Parliament may not have easily accepted that tax payers' money should have to pay depositors when some rich individuals have stolen that money and gone away with it. 

On privatisation, here I was left wondering really, whether the President is aware of the extent of corruption in the privatisation process.  He quotes Pepsi Cola as a success story, and indeed it is, and goes on to ask what is the overall picture as if to say privatisation on the whole, is a success. I want to answer him that the overall picture is disastrous, disappointing and even scandalous.  

What the Select Committee on Privatisation reported in their interim report is that privatisation has been hijacked by a few powerful people who manipulate it and are taking over private enterprises for a song. They are not paying up, they are cutting shady deals and walking off.  They are manipulating the biding process, the evaluation process, the award processes, they are intimidating staff, they are pushing their way through privatisation.  That is what we revealed.  The process is not transparent. That is what we revealed.  In fact, the picture was so bad that the Minister himself resigned before a censure.  So, I cannot understand how then the President can have confidence to indicate that the overall picture there is that of success, it is not!

Privatisation could be used to stimulate the economy in a similar way that Korea used it as the engine for their economic miracle.  I therefore, see it as an opportunity squandered.  Mr. Speaker, I urge Government to bring up an Amendment to the PERD Statute to streamline the process and I am concerned that that was not listed as one of the Bills for this Session.  I hope it will be brought up.  

I welcome the President's new focus on households and poverty eradication.  We have been monitoring growth in terms of macro economic indicators, looking at the growth of GDP, looking at the declining debt to export ratio but not looking at the household and changes there.  So, I am happy, I am pleased that the President now seems to want to focus more on what is happening at the family level, in the household and to focus on poverty eradication.  That is the direction to take.  The micro economy is as important as the macro one and the linkages there are important to understand and to promote.  I also welcome the focus on the North and interventions to increase incomes in the North because I feel that conflict itself is fuelled by great disparities within the country.

Entandikwa is a project of Government that I also support but I ask that it is quickly de-politicised and technicalised so that those with sound skills in macro-finance institutions run the entandikwa scheme.

On corruption, Mr. Speaker, again, the President's speech left me disappointed.  While I welcome the CID probe, I still feel that political will is lacking in fighting corruption, especially when it comes to some highly placed individuals. We as Parliament came to a near confrontation with the President in the case of one Minister and to this day, he is on record that the hon. Minister of State for Planning was not guilty, despite the facts that we brought before this House.  The censure method which is constitutional, he finds unacceptable and wants us - in fact, in his speech, he refers to it as "launching unguided missiles at each other".  I find that disappointing because we thought about it as Constitution makers and put it there because we saw that was the only way within the Movement in which we could keep our House clean.  Other methods lack rules and means of proper exposure and of proper punishment, Mr. Speaker.

I also want to associate with what hon. Okello-Okello has said that, having acted on, maybe up to six Ministers if you include the Vice President on the issue of the dams and the seeds in Agriculture, up to this day the President has not taken a side with us and openly punished failure by any Minister.  Instead, he prefers the option of what one might call a soft landing or, in a hard way, one would call it a cover up, where people whom we find guilty are reshuffled very nicely with the innocent. 

This is a refusal to acknowledge corruption in the political class; it is a refusal to punish corruption in the political class and I fear that the cynics in this country are going to see this good inquiry - the Police probe - as just a way to find a fall guy.  They are going to say it is easy to punish Policemen when has he admitted that a  politician close to him is guilty of corruption!  So, I still want to urge the President that it is good he has moved on the Police but he has to show firmness as well in dealing with the political class.  

Lastly, I welcome the amnesty, but I also note a contradiction. While admitting that there is a spread of insecurity into more parts of the country including urban areas, the President continues to present to us a picture of the problems from a military angle, of the logistical requirements.  We are told we need this, we need to put roads, we need to buy this equipment. We are given a list of those who have been caught or killed but these are sons and daughters of this country!  The speech does not mention any diplomatic and political strategies to achieve lasting peace as such.  I think that this is an error.  We have to be thinking of what we can do to bring peace to the Western region of Uganda.  It cannot be just the weapons!  What can we do at a political and at a diplomatic level?  Consulting Parliament is part of that process.  

I also found it disappointing that this conflict which has engulfed the region was not even talked about.  That silence spoke loudly - the silence about the conflict that is spilling over our borders from Congo and Rwanda. That was not talked about to Parliament.

BRIG. KYALIGONZA:  Thank you very much, hon. Member for giving way.  I wanted to inform the hon. Member and the House that this kind of silence is not only on the issues of the war in the Congo but even internally. People are being killed, our soldiers are being killed, we are only learning of them through the press.  Not even a single Government functionary has made an effort to inform this country of what is happening.  

MS. BYANYIMA:  Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. Brigadier for that information.  Some time back at another forum, I complained that I can know more about what is going on in the conflict in Kosovo than I can know about what is happening here.  We do not know where are our children are, where they are deployed, how many have died, where are they buried, what it is costing this country or what is the possible end to this conflict and yet we are the representatives of the people!  If the President cannot discuss these matters with us, who does he discuss them with?  If he does not get the views of the people from us, where is his wisdom coming from?  Only from the military who are operating in these areas?  Mr. Speaker, I am encouraging the President to form a strong partnership with us and to share with us the problems of this country.  There is a wealth of political wisdom here - diplomatic wisdom, even military wisdom.  

So, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, I want to thank the President for his speech, most especially for the good management of the economy but to encourage him to work more closely with Parliament and to be more candid in sharing the problems of this country and not to be afraid to deal with the political class whenever issues of corruption arise.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. NYAI  (Ayivu County, Arua):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am lending my voice in support of this Motion of thanks with great reluctance.  With reluctance in that, Mr. Speaker, you did summon us to begin Parliament on 1st of June.  On that day, His Excellency was supposed to have made his State of the Nation Address.  He took off, went to Lusaka, for a very important meeting which affects the lives of our people in other countries. He came back and in a very long speech, he did not talk about what took him to Lusaka.  I think it is wrong.  

I believe that the truth shall set us free and, Mr. Speaker, when I said I am supporting this Motion very reluctantly, it is because I hope the Ministers here whom he has entrusted to support him and be his aides will give him this information that as a father figure to this nation, we expect, at least or at the very minimum, that the President shall try as much as possible to be truthful.  What do I mean, Mr. Speaker?  

On page 3, the President is talking about our national economy and the closure of banks. Very flippantly he says: "To argue that banks should not be closed in spite of being insolvent is the same as arguing that dead bodies should not be buried but preserved and kept in homes.  However much you love your relative, when he or she dies, you have no alternative but to bury him or her. That natural and rational logic must apply to all banks as well."

In Ayivu, if you have a son whom you love and that son is sick, but you keep him at home, you do not take him to hospital, every evening you are drinking with your colleagues and you are very happy, the day you make an alarm that "you people come and burry my son", the people will first ask you; "did your son die of an accident?"   And if you say "no, he has been sick for a long time", they will say, "why did you not tell us?  Are you a mulogo?"  - this is a word I learnt from Busiro here in the course of my education - are you a wizard?  

We have here an arrangement where you have the Bank of Uganda supposed to oversee these banks, to make sure that doctors are brought and I am very sure that there is enough legislation for the Bank of Uganda to apply supervision.  The Bank of Uganda does nothing, then Greenland is closed, my OB Sulaiman Kiggundu is locked up in Luzira briefly, then from there he is taken to Rwakitura, he swears on the Koran that so long as you are the President of this country, I will not stand for any elections against you.  That was what was reported.  

I am saying this because, the truth is bitter but it will have to free us.  I do not believe that private banks can fold up or are forced to fold up and the relationship between the depositor and the share holders, the owners of the banks is put aside and the tax payer from Ayivu is asked to pay for mismanagement of finances in Kampala without those banks being asked to be liquidated, and this payment is done extra judiciarily, without the approval of this Parliament.  I find it strange and because I find it strange, Mr. Speaker, I am tempted to suspect that the people who are paying the depositors quietly using the tax payers' money have something to hide and it is on this point, Mr. Speaker, that I hope we shall have this House  address itself in detail to the banking scandal in this country and, in fact, Mr. Speaker, at an appropriate time, I wish to move a Motion that this House should immediately establish a Select Committee to look into our banking system.

MS. KIRASO:  Mr. Speaker, because of the hullabaloo surrounding the Bank of Uganda and its operations, the three Committees -National Economy; Finance, Planning and Economic Development; Statutory Corporations and State Enterprises - have decided to put in place a task-force of two members from each of those three Committees to actually go into detail and investigate and know what went wrong in Bank of Uganda, to find out who is to blame for what because Bank of Uganda enjoys an autonomous status and there is very little information that we can get from the Ministry of Finance.  So, this Parliament has decided to take it up by itself.  That, to me, is equivalent to a Select Committee. 

MR. DICK NYAI:  Thank you very much for that information.  

MAJ. KAZOORA:  Mr. Speaker, the hon. Member holding the Floor has made a very serious statement about a Member who is not in this House. He said that Dr. Sulaiman Kiggundu went to Rwakitura and swore by the Koran before the President that as long as His Excellency Museveni is the President, he, Dr. Sulaiman Kiggundu, will never stand for the Presidency.  Now, I am very concerned, Mr. Speaker,  because this could mean that we are talking of different things other than the technical issues that led to the closure of Greenland Bank. Could the hon. Minister in charge of the Presidency or the Minister for General Duties in the Prime Minister's Office or whoever has information put this House in good light, otherwise I will remain with doubts, Mr. Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  You mean the doubt that standing for Presidency and the closing of the bank are related?  Is that what you want?

MAJ. KAZOORA:  Mr. Speaker, if this remains unexplained, then any interpretation is possible.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I see.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The hon. Dick Nyai,  to begin with, has said that the information he has brought to this House is information he got from newspapers.  As we all know, the last thing you want to expect from some of our newspapers is reliability of the information they get - (Interjection) -  Yes, I mean it!  So many things have been said about people, including hon. Aggrey Awori.  If he wants to suggest that everything said about him is true, he has a serious problem.  

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the only time a Member of the Cabinet or the Government has to own to what happens in the Government is when it is Government business.  There is no way a Member of Government can be expected to know what happens between two individuals; whether they are Members of the Government or outside the Government. That is purely personal. So, I cannot see how a personal matter like that, even if it had a chance in a trillion to be true, would be known by a Member of this House simply because they are Government Ministers.  The only time we know as Ministers is when we are handling matters that are of official nature.  I thank you.

MR. DICK NYAI:  Mr. Speaker, I thank all these great contributors.  I am particularly grateful to hon. Kiraso for the information that certain Committees of this Parliament are trying to get at the truth but I am very sad to report, Mr. Speaker, that whereas yesterday a Report on the Co-operative Bank was circulated to Members and we thought this Parliament was going into a salvage operation to save the share holders of the Co-operative Bank, by the time I got home, the branches were already being sold.  It is in that respect, Mr. Speaker, that I am saying, at an appropriate time, this Parliament must set up a Select Committee with powers to pronounce itself on legislation to safeguard our taxpayers' money from being expended anyhow.  

The matter of Kiggundu swearing on the Koran was public knowledge in the newspapers, and whereas Government is normally quick to disown the "never did so" up to tomorrow, if other people have been taking money from those banks - I understand one of them was related to some big person, in fact the young brother of His Excellency, we read that he was forgiven for his sins - then, Mr. Speaker, we cannot use two standards for the taxpayer in Bundibugyo to pay for the luxuries of somebody in Kampala and nobody finds out who the thief is.  I think that is important.  

On page four, Mr. Speaker, I was a little bit perturbed in the last but one paragraph when His Excellency was saying that in these 14 years his Government has achieved a minimum recovery programme.  However, he goes on to say that the Movement's long term target is not minimum recovery.  If 14 years is minimum recovery, how long does the Movement intend to run this country? Is it ad infinitum?  Mr. Speaker, since I have no time, I will take the mugole's information privately.  

The hon. Member who spoke previously about the Mountains of the Moon talked about the suffering of the people there and on page six, the President talked very ably about how Government is going to contain rebellion in that area but recently, Mr. Speaker, the President was visiting that area and he goes ahead in public and said - and it is reported by Government media, I pay taxes for maintaining that media - that "for a long time, I have been misinformed, I do not know what has been happening here."  Then the following day he says, "I also now know there are only 500 rebels." Did he count them with bullets?  

It is in this respect that I would plead with His Excellency that when he is addressing the nation through Parliament, a little respect is given. Parliament is made up of intelligent people who cannot be treated like children to whom you give a pencil and they play with it in the sand!  Like the example he gave in the Sheraton.  Mr. Speaker, let me draw your attention to this one.  Mr. Speaker, this is the Leader of our Government saying at the bottom of the long paragraph on page 11:  "Many of the investors who are here are here - and the emphasis is his - in spite of the system, not because the system has necessarily assisted them."  If our system of Government over which he presides is so unfriendly to investors, then I think it is the duty and it is only fair that he should allow the people of Uganda to put in place a new administration which will ensure that the development of his people is addressed properly.

Finally, Mr. Speaker, on page 13 in the last paragraph at the bottom, the President says without batting an eye:  "The second reason why our goods are expensive is that while Uganda was on fire, Kenya was stable. The Kenyans borrowed money 30 years ago, built factories, paid back the loans and the interest. Today, they no longer have loans to pay."  Mr. Speaker, in the international or global information market, this is an absolute lie!  Even as recently as yesterday, the International Monetary Fund was asking Kenya to spruce itself up, reduce corruption and manage its money properly.  The International Monetary Fund is saying that because there is still a financial backlog in Kenya which Kenya has not disbursed.  

So, I find it strange that my father, the Leader of this Nation, should tell our people things which are not very near the truth.  Otherwise, when he is giving guidance on what he intends to do with this nation as is his right and duty and privilege, I think we will all be very grateful.  Let him stick to the truth and guide us in the light.  I thank you.

MR. ORYOKOT( Kapelebyong County, Katakwi):  Mr. Speaker, I thank you very much.  Mr. Speaker, allow me to comment on one or two items in the President's Address.  One of them is UPE.  

What we see reported by the President on the introduction of UPE is something I would call creative because for many years in this country, nobody has hatched that kind of idea.  We now find that the enrolment has tripled; we find that the society or the citizens are sensitised, they are now interested, they have now seen the value of education in this country.  This is all commendable but, Mr. Speaker, there are issues which are technical which His Excellency has addressed.  Perhaps if it were possible for His Excellency to come on the ground, he would see what is lacking and what may not make this project a success.  

We might find that children in the system will only complete the Primary School Education cycle without being able to compete with other children who are not in that system.  For example, he would find that the present teacher-pupil ratio is so bad;  it is one teacher to over 110 children. And now that the numbers have tripled, it could even be worse  for sure!  Why should we expose our children to this kind of treatment when none of the hon. Members in this House ever attended a class of more than 40 children per teacher?  

This is not only wrong, it is primitive, ruinous, and dangerous to the children of this country.  Why should it be encouraged? Why can't the technocrats - why do the Ministers in the Ministry of Education and the professionals in Makerere and the professors in ITEK address this issue?  Why can't the Ministry of Education allow Members of this society to not only contribute in the collection of building materials, but  also contribute in the actual running of the programmes in primary schools?  

It is unfortunate and I call it something funny  because we have professors, even in this House.  In this honourable House we have professors of education who have not insisted or shown us how we should run the programmes that affect us, instead of borrowing ideas from the World Bank.  The World Bank says one teacher to 110 pupils, then the professors and the teachers in this country and the Ministry of Education accept this hypnosis that one teacher to 110 is good!  I think this is a serious issue which should be addressed this particular Budgetary season because we have talked about it for the last three, four years but nobody pays attention because we must obey the masters and ruin our children!  

We must also take into account that today, the purpose of going to school, as it is understood by the people, is to get a job later on.  There is nobody who thinks children should just go to school to acquire literacy.  At our level and at the level of the President, yes, it is a genuine thinking but in the rural areas, the purpose of going to school is to acquire knowledge and get employment which UPE, if we are not careful, will not provide.  We must therefore see that we are not running a risk because we know and we believe that little knowledge is dangerous.  We are going to breed a generation of people who will, in future, think they were cheated because they were driven to a system which does not give them jobs and, therefore, they will easily be manipulated to carry guns against those who have provided a system which does not help them. Mr. Speaker, this should be looked at very seriously.  

There is a way out for this particular issue:  More teachers should be trained and the base of recruitment should be enlarged so that we have a teacher to a few children.  This should be done without closing colleges.  We cannot expand if we have many children at school, the base of recruiting teachers is narrow, the primary teachers' colleges are being closed. How far are we going? 

Secondly on the same issue, there were teachers' colleges which were specialist colleges but these were also closed.  One of them was Ngora BKC, the other one was Ggaba here and another one was Christ the King in Gulu.  These particular teachers' colleges were running specialist programmes.  Now, how are these programmes catered for?  We are now running after project propelled programmes, like TDMS?  

When the idea of TDMS came, I was a principal and the idea was not to close colleges but to make core PTCs which would be core in that they would send programmes to the other colleges so that training continues but the new arrivals in that Ministry have apparently taken over from where they do not know. This is very unfortunate. It is sickening because, talking about project propelled programmes, everybody seems to be running to projects.  You have TDMS, fine; what does it provide? Money, funds, diversions? Everybody is running there! You have cash bought motor-cycles and we think that is a better system now? No! (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Perhaps we should hear from the Minister; whether this is a new arrival, I do not know.

MRS. BITAMAZIRE: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to give my Colleague some information about what is going on regarding the implementation of the UPE in the country.  

First of all, I would like to inform him that during March this year, the Ministry of Education carried out what we call "a head count" of all the teachers, all the pupils and all the facilities available and the results indicate that at present, we have 6.5 million children in the primary sector and we have 94 thousand teachers in the same sector, managing the primary sector. Of course, a lot more information was brought forward regarding the facilities. 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to inform him and the rest of the House that we are using those statistics to work out the number of teachers we need and a ratio which might be manageable in the long run.  So, the process has already started and the ratio of teacher to pupil is being handled as a priority and very soon, we shall be overcoming that as a problem.

Regarding the closure of special colleges, well, the closure of PTCs is a long subject but I would like to say that the specialist subjects which he is referring to have been integrated into other normal teachers colleges.  Instead of having the specialised colleges, the programme has been integrated and the teachers coming out of the PTCs should be able to handle many of the specialised areas which were concentrated in one or two colleges. 

Probably finally, I should say we all know that UPE brought into schools more than 3 million children at ago but  we are working gradually to make sure that the situation is conducive and can enhance quality education in those schools.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Speaker, on the issue of TDMS replacing specialised teachers training colleges, the clarification I am seeking from the hon. Member who is still holding the Floor is that, the concept of TDMS was supposed to offer a management input to teachers' training so that they can manage schools properly rather than replacing TTCs because the role of TTCs has always been, and still is, to train teachers. So, the clarification I am seeking is; since TDMS have been introduced as a means to improve on the management skills of teachers, how would it then replace the TTCs  when actually the TTCs are very crucial and should be there to train teachers so that we continue to train, retrain and increase the number of trained teachers in our schools? Thank you.

MR. ORYOKOT: Mr. Speaker, first of all, I thank the Minister for the information she has given me, and I also would like to thank hon. Okumu Ringa for asking me to clarify.  Mr. Speaker, I did not say that TDMS is replacing teachers' colleges. I stated that when TDMS started, I was a principal, so I know exactly what it was supposed to do.  TDMS is supposed to train managers, the administrators and was to run alongside the pre-service programmes in the other teachers colleges.  So, it does not replace them.

I want to touch on one other area, the security or insecurity in places like Karamoja.  I am surprised to note that there is still a group of people in this country called warriors; warriors in Uganda?  You read in the papers that warriors have killed people in Karamoja, that they have killed the UPDF. Warriors in this country, Mr. Speaker, we still have warriors in this country? it is disappointing!   

In the President's Address, the President has been campaigning and telling people that they should grow high yield crops.  It is a good idea but I think I would recommend that government should have a definite and deliberate programme to help people grow these crops. Kawanda has done a good job; Kawanda has  done a lot of research, it is true, but how do we interpret this to the people if government does not have a deliberate programme?  What I mean by deliberate programme is that, government should take a particular area, like, if people are to grow mangoes, government should provide the mango seedlings  so that later on when they sell and they get money, then perhaps the statement that His Excellency made on the national cake might apply. But now, how does it apply? It does not!  

Last year towards the end when we were discussing a report on the economy of this country, we said that it was only coffee which was a perennial crop which was sustaining the economy of this country.  There are other crops which could do that if government had a particular definite system to help those areas develop this crop.  Without it, it is not possible. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Well, it seems I have a long list here but be assured that I have all those who intend to speak on my list and when I adjourn and we resume next week, I will definitely start with those on my list because now, since nobody stood up, I thought you were tired - (Interjection) - No, I have you on the list but it appeared you were tired because after he finished, nobody stood up.  But I have got you on the list here. Maybe the Clerk will adjust  -(Interjection) - Okay, the list is adjusted but I think it is a convenient time - (Interjections) - You still have energy? Okay, you have been listed. Now, it is the convenient time to adjourn the proceedings.  The House is adjourned until Tuesday, 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose and adjourned until Tuesday 20th July, 1999 at 2.00 p.m.)  
