Thursday, 19 July 2007

Parliament met at 2.53 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am happy to welcome you after a little break and I hope you have energy to transact the business ahead of us. I want to congratulate those who have been able to achieve one thing or the other. 

But I want to announce the sad news that occurred in your absence. After paying tribute to our fallen friend hon. Mugarra, the following day we lost a former colleague, hon. Edward K. Wesonga, who died in a motor accident along Kampala/Jinja road. It is very sad! He died abruptly. He was a popular Member of Parliament here, you all remember him. This happened during your absence and that is why I should announce it now. I think it is appropriate that we stand to observe a minute of silence.

(The Members stood and observed a minute of silence)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, today in the gallery, we have Mutundwe Parents Day and Boarding School, a nursery school of 86 pupils. You are welcome to your Parliament! Also, you may be seeing some strange faces here; we have Emotion Picture Productions supported by the Women Prisoners’ Support Organisation. They are making a documentary on justice in Uganda. Please, feel comfortable with them.

Honourable members, this morning, the Business Committee sat to decide on how to handle the business before us. As you know the tradition, during this time and sometime in June, Parliament handles two important businesses: one is to receive the State of the Nation Address, which is the constitutional address by the President, and the other is the budget, which is also supposed to be delivered by the President, but often delivered by the Minister of Finance.  

After those two, we normally have a debate on the State of the Nation Address and a debate on a motion for the House to resolve itself into a committee of supply. Up to date, we have not started debating these two important businesses, but we are due to start with the State of the Nation Address. 

The Business Committee, which sat this morning, decided that we shall start to debate the State of the Nation Address on Tuesday and this will take us four days: Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday. Because of this, it will require you, honourable members, who want to make contributions to this debate, to liaise with your whips (the Government Chief Whip, the Opposition Whip and the other whips) so that a list of those who are going to contribute is given to the Speaker to identify the various people who will contribute. That will be the procedure we shall follow. 

After that we shall have a break to enable the committees to consider the estimates. So, a committee will be able to sit morning and afternoon to deal with the estimates, call the technical staff and so forth. We expect all the committees to submit their reports by 14th August. The law requires us to complete the estimates by 31st August. 

So, after 14th August, we shall have a general debate on the motion moved by the Minister for Parliament to resolve itself into a committee of supply. This may take five or six days as the case may be. After that general debate, and agreeing to resolve ourselves into a committee of supply, we shall supply by using the various recommendations from the committee. 

We think this arrangement will help you to make meaningful contributions to the motion because you will use the information gathered by the committee to enrich your submissions and it will be faster too. We want to comply with the date for 31st July. That is the arrangement we have agreed on this morning. 

2.29
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of concern that affects the institution of Parliament. On the 11th of this month, we had one of our colleagues, hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire, Member of Parliament representing the people of Buyaga, arrested. I believe he was wrongly arrested, because he was duped and called upon by the Office of the Inspector General of Government that he had a letter, which he was to collect from her office. When he went there, he was arrested without due notification of your Office as it is the process under the Parliament Powers and Privileges Act Cap.258 of Uganda laws.  

He was arrested without the knowledge of Parliament, let alone your personal knowledge as the Speaker of Parliament. I know that in the last Parliament, we had colleagues like hon. Ocula and hon. Okumu Reagan arrested and serous charges were asserted against them. But the procedure adopted was that, they were summoned to report to Police through your Office. I think and I believe that many times, when Members of Parliament have any reasons for which Police requires explanation or a statement, then the agreed position is that such summons should be done through your Office. 

I am afraid this act, which took place on the 11th of this month, is already breaking, exposing and injuring the sanctity of the institution of Parliament. That means that we are all at a risk, and we can be arrested like chicken thieves without going through the due process of being summoned through your Office as is required by the law. 

So, that being the first of its kind, if Parliament does not come up to protect its image and assert itself on the provisions of the law, I am afraid that that may expose any one of us to such arbitrary arrests. I feel that Parliament as an institution needs to reform itself and even seek for explanation from government as to why this honourable member of Parliament was arrested in such a hastily manner. The scene, which was showed on Nation TV, was not good at all –(Interruption)

MR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Mr Speaker, I agree with him and I want to inform the House that I was the first person to be sent a message by hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire, when he was at the IGG’s Office. We were here paying tribute to our fallen colleague. When I went to the IGG’s Office, I learnt that hon. Tinkasiimire had been called on phone by that Office, and he was sitting on a bench in the corridor from around mid-day; I got there towards 6.00 p.m. All the while he was just sitting in the corridor on a very dirty bench. I found him taking water in a very dirty plastic cup. 

When I inquired whether summons had been sent through the Office of the Speaker, the arresting officer told me that the Sergeant-At-Arms had signed the summons. I rang the Deputy Speaker, and she denied knowledge of any summons. We also rang the Sergeant-at-Arms and he also denied knowledge of any summons. Later on in the night, I talked to the honourable Speaker, but he also did not know about it. 

So, when we inquired why he was seated in the corridors yet it was beyond 5.00 p.m. then that Office attempted to take him to the Central Police Station. I was joined by a number of colleagues and we were harassed at CPS. I am sure those who watched the television scenes saw it; we were being pushed not to enter the Central Police Station. He was kept there, and on the following day he was taken to Tororo at 5.00 a.m. and we took it as an adduction. But luckily, he was charged and has been released on bail through the Mbale High Court.

That is the information I wanted to give. But I want to say that when some of us visited him in Tororo, the media tried to intimidate us by calling us rebels. So, I want to urge the media not to intimidate Members of Parliament because an act of visiting a colleague in prison should not be interpreted as rebellion. Yesterday my seven-year-old son asked me whether I am related to Kony because the media has been writing that I am a rebel MP. So, I just wanted to use this chance to tell the media that they should be friendly and avoid intimidating Members of Parliament. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I was saying that we are not in any way condoning wrong actions by Members of Parliament. Members of Parliament are not above any laws in this country, but the most important thing is that there are procedures. If a Member of Parliament has committed an offence, or is a suspect, there are laid down procedures, which should be adhered to as much as possible. As I said earlier on, this exposes us. It is comparable to the story of the elephant and the camel who said, “Let me just push my nose in your house a bit. It is too cool.” Then he said, “Let me push in my arm” and at the end of the day, you may be pushed out of your own institution.

The point I am driving at is that, with such an act of defilement as it were done on the institution of Parliament, I am afraid worse things could be yet to come if we cannot pronounce ourselves and condemn the act and the manner in which the Office of the Inspector General of Government arrested this colleague. Much as we would wish to cooperate with all arms of law enforcement, let them also take cognisance of the laid down legal provisions, which are there to safeguard all institutions of governance in this country.

So, Mr Speaker, that is a matter that I think we need to pronounce ourselves on as an institution, and if possible, the minister responsible for the institution of the Office of the Inspector General of Government should come here and tell us why that Office decided to behave the way it did. Thank you Mr Speaker.

3.07
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I want to welcome back our colleagues who went for a lesson on how to make this country a better place – I hope I got it right.

Mr Speaker, in my opinion, the manner in which hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire was arrested is not an isolated incident, and should not be looked at as so. To me, it is an orgy of lawlessness that is the order of the day in Uganda today. “Orgy” is a strong word. It is an English word, which means indiscriminate behaviour, unrestrained behaviour, it means indiscriminate indulgence, and that is what I see happening in this country today.

When you look at the goings on in this country: the unrestrained repression of the opposition, land grabbing, incarceration of people who have been granted bail some have even got amnesty, the attack on courts, the incredible scandals in Pentecostal churches which many of us attend and are loyal supporters, the murder of innocent civilians by known men in militarily uniform – when I think about all this and the manner in which an MP was arrested and treated without following the known protocols, the word that sadly comes to me is an orgy of recklessness, ruthlessness, and lawlessness.

But what I hate most, Mr Speaker, is that Parliament has turned into a group of salary earners because we come here and mourn and participate in the orgies and at the end of the day we earn our salaries. Some people came here with a lot of zeal, but lost it quickly.

But to go back to the main point, I want to emphasise that what happened to hon. Tinkasiimire is not an isolated incident; it was an incident of total contempt of the laws and regulations of this country. More importantly, they are unrestrained. I wish somebody could stand and restrain them.

Mr Speaker, as I wind up, we need to redeem the image of this House, and the onus is on the majority party. Because, when the opposition raises issues, it is quickly politicised and the House and the whole country are polarised and it becomes opposition verses ruling party and there the matter rests, and the status quo gets worse and worse. 

About ten months ago, Mr Speaker, I brought a motion here to look into matters of human rights abuse, matters of abduction, matters of disappearances of people, it was shot down. Ten months later, hon. Frank Tumwebaze sat there and stood on a matter of national importance and mourned that his constituent had disappeared and he called upon strongly the Minister of Internal Affairs to make a statement and find that man. I looked at hon. Tumwebaze, and I remembered him shooting down the motion to investigate the matter of human rights, and I felt sad. (Laughter) It is not a laughing matter. I did not laugh at all, Mr Speaker, it is terrible. What we do not know, one day it is someone else, but another day it is us. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: This matter, which was on the Floor was by hon. Wadri. It was the concern about the manner of arresting of hon. Tinkasiimire, but now many other issues apparently are cropping up. Did you stand to make a contribution on what was raised by hon. Wadri? It was not a protest of arrest but the manner of arrest, which I thought may not attract much debate. What we can do is to get in touch with the appropriate authorities to explain the procedure that we use. In the past we had agreed with the Police as to how to do it and they are doing it. Whenever they want a Member of Parliament to make a statement or this and the other, this communication is channelled through the Office of the Speaker who advises the Member concerned to go and report. But now this is a new authority of the IGG, as you said. Let us express our concern and agree in future as to how this is going to be done so that the matter it taken. But if you had another issue yes, but I saw other things coming in –(Interruption)

MS KAMYA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I am winding up, but I brought that because tomorrow somebody important here could be arrested and then we do not need another session like this one. That is why we have to talk about the entire concept of lawlessness in this country. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I will take it up with the IGG.

3.14
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance, regarding the field in which I serve as shadow minister of internal affairs. 

Three weeks ago, I did participate in an exercise that was aimed at weeding different items that come as used items in the markets that were quite similar to military uniforms. So, I convinced the people in Makindye West to resist from using such items as they were contradicting the law inadvertently. They succumbed to that idea and the exercise was pretty nice all the way through. 

I have been surprised last week Members of the opposite side of the House went for a retreat which included an ingredient of military training, to which I have no objection, Mr Speaker. I discovered a morning later that they were overwhelmingly - I think almost all of them - dressed in military uniforms which I thought contradicted the Constitution, the Leadership Code and the UPDF Act as the laws are laid down.

I stand here, Mr Speaker, to seek clarification from the relevant minister on how to use military uniforms without necessarily becoming a military personnel –(Laughter)

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much my colleague for giving way. Mr Speaker, I want to inform my colleagues here that this is not the first time that we experience non-military people going to Kyankwanzi clad in military uniform and undergoing some sort of military training. Some nearly two months ago, sub-county chiefs who are actually civil servants around the entire country were summoned to Kyankwanzi. While in Kyankwanzi, where they took about one month, they were given military uniform. These ladies and gentlemen returned to their stations after that course in military uniform. They have continued to perform their duties as sub-county chiefs in their stations in military uniform. I raised this matter with the chief of defence forces during a meeting of all Teso leaders in Soroti about three weeks ago. In response he said, “Let the sub-county chiefs dress in the military uniform. Do not disturb them.” 

Mr Speaker, I thought this information could be very vital to hon. Kyanjo’s submission because it does not seem to be limited to only Members of Parliament, who did undergo the course for which generally we are happy because I see the potbellies have gone down a little, but it extends beyond just the Members of Parliament. 

Also, I would like to inform the House that military uniform are restricted items and not any wanainchi is allowed to be in possession of them. I will cite incidents in my own constituency where members have been found in possession of military uniform and they have been tortured and imprisoned. These are military uniforms coming from bales of mivumba or second hand clothes. So, I think the matter being raised is a very important matter and I thought I should chip in and give this piece of information. Again thank you my dear colleague for giving me the opportunity. 

MS ALASO: Further information.

THE SPEAKER: No, I think he wanted clarification under what circumstances people going to Kyankwanzi are greened. I think let us get the clarification; that will be enough.

MS MARIAM NALUBEGA: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the honourable member that the people who were putting on the uniforms were entitled. The spokesperson of the Army Col. Kurayigye explained that they did not want the Members to tear their clothes and more so, this is an arm of government, which is entitled to such privilege. I think even the opposition can go to Kyankwanzi and they can put on military uniform. Thank you.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I would like to add this to the number of things the honourable minister will come and tell us. I also saw my colleagues, hon. Elly Tumwine and hon. Sarah Mpabwa, representatives of the UPDF. I had all along known that they are not Members of the NRM party and that is what was explained to us in this House. But I saw them taking part in a retreat of the NRM party. I would like to know under which circumstances our Army, the UPDF, crossed to join the NRM party. Will that explanation be provided to us? (Laughter) Thank you

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, I thank colleagues for the information and hon. Nalubega for that specific information. I would also like to counter-inform her that I had the explanation by Gen. Kurayigye but I thought it was less professional. This is the reason I decided to come and get a more accurate legal clarification from the relevant minister.

Mr Speaker, there is also another fear from the general public that on coming to this House, the agreement was that we were coming into a civilian Parliament. It now looked to the public like the opposite side had turned into a military junta now debating with a civilian party this side. (Laughter) All these are matters that really need accurate explanation so that we have the comfort of explaining to our constituents when we go back home. 

The bother I am having right now in my constituency is that, people are now demanding for some items we removed from them including bed sheets which had the word “army”. So, we removed them and now they are saying, “We are poor people. We wanted these items for genuine use. Now if it is open, let us go back and wear our uniforms in Kisenyi, Katwe and wherever else.” Mr Speaker, it is going to be hell in this city and all around the country. So, I would like to be clarified together with the whole country on the circumstances under which Members of Parliament were either conscripted in the army or given uniforms inadvertently against the law. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think the Leader of Government Business can give clarification on this.

3.23
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/ MINISTER IN CHARGE OF THE EAST AFRICAN AFFAIRS (Mr Eriya Kategaya): Mr Speaker, first of all, on the question of the manner in which hon. Tinkasiimire was arrested, if the rules were not followed, your Office can summon whoever did that to give an explanation on behalf of the House. I do not see any problem with that. If the procedure is that your Office should be informed so that you can inform the Member of Parliament to report to the Police and if this was not followed, I think the person who is alleged to have done so should be summoned to come and give an explanation on behalf of the House through your Office.

On the second one, first of all, I would like the Members to help me on whether any green cloth qualifies to be a uniform. I do not know whether what was being worn by Members in Kyankwanzi can be described as -(Laughter)- I am asking a simple question. [Members: “Information”]. No, I do not need it. That is the first question that we should clarify.
 
Secondly, military training under Article 17 (2) of the Constitution is a duty for any Ugandan. (Applause) It is a duty of every Ugandan to be trained. It would be wrong if training is not given to all. The Members of the NRM party also got military drills during the retreat. I do not think it is called training. You cannot train in one week. It is just a drill.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Rt hon. Prime Minister, for accepting this clarification. I know not any green attire constitutes a uniform. There must be an emblem of the country on that piece of cloth so that it is UPDF’s property. However, what is of concern to us is that these are government stores, bought by the taxpayers’ money, issued out to individuals by the commandant of Kyankwanzi. Kyankwanzi gets money through this Parliament. [Hon.Members: “No.”]. We vote money and we appropriate money for Kyankwanzi through this institution! Now that these uniforms were given out and not only used for training and left there but also some of my colleagues have even walked with them home, how do you account for that in stores management? These are the questions, which we will be very grateful if the Prime Minister could clarify them to us.

MR KATEGAYA: That is an argument and not a clarification. As I said, the retreat involved military drills. Training is really a big word. You do not train in a week. There was a drill. They had some weapon handling and you cannot do that in a suit like mine. It will be impractical that you should go to do rolling in the field in a suit or in a T-shirt. Practically, I think I do not see any problem about them having clothes which looked like military uniforms for the purpose of carrying out their military drills.

The presence of Gen. Tumwine and company, they were invited as resource persons - (laughter) - by the commandant of the school. I am sure if next time the opposition wants to have an appearance in Kyankwanzi, equally the commandant may call upon Gen. Tumwine to come and give you some lectures on this thing. So, as far as I am concerned, this is a non-issue, in a sense that Members were seen in green clothes. I am sure we are not going to see them parading around in these uniforms. It is really not a big issue as far as I am concerned.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, thank you. I am concerned about the way the Rt hon. Prime Minister is proceeding. Really, our concern is that these are military uniforms. To go around and around saying the green pieces of clothes are this and that - Members of Parliament came here yesterday dressed in those uniforms. These things had the emblems here on the shoulder. That clearly showed that these were uniforms of the UPDF. 

I would like the Rt hon. Prime Minister to tell Ugandans whether he is just denying it or tell us something straight but not to meander around when we actually know there is serious militarisation of this country. People are being armed left and right; the number of ammunitions out there is alarming; the rate of intimidation when everybody puts on uniform, the public is terror struck, and then the whole Rt hon. Prime Minister comes to the House to tell us that these are simple green pieces of cloth.
 
Mr Speaker, our lives are in the hands of an elected government and that is the government that the Prime Minister represents. He should at least be able to assure us. 

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, I want to get the Prime Minister right. I am an adult and a Member of Parliament representing a city constituency. I am seeking clarification to the effect that it is no problem putting on a uniform similar in colour and decoration to the one that they put on at Kyankwanzi. I will go to Katwe and to Munyonyo and tell my people that this is a legal outfit in the whole of Uganda and nobody will be arrested and taken to prison. Honourable Prime Minister, stretch further and be more serious. 

MR GUMA: Mr Speaker, I was in Kyankwanzi and I returned yesterday. Last evening, I picked this information from some people that there was apprehension by some colleagues in the country especially Members of Parliament, and that they had the concerned MPs putting on military uniform. So, this morning, I rang someone in Bombo - I am a retired military officer - I got concerned because I could not also remember. So, I rang some one very senior officer in Bombo and he said that the uniform that we wore at Kyankwanzi is not a UPDF uniform. Then I asked him if he was sure and he said, “Yes, Guma, have you now forgotten after retiring from the Army?” Then he said, “Look around and tell me of any UPDF officer or man who is putting on this uniform.”

Hon. Amuriat said that it is a uniform for local defence, and as the honourable Prime Minister has said, anybody can train for self-defence and for military training, a training passed on from the military people. So, it is not a UPDF uniform as some people are insisting. 

MR KATEGAYA: Mr Speaker, first of all, I do not share the so-called fears of hon. Alaso, who said that the lives of the people of Uganda are in danger because of a uniform. It is the other way round that this uniform brought about otherwise, Members would not be sitting here. I do not think anybody is in danger in this country when he sees a uniform; it is not the same way as before. I am also a citizen of this country. People can see the uniforms but they do not get scared as if their lives are in danger. Nevertheless, just to bring this non-issue to a happy conclusion, I am going to ask the Minister of Defence to clarify on what a UPDF uniform is and what it is not and I will bring the answer to the House, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: So, we will get a detailed statement explaining the circumstances of acquiring the attire. We will get that statement next week and that will complete the subject. 

3.36
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise here on a point that concerns all of us in Parliament as an institution. This is the issue that concerns our welfare - the medical insurance. In the last one-year, we have faced problems under the scheme. Last week, when we had the unfortunate incident where we lost our colleague, hon. Adolf Mwesige did allude to some extent to what he went through at the International Hospital, Kampala. However, prior to that, we have had problems. Hon. Kubeketerya had his mother admitted at the International Hospital, Kampala and we thought it was all covered under the insurance scheme that we had, but his mother was held at the hospital and hon. Kubeketerya was asked to pay Shs 8.0 million. Much earlier than that, you all know that hon. Otada went to South Africa for medical treatment and we thank the Parliament for the assistance it advanced to him, but what happened to our insurance scheme? 

All these were supposed to be covered. Hon. Otada did not get the facility he was entitled to under the scheme from the International Hospital, Kampala. My mother was denied health services at the International Hospital, Kampala. My appeal to you, Mr Speaker and the commission at large is that, can we have a better medical insurance deal to cover these problems in this financial year, such that we do not fall into these problems again? We do not want a situation where we shall end up running to the Clerk, running to you and to the medical board for assistance. When they came in here, they told us that all this must be covered. I must really ask your Office to help us in this financial year. Before we release our money to these medical insurance companies, let us have a better deal. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Actually, when the honourable minister spoke last time, he was in doubt about the facilities. What we will do is to get the details. What facility do you expect under that insurance cover so that Members can know what to expect? Maybe they expect more than what can be given under the other. So, you will get the details.

3.39
MR MOSES KABUUSU (Independent, Kyamuswa, Kalangala): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I represent the fishing community and my constituency is only to do with fishing. There are a lot more circumstances that the fishermen would not share, the same way it is with the main land. I rise to raise a matter of concern from the fishing community and there are two brief issues: The first one is about CHOGM. State agencies have traversed along water bodies scaring the fishermen that there will not be any fishing activities during the CHOGM week. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I have been to my constituency but I have had no answer about that. I raised the head of security in the district (the RDC) and he was not aware of it. I tried all means to find out why it would be the fishermen. How does CHOGM directly affect fishing? These are poor people; they are peasants. 

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you ask whether it is true that during the CHOGM week there will be no such activity, so that you get the information?

MR KABUUSU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is it true that during the CHOGM week there will not be fishing along the water bodies of Lake Victoria? (Laughter)

The other issue is about taxation. I am aware that Parliament has not discussed the Budget Speech as it was read by the Minister of Finance. However, in that speech, the Minister abolished road licence taxation. I do not know whether he forgot to abolish licences that share the same spirit like the road licences. 

There is a tax called Water Vessel Licence, and this is levied from every water vessel that goes fishing or sailing on water. These vessels are motorised; they have out-board engines and they use fuel for that purpose. The fishermen want to know, is it true that in the speech the Minister also abolished the Water Vessel Licence? Should the local governments and the relevant authorities stop collecting that tax? They are aggressively collecting it; possibly it is a pre-emptive measure and they are aware that the tax will be abolished, but should we go and tell them to stop paying this tax? Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MAJ. (RTD) Rwamirama: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was with hon. Kabuusu just a week ago in his constituency and we toured the island together. But as far as I am concerned, the Ministry of Agriculture is not informed of any ban on fishing on Lake Victoria.

 The issue of vessels: As we interacted with the Local Government in Kalangala District, they raised some of their concerns and I promised that I would take them to Cabinet and also discuss the issue of the ferry. I have since then contacted the Minister of Finance and when we discuss the Budget Speech and the Tax Bill, it will be communicated. I thank you, very much. 

3.44
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Masindi): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I represent the disaster-landless community of Buliisa; I represent the peasantry who are being denied their communal rights on their customary land. I also have a police summon here from the Police through the Office of The Speaker, for incitement of violence and civil disobedience. I have no problem with the summon; I have arranged when to meet them. 

However, my problem is, one, in my maiden speech in Parliament, I reported to the Police of Uganda through this House that for close to two years in Buliisa, there was criminality of land grabbing and the Police had not done any detection or crime prevention. To my surprise, after one year and one month, I am being summoned for incitement of violence and civil disobedience. My concern is: Does the Police still do crime prevention and detection? Does it take three years because for the last three years no single person has been-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think in respect of that particular subject for which you have been summoned, I would rather advise that you just go and find out why they want you. No, I know what is there and when you start debating it here, it may prejudice you. Otherwise, Parliament here will not say, “Do not go.” We shall not be able to do that. So, you should go and handle it and we shall deal with it later.

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I thank you so much. My position is very clear and I have already agreed with them on when to go there and I have no problem with going there anyway, because this is part of the occupational hazards for representing the weak. (Laughter) My concern is still, one, that there has been forgery of land acquisition in Buliisa for the last two and half years and nobody has been arrested. I have read in the papers there are about 30,000 cows in Buliisa without a movement permit and nobody has been arrested. I am raising the issue of crime detection and crime prevention, which I think according to the law, is the role of the Police. Why have the Police not done this? Of course I am going to meet them but I would like to request police – I was assaulted and no body was arrested or summoned. 

The lawyer of the Balaalo has been inciting violence on radio and in rallies and nobody has been summoned or arrested. The person defending the weak is the one being summoned when they have not actually done their part in crime detection and prevention for the last three years. So, my concern is that next time round –I have no problem with summons because mine has come duly through the Office of The Speaker – let the police do their work instead of blaming somebody. I am a one-year old MP in a three-year old crisis and they did not detect and prevent the crime and I am to blame. I think that is unfair to the people I represent. 

MS KAMYA: I would like to inform the House and the members, as the Minister prepares to answer the issue raised by hon. Mukitale, that time and again, I have come here and informed this House that people were murdered in cold blood, one and a half years ago in Mengo. The suspected murderer, one Lt Magara, is in my constituency walking freely, wearing Army uniform. The Army has denied him and the people are upset yet we have raised these matters. If people take the law in their hands, will the police summon their representatives to go and answer charges of incitement? 

I took the man that was shot, one Haruna Byamukama to the Human Rights Commission and he said in his own words that “I am terrified.” Both Magara and Haruna Byamukama live in Nakulabye and Haruna knows that he is the living key witness to the murder. He came and told me that he is terrified because the man was given a bail and he lives in the neighbouring village.  I brought it here but nobody did anything. He is in a wheel chair and he is vulnerable. I took him to the Human Rights Commission and he said so in his own words that he was terrified; the man who shot him lives in the village next door and the case is still on. Honourable Minister of Internal Affairs, we need to know whether the Police have the capacity to investigate and to prevent crime. Thank you.

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I want to rest my case by appealing to the organs concerned  –(Interruption)

MS MPAIRWE: I would like to inform the House and the honourable members that even in 2005 a Mulaalo was killed and a Mugungu was killed but when a Mulaalo was killed the suspects were arrested and up to now those people have never been produced in court. When a Mugungu died there was nothing done. Is Police really fair?  So, the thing started long time ago and right now there are some Bagungu who are still being arrested and most of them have even run away from their homes.

MR KAWUMA:  Thank you my colleague for giving way 

THE SPEAKER: Are we now having a general debate? The report was on Buliisa. Are you reporting on Buliisa?

MR KAWUMA: Mr Speaker, thank you very much for giving us this chance. I would like to inform this august House that the impunity and the injustice in Buliisa for the last three years need very urgent attention.  I thank you so much.   

3.52
MR BEN WACHA (Independent, Oyam County North, Oyam): Thank you, Sir. I rise on a matter, which I feel is of concern. Today in The Daily Monitor Newspaper, on page 3, there is a terrifying story that is headlined, “Lecturer Survives Butabika Injection.”  According to this paper, an advocate of the High Court of Uganda, who is also a lecturer at Mukono University, was hijacked by policemen from his home and forcibly driven to Butabika with the intention that he should be forcefully admitted in this mental institution. (Laughter) This is not a laughing matter it is here and it is supposed to have been done by two police patrol vehicles manned by police officers. The individual in question was nowhere near to being mentally sick. Somebody tried to get him admitted in a mental facility.  

Mr Speaker, in Communist Soviet Union, the issue of forcefully admitting sane individuals in mental institutions was widespread. It was used by government to put aside people whom they thought were against them and then eventually it was used by individuals to put people away.  Once in a mental institution, it is very difficult for anybody to come out. 

Now, I want to know who were behind this horrific action? Who are the people who try to get people who are sane, certified insane, without a certified certificate from an authority that is supposed to do so?  And why, of all things, does the police get itself involved in this? The story states that there are some senior police officers who were against this young man. Have the police become so debased? What sort of system are we running? (Applause) Can the minister in charge of the Police tell me? It seems everything is going round the police. What is the problem? Are the Police a law unto themselves now?  Are we having some terrorist organisation which is running the Police? Mr Speaker, this is horrible.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ben Wacha, I think this should be in form of a question as to whether the story in the Monitor newspaper on this incident is true, and would the minister explain why, if it what happened is true?  I think that is the way he can handle it, because maybe the story is not true and so the best way is for the minister to confirm or deny.

MR WACHA: I thank you, Sir, for your advice. However, knowing our ministers, when you ask a question it takes three years before it is answered and the urgency of the matter will have been eroded.

THE SPEAKER: So, what I would say is that by Wednesday, please come with a statement on this particular story after you get the information.

3.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, with due respect to my brother Ben Wacha, I should have asked him to withdraw the statement that ministers are asked questions and it takes three or four months or three years before they are answered.  As far as I am aware, Sir, I have been in this House and I have been a minister for –(Interjection)

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, we are very privileged that you are one person who has been in that chair for a long time. I do not want to say that it is in your knowledge but I want to say that it is common knowledge in this House that ministers take years, maybe they never even answer questions at all which are put to them. There is evidence everywhere.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we should limit this to this one. The story is in the paper about this incident and I am saying that in order to prevent delay in answering on Wednesday, he will be coming with a statement to confirm or deny what is in the paper.

MR KASAIJA:  Mr Speaker, I oblige. On Wednesday I should be able to do the needful.  But, may I take this opportunity to respond because a few things have been raised about the police especially in relation to Buliisa and Magara and I do not know whether, Mr Speaker, you will allow me-

THE SPEAKER: That one you can.

MR KASAIJA: Thank you, Sir.  On the question of Buliisa, people have been arrested while others have not been arrested.  Before we came here I did have a word with hon. Mukitale that I will undertake to find out who are the people that are supposed to have committed crime and yet have not been apprehended. Before the police can be able to move on any suspect, if that suspect has not been seen by the police themselves, the citizen who has been injured or who has been wronged, should go to a Police Station and make a report so that we can get a reference number of the case. It is only when we have received that information that investigations can be done and the suspect is arrested. That is the point on Buliisa and I want to leave it that way for the time being. 

On the question of Magara, the suspected murderer of a Ugandan at Bulange- was it last year? Yeah. As far as I am concerned, Magara was released on bail by a court order. We in charge of the Police cannot go against a legal instrument that has been issued by a competent court. If there is anybody who has got a complaint then he or she should go to the court. As far as I am concerned, Magara is out of jail because he was bailed out and the case is still proceeding. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The issue was, why is it taking so long to prosecute such a person? I think that you may have to investigate why it is taking so long. 

4.01
MR JOSEPH BALIKUDDEMBE (DP, Busiro County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is unfortunate that the minister has walked out. I wanted to add to what the honourable member of Kyamuswa had to say. Whereas we are getting prepared for the CHOGM meeting that will take place in November this year, my people in the islands are facing a similar problem. I may not dwell too much on that but I wanted to bring it to the attention of the honourable minister that in the islands of Busi, Zzinga and Kabenyana we are facing the same problem. The fishermen are held in custody because of this CHOGM meeting. 

There is also another problem of taxation. People are taxed very heavily and they are taxed thrice: When they start fishing they are taxed at the landing site, they are also taxed when they are using the vessels to get to the markets and they are taxed when they get to the market. This is a very big problem for our people in those areas. 

And in addition to that, Mr Speaker, regarding Busiro South and the road users of Entebbe road, I had another question I wanted to get some clarity on from the hon. Minister of Works and Transport, hon. Nasasira. We are having a very big problem regarding the road from Kawuku to Entebbe Municipality. The road is in such a bad shape that in a week we bury about three or four people. There are around five accidents on that road and yet that is a motorway that is used by both the visitors coming into the country and we the Ugandans going to and from the airport. This situation is causing us a horrifying problem. I wanted to know from the honourable minister, regarding the motorway, what are we supposed to do? Are our people supposed to get due notice on whether that road is going to be- because now we are using 12 feet of the roadside, that means two vehicles from Kampala and from Entebbe are using 12 feet of the roadside? Is this normal really? As the road users, should we carry on just like that? I believe we are in such shambles and we need an answer from the minister.

THE SPEAKER: I think there is nothing that can be done other than appealing to the contractors to expedite the work. If they have started on the work, I think what you need is speed so that the road is completed. Otherwise, are they going to stop it? Would you like them to stop? No, you do not want them to stop. You want them to put in more- yes! 
But honourable members we have been on this subject, which came as a result of communication and now it is 4 o’clock. I allowed it because the major debate of the State of the Nation Address was not going to take place but I think this is too much. Perhaps tomorrow we shall consider other matters of public importance. 

MR KAWUMA: Mr Speaker, I wanted to make a small supplement to this subject.

THE SPEAKER: No. My advice is that we ask the Minister of Works to ensure that the contractors put in more effort to complete the work. Otherwise, we cannot ask them not to carry on with the work. The work has to be carried out. You see when these works are carried out there is some inconvenience. They make diversions and so forth but this time they are not making diversions; they just want you to be considerate and use half of the road. However, if they increase their speed, then the inconvenience will go away.

MR KAWUMA: Mr Speaker it is not about completion of the work. It is much more than that. 

THE SPEAKER: Yeah. Yours I saw on TV where you showed that some tarmac is not there.  I saw it on WBS. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Now, I am making an adjustment to the Order Paper to allow the Chairperson of the Committee on the Economy to table a report, which will be useful to the committees when they are considering the budget. Hon. Kaddunabbi.

LAYING OF PAPERS

4.07
MR IBRAHIM KADUNABBI (NRM, Butambala County, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Committee on National Economy is making its third quarter report of the financial year 2006/2007, to help members internalise and make an input when they are debating the budget. 

Briefly, Mr Speaker, I want to say that the government budget objectives as highlighted in the Budget Speech in 2006/2007 were stimulation of economic growth and development and provision of basic goods and services to promote and maintain macro-economic stability. We note that the key traditional economic goals for any economy are: High level of employment with price stability, satisfactory rate of growth, efficiency in resource use and equity in the distribution of income. 

In this report we evaluate the economic performance against the budget and traditional economic objectives with the aim of coming up with the key policy issues and policy recommendations to the Executive. The developments of the various economic indicators from quarter one to quarter three suggest that the Ugandan economy will tend to grow during the remaining quarter.

Increase in exports, investments and consumption have helped the economy to recover from its slow growth, last fiscal year. However, the largest driver of the current economic growth is consumption rather than investments or exports. Consumption expenditure, which is mainly recurrent in nature, explains 95.8 percent of the GDP in the year 2006/2007. 

THE SPEAKER: Are you reading the report? I thought you are just -

MR KADUNABBI: No, I am just reading a one-page summary. This is not celebrated growth because the structure points a bleak future. This is because countries that have developed have had to produce capital goods and cut back on production of consumer goods. Reorienting the economy requires changing the economic structure with policies clearly based towards investment.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, this may be painful at the beginning because it may make some social economic groups to suffer but the strategy will bring a better future for even the affected groups.

We also observed that the economy experienced inflationary pressures during the reporting period. Inflation was widespread across all consumer categories, which severely eroded people’s welfare. Protecting people’s welfare is considered an important function of government. This may not necessarily require giving out free handouts but using tax policy measures to favour those commodities where the impact was severe.

In terms of resources, revenue performance showed some improvement and a budget balance, including donor grants, showed a surplus. However, government presence in the credit market continues as reflected in the commercial bank financing of the budget amounting to Shs7.4 billion. This is a contributory factor in the sustenance of high interest rates with ultimate negative impact on private investments. 

It is also important to note that government continues to meet Treasury Bills issued by an independent Central Bank, and arising from this domestic interest, payments continue to overburden the national budget.

In this year’s Budget Speech, appreciation of the exchange rate has been welcomed as a sign of confidence in the Ugandan economy. The strengthening of the Shilling against the United States Dollar has to be considered with two sides. On one hand, if the strengthening of the Shilling is a sign of real economic recovery, and if it is a permanent one, then it is a welcome development. However, if a seasonal situation is depicted as permanent, then this can be damaging to our economy. This is because expectations of economic actors are formulated depending on how they view the situation. Besides, the strengthening of the Shilling against the United States Dollar is likely to undermine Uganda’s export competitiveness. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the economy continues to be affected by the power tariffs and power shortages. This is a serious problem given the impact of power cuts across all the production sectors of our economy. In the first quarter report of 2006/07, the contributing factors had been identified as arrears, particularly that government owed to the power distributor. We need to reiterate that government considers this as a serious cost affecting all social economic groups.

In the external sector, improvement in the balance of payments is noted but the trade balance continues to suffer due to inadequate exports. The imports continue to increase in excess of exports thereby affecting the external sector position. 

Sustaining the external sector position through borrowing exposes the economy to future external shocks particularly threats of declining income and change in priorities in donor countries.

Finally, Mr Speaker and honourable members, Uganda’s population continues to grow at 3.2 percent per annum and if government does not make a strategic intervention to harness it, the economy is likely to suffer rather than benefit. In addition, unemployment is recorded at 1.9 percent, which is another threat to future economic growth. 

I now have the honour to lay on Table a full report, which I would request members to read. I know it will be helpful during their deliberations in the Budget Speech. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I hope members have got the copies. Please, peruse through so that you can use it in future.

MR KADUNABBI: I would also like to lay on Table, Mr Speaker, minutes of the Committee on National Economy when we were considering this report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Maybe we should go to the next item. There is a Member who had booked to raise a matter, unfortunately when she stood up she dealt with other issues that were not of her concern; now she says she has a burning issue. Let me allow hon. Alaso just two minutes to raise her issues - but many times you stood up and you have joined other battles. 

4.16
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC Woman Representative Soroti): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I was actually getting very disappointed because you had always said that we come to you and tell you –

THE SPEAKER: Yes, but you stood many times and you were contributing on other issues rather than your own.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, you know when you just grab the microphone- that is not really what we mean to say- but you had communicated about the death of hon. Wesonga and we did observe a moment of silence in the House. I also attended the burial of hon. Wesonga but I thought that our tribute to hon. Wesonga would be incomplete if we do not mention the question of road accidents in this country. 

The carnage on the roads is so bad, particularly Jinja road. I use that road almost every week and there is no day you pass that road and you do not find an accident: a trailer fallen by the wayside, vehicles that have collided, cars that have veered off the road. It is such a bad road. Every time you use that road, the fear of death hangs round you, and it does not occur to you as though it is something far. At least we can mention hon. Wesonga because he was a member of this House, a prominent person in this nation, but there are people who are dying everyday on that road. The works on that road do not seem to get complete. Year in and year out, it is now three years and that road is in that same state, getting bad every other time.

Traffic regulation enforcement on Uganda’s roads just seems not to be done. People still do drink-driving on our roads; people still drive while talking on phone. You find trailers on the roads moving at night. Somehow I get the impression that they should be parked, but that is not the case. 

Recently, my colleague, hon. Acen Rhoda, was involved in an accident on that road. The day we buried hon. Dr Okulo Epak, when his body was here, I was at home mourning my cousin who died on that road. The other day hon. Ekemu was involved in an accident on one of our roads; hon. Tolit got involved in an accident too. Everyday people are dying of road accidents; the road carnage in this country is rated to be among the worst in Africa and I think the worst in the world. So, why don’t we pay more attention? 

I would like to see the responsible ministers tell us when these works will be completed because there is an extension every time. But that aside, we do not seem to see the question of enforcing order on our roads being done. The Police who are on the roads seem to be compromised, their priorities look a little different and so everyday we come here; we observe a moment of silence. The other day government sent Shs2 million to bury my honourable friend. There are Ugandans whom we cannot even ever get to know their names but they also died. There are businesses that have been destroyed on those roads – a trailer burns up with some fuel while carrying coca-cola – everyday somebody is suffering the impact of accidents on our roads. I would like to appeal to government to prioritise the question of road safety. That is my appeal, Mr Speaker. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: What we shall do is to ask the Committee on Infrastructure, hon. Byanyima, to take up this matter with the ministry concerned so that we minimise these accidents on our roads. 

4.20
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much for this opportunity, and I wish to thank my colleague, hon. Alaso, for raising this matter. 

I have sat on the Committee on Infrastructure, and at one time on the Committee on Works, Housing and Communication for six years now. This is my seventh year. Every year we interact with the ministry officials and we always raise the matter of road safety; it is not a new matter. Following the carnage on our roads and the loss of life and property, the issue of road safety has been raised over the years. Every time we raise this matter, the ministry of works always says it will pay attention to road safety. 

There seems to be a problem with what the ministry of works is doing and what the enforcers of the law on the roads should be doing, and I think this is not only a matter of ministry of works, it is also a matter of the Ministry of Internal Affairs because the Ministry of Internal Affairs is charged with the responsibility of enforcing order on the roads not the ministry of works. 

With that said, I think there is also a problem in the ministry of works that needs to be addressed. This is to do with facilitation to the Road Safety Council, and those departments that are responsible for ensuring safety on the roads. I know that having interacted with my colleague, the line minister, there are some improvements that are being done on the Kampala-Entebbe road to try and eliminate blind spots. This is also happening on the Kampala-Jinja road but that has been observed, these works are moving at a snail pace and this causes us more pain. 

Mr Speaker, while presenting the opposition critique to the policy statement last financial year, I did make a deliberate proposal that a policy be put in place to stop trailers or heavy trucks beyond a certain axle load from travelling between dusk and dawn. This was ignored. Government even did not have the courtesy to say a word related to this, and we have seen carnage after carnage happening on our roads. I think this is an opportunity, even as we prepare our critique to the policy statement, for me to appeal to honourable members of this House, especially our friends on the other side of the House, since they have the voting power, to assist us reduce deaths on these roads by accepting some of the proposals that we are going to make. 

Mr Speaker, you have referred this matter to the relevant committee but, Sir, this committee has done its work year in and year out and yet the line ministry has either done very little or not paid attention to what is happening on our roads in as far as safety is concerned. So, I do not know whether it would be necessary to have a special committee to particularly deal with this matter because it goes beyond the mandate of the ministry of works as I have said. (Interjection)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank my colleague for giving way. I have been listening well to the honourable member holding the Floor and you refer to this side saying that our colleagues on the other side have the voting power. I am seeking clarification on grounds that I thought he would be imploring the entire House, this side as well, to consider the matter, think appropriately and take action accordingly. 

The clarification I am seeking from hon. Amuriat is that did you imply that we only have voting power or you are appealing to our understanding and consideration to take up the matter. I thank you. (Laughter)

MR WAMBUZI: Mr Speaker, I was listening to the colleague, Eng. Hon. Patrick Oboi, on the issue of filtering heavy vehicles to move only during the night and light vehicles to move only during the day. The honourable member knows that already vehicles are delaying to deliver commodities to Uganda from Mombasa. Therefore, if you say they should move only during the night, that means we are going to double the cost of haulage indirectly. 

I would like the hon. Member of Parliament, and of course a registered Engineer, to clarify to this House whether this type of filtering or choosing that heavy vehicles should only move during the night and the light ones during the day - where in the world is this being practiced? And whether it will not hurt this economy further. The economy is already delicate.

THE SPEAKER: I think what he has in mind is that during the military regime of Iddi Amin, he had that policy where heavy vehicles were not allowed to move especially at night, and I think it had an impact of reducing accidents. I think that is the idea he had. You are considering trade but he is considering life. (Laughter) 

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, you have said it all. Whereas I appreciate the concern of the hon. minister of government on matters of trade, I think lives are more important than business. Also, when considering the delays, if there are anticipated delays, I think people involved in transportation of goods could start early knowing that it would take a little bit longer for cargo to come from the coast to Kampala.

On the matter raised by my friend, hon. Ssekikubo, and I think this is something that is really obvious. My experience in this House is that persuasion is one thing, which is entirely different from acceptance or taking a decision. I know that I referred to numbers because if it is decided by our friends in the Movement that such a policy should not pass in this House, regardless of the good arguments, come rain, come sunshine, it will not pass. You know this has been the experience in this House. 

That aside, Mr Speaker, I was trying to make a humble request to you and the honourable House that we have a special committee to examine specifically road safety on our roads. It looks like in this House when you have a special committee, there is that level of concentration given to an issue, and I think they can exhaustively examine it and report back. This is really what I think, Sir, and I wish to appeal to this House that we take this matter of road safety seriously and that a special committee be put aside. 

In addition to what I have said, and related to what hon. Alaso said, there is the matter of delays on projects. The secretariat from our side is requesting all Members of Parliament to give us information about projects on roads for which they are not satisfied and that are moving slowly. The Jinja-Bugiri project has been cited. I can also cite the Northern Bypass just next door to us here, which has terribly delayed. The target was to have it completed by December last year but this has passed and we are now thinking it will be complete by CHOGM, which I think is impossible. It will never happen due to the rate of implementation of the project. There are many other projects that I cannot mention here which should have started earlier on but have not started.

We really need to look at the overall picture of the performance of this ministry. I think the relevant committee would be able to do due diligence, but on the matter of road safety I would like to seek your indulgence that we have a special committee to examine this. I thank you.

MR ERIYA KATEGAYA: Mr Speaker, I am equally concerned about the deaths on our roads. People have mentioned the Ministry of Works not completing its assignments and the police not enforcing the laws, but I think there is one factor which we are forgetting - the driver himself. The behaviour of the drivers on our roads, to me, is the biggest contributing factor to the death toll on these roads. Even here in Kampala, you find people do not obey signposts, they do not obey lanes and there is chaos on our roads. 

Unless we really do something about the behaviour of the drivers on these roads, even if we put a policeman in every vehicle, which is not possible anyway – (Interjections) - That is what we are suggesting. I drive on these roads sometimes and you find somebody is overtaking on a hill when he does not know what is in front. By accident, he may pass but if there is another car coming, definitely there will be an accident. 

Some of these accidents are caused by the behaviour of the drivers. I do not know how they get their licenses. I do not know whether they are examined at all because in this country, I am afraid obeying rules is actually a punishment. People think you are a fool if you obey rules. I have been in a traffic jam and you if you are following the proper lane, you will stay there for two hours. Everybody will be bypassing you on either side of the road. We also have the disaster with the boda bodas. They are useful in ferrying people but they are a disaster when it comes to traffic. 

Mr Speaker, if we are going to look at this question of deaths on our roads, we should also look at the behaviour of the drivers - do they obey rules, do they go by the lanes? I think we should be objective -(Interjection) - Yes, if you have it. (Laughter)

MR TUMWESIGYE: Thanks a lot for giving way. I just want to add some information. In addition to the bad roads, the bad drivers and the mechanical conditions of our vehicles, many people involved in accidents are able to survive but very many people die in hospital and on the way to the hospitals because our emergency services are not good or are not existent. Also, the causality departments are not given priority by the ministries and development partners. 

Therefore, as you are talking about this issue of road safety or as we are forming committees to look into this issue of road safety, we should not stop at only the bad drivers and the size of our roads. We should also look at our capacity to handle emergencies. In most cases when somebody gets an accident, people will not know whether you are an MP or not. You are taken to the causality ward when you are dusty and somebody is hesitant to touch you because they imagine that you do not even have any money. When you are taken to the theatre, sometimes you are told there are no things to use. 

In the past, the development partners were not interested in funding hospitals but I am happy Parliament and the Social Services Committee put its feet down and said we must give money to hospitals. However, we need to go beyond hospitals because on our major roads you might not find a big hospital for a long distance and private hospitals do not like treating accident victims because they do not pay, so they are neglected. 

Also, when it comes to TV, you do not see any advert teaching people how to do first aid. So when people get accidents, actually people just drive their cars and pass by because they do not know what to do in case they find somebody bleeding. Therefore, we need to intensify actions that will teach our people how to do first aid. Even in our schools, the children should learn how to sustain life. 

Therefore, in addition to what you have said as causes of death, the issue of emergency care, the issue of our causalities, should not be overlooked because life has no spare parts. We have lost hon. Wesonga and we shall never have him again, and we are losing so many people like that. This is a very big issue and it should not be a partisan issue. Let us look for a solution to the safety of our people. Life once lost can never be regained. I thank you.

MR NSUBUGA BIREKERAAWO: Mr Speaker, further to what my colleague has just said, there is the issue of Ministry of Internal Affairs especially the police. One time I was driving from here to Masaka, I found that an accident had occurred and I rang 999 Police because people were spilling over the road like beans. The 999 people were asking me, “What is your name? What is the registration of the vehicle involved?” Instead of asking, “where is the accident?” so that they can rush to the scene to save those who could be saved, and this was between Mpigi and Buwama. Sometimes you find somebody has no airtime on his phone and he has just reported an accident but they are asking for details. Sometimes they even want you to go and make a statement as to whether you have seen the accident. 

When you go through Masaka Road, for example, you do not even see where the people repairing the road have started from. When you move from here to Masaka, you can find some obstacles at Mbizinya to show that they are working. The next time you come, you will find them in another place and yet they will not have finished the other side. So, you wonder really whether the Ministry of Works cannot put something in place so that if you are driving from Masaka you know that such and such a part is being repaired.

Thirdly, Mr Speaker, you find a truck that has had an accident on the road and it stays there for a whole week and yet sometimes these accidents occur at bends and sharp corners. Now, most likely people coming from either side will also have an accident because of this. I think we should also have a system were any vehicle moving on the road has to be registered with a towing company like it is in Europe. If you get a problem on the road, you only have to ring your company and they come and tow the vehicle away. Here, you can imagine it takes a whole week or sometimes two weeks for a vehicle to be towed away; a vehicle carrying oil is on the accident scene for a week or even more. Mr Speaker, these are some of the things that we have to look at if we are to save the lives of our people on the road. Thank you. 

MS ROSE NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am seeking clarification from the Prime Minister. What happens in case some of these laws that we pass here are not implemented? After the death of hon. Ayume, we passed a law here to the effect that safety belts are a must; whoever is driving must use safety belts. We also passed something to do with speed governors and the use of mobile phones while driving.

The issue of safety belts worked for I think just one month and the Ministry of Internal Affairs, particularly the Police, never took it up. Up to today, it is no longer an issue. I believe it one of the major causes of these fatal accidents on the road. So, I want to know what happens if we pass laws here and implementation becomes a problem. As far as Parliament is concerned, we played our part in that respect and now it is up to the Executive. 

Lastly, still on the issue of roads, I agree with hon. Amuriat that it is the Ministry of Works and that of Internal Affairs that are vital in as far as implementation is concerned. However, I want to give an example of the Kampala-Gulu highway, and I will be very particular on the section I am familiar with, which is from Bwaise to Luweero. This road is in a very bad shape. I get perplexed when I see murram being used to fill a tarmac road. It really perturbs me. You use murram to fill a pothole on a tarmac road! You use murram to fill a pothole on a tarmac road and within two weeks the murram is finished and you put more murram. I find this very disturbing, and particularly on that road where the traffic has almost doubled with the trade between Uganda and Southern Sudan. Traffic has more than doubled but the road is still in that sorry state. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I see that there is total agreement that the situation is bad and it requires a solution. Unfortunately, there was no formal way of ending this. There is somebody who said that we have a committee, but it was just a contribution. I really do not know what to do because even the Prime Minister agrees that there is a problem.

MR ELIJAH OKUPA: Rt hon. Speaker, just before we come to a conclusion, something that needs urgent attention on our roads because I think the Ministry of Works –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable member, even if you are to set up a committee, it is the committee to probe into all these and then come and report. 

MR OKUPA: Yes, but this one is an emergency because it is happening on Kampala–Entebbe Road. Last week I saw the honourable member for Entebbe on TV because half of the road, around Kisubi up to the airport, had been blocked for one month. However, yesterday I drove to Entebbe and the whole road has peeled off. 

From the information on TV, the local people of that area are saying that vehicles are getting accidents everyday. What type of work is the Ministry of Works doing on that road? This is the very road that the Ministry of Works officials use everyday because they have offices in Entebbe. This is the most important road for this country. Can we be helped with this road? Who is doing this work? I think someone should be held responsible and accountable.

THE SPEAKER: We are just repeating ourselves because that issue was covered. I also saw the patches on WBS. The question is; how do we end this matter? What is the way forward? 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I would like to propose, since you have already guided us, that we could set up a special committee to look into this matter as proposed by hon. Amuriat.

THE SPEAKER: There should be a motion. I cannot rule.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, thank you very much.  Following the debate that has gone on the Floor concerning matters of safety on our roads and the increasing carnage, I would like to move that a special committee of this House be put in place to look into matters of road safety and then report back to the whole House. I beg to move.   

THE SPEAKER: Seconded?

THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Mr Eriya Kategaya): Mr Speaker, I am still overtaken by the way we are operating. There is a law on seatbelts but how many of our people actually use them? Very few; and somebody says Ministry of Internal Affairs. As I said, are you going to put a policeman in every car to make sure that the driver and passengers have seatbelts on?

Secondly, I have seen people driving while speaking on mobile telephones. Now, should we not say the first responsibility of safety on the road is for the drivers themselves to obey the rules? It should be the exceptions – (Mr Amuriat rose_) Please, Engineer, I have heard you very much and you seem to have knowledge on everything, just leave us who have little knowledge to express ourselves. 

Somebody is law abiding, is aware of the safety on the road and yet goes to a car and does not fasten their seatbelt, then they are on a mobile phone using one hand to steer the car and then they have an accident and blame the police. I do not accept that position. As leaders we should be able to really –(Interruptions)- I am not receiving any information. If I want information, I will receive it but I do not want it. I am afraid - (Laughter) 

Once you approach a subject in a biased way, then you will not solve it. It is a crisis and there is no question about it. We should say the roads are a problem; yes, I am not saying they are not. Policemen are not enforcing the law, yes, but the primary responsibility of safety on the road is for the driver. First and foremost, the moment you have drivers who are careless and forget about safety on the roads, then you will have problems.

Mr Speaker, the second point I want to make is that creating committee after committee is no solution. We have committees of this House; if there is a problem, let us ask them to focus on that problem rather than creating another committee. (Applause) This is my contribution.

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, let me give information. The Committee on Infrastructure is having a programme of meeting the National Road Safety Council and we are going to discuss this issue. 

Having said that, this issue of safety is two way - government has something to do and the population has something to do. Government, as my friend the engineer said, handles it through the engineering aspect, and we have already signed contracts to address the black spots. We have also addressed it in training. There has been a training programme by the National Road Safety Council in primary schools in the transport sector, and all these have been done by government. 

The other issue is enforcement, which my colleagues have talked about –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, there is already a motion on the Floor and I thought the Rt hon. Prime Minister was just sorting out a number of issues that we had raised. I thought the motion takes precedence. I would like to ask if we could dispose of it -(Interjection)- Hon. Amuriat seconded it; you did not see. 

THE SPEAKER: In a nutshell, I think what the Prime Minister was saying was; why should we set up another committee? Therefore, he was opposing the motion to set up another committee. The problem I see with setting up another select committee is administrative. The select committee is not going to be set up by this House. I will have to convene the Business Committee and it is the Business Committee, under Rule 162, that sets up this committee. However, if we give this assignment to that committee to handle specifically and report within a certain time, it may be more effective than setting up another committee.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I have no objection if it can handle that special assignment.

THE SPEAKER: You may have been handling this generally, but let this be a special assignment to that committee, as they have vast experience. Let them give us a way forward. Don’t you think so?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes!

THE SPEAKER: So, I think let us end this by asking the Committee on Infrastructure to make a special report on this issue and propose a way forward. Agreed? – (Interjections) - Thank you. What should the timeframe be? –(Interjections)- Okay let it be one month. 

Honourable members, we were supposed to handle general debate but we start on Tuesday with the State of the Nation address. Also, there was item number four but do you think it makes any sense to receive a report at this time? Hon. Tinkasiimire has just sent me a note that he is here and wants to say a word. Don’t you think we should end there and wait for next week? 

PERSONAL STATEMENT

4.53
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members of the Eighth Parliament. On Wednesday last week, I had just come from my constituency; I had gone there on Friday and over the weekend so many people died and I was really very exhausted. However, as we had also lost a colleague, I came back very early in the morning, signed the condolence book and viewed the body. It was really a sad moment for me. Thereafter, I went up to the canteen to try and digest what had happened throughout the week and what we were going through. 

While I was taking a cup of tea, I think it was around 10.30 a.m., I received a call from a landline. The caller said they were from the IGG and they wanted me around midday for some consultations. I asked them what the consultations were about and they said it was about some investigations. I tried to find out from some colleagues what this investigation could be about, but they could not find a complaint anywhere in the books of the IGG on why I would need to be consulted. 

Nevertheless when that time reached, I received another call saying that they were in a meeting and that I should go there towards 1.00 O’clock. I obeyed and when it was coming to 1.00 O’clock, I left my car in the parking yard and walked to the IGG’s office, which is on IPS building. I introduced myself and said I had been called. 

They led me to the offices upstairs and I think the IGG herself asked an officer called James to handle my case. That officer led me to another office where there was a lady whom I later on learned was a police officer called Nora. While I was there, they said they had carried out an investigation that while I was in Tororo I stole Shs 2.5 million and led government to lose Shs 6.3 million. As a result, they wanted to charge me for stealing Shs 2.5 million, making government lose Shs 6.3 million and abusing the office which I had occupied then.  

As I had not received anybody asking me about these things, all this was a surprise to me. I said, “Have you carried out your investigations?” They said, “Yes, we are under directions to arrest and charge you”. They asked the police officer to draft the caution and charge statement. I said to them, “Well, as much as you are asking me to sign these things, let me call in my lawyer to advise me on what to do”. 

I called my lawyer, Maxim Mutabingwa, and he did not take a long time in coming; I think he came on boda boda. He was allowed in immediately and when he came, he wanted to know whether I had ever been investigated or whether I had ever made any statement on this matter. I told him, “No, but they want me to sign a caution and charge statement.” My lawyer said, “Do not sign anything.” At that moment, a man called James got very angry with him because he was insisting that I should sign and my lawyer was saying, “No”. They had a terrible exchange and they actually chased away my lawyer. They brought in policemen to push him out. However, because he is also a bit stout, he wanted to fight them back. Nevertheless, he gave in and was led out. 

I insisted I was not going to sign, so this man called James ordered the police officer to put handcuffs on me. I told James, “It does not make any difference because whether you put handcuffs on me or not, you have arrested me. You can bring them because I do not fear them”. I think after consultations, they decided not to bring the handcuffs. I insisted that I wanted to talk to my relatives, which they refused. I also insisted that I wanted to know where they were taking me but they did not tell me until I saw myself, late in the evening, being driven to CPS. That was Wednesday and that is where I slept. 

It was a privilege for me to really know the conditions of the suspects in the police cells and to learn that actually at CPS both men and women share the same cells and that actually the cells are so filthy. These suspects also gave me a petition about their plight. 

Very early in the morning at 6.00 a.m., I was driven to Tororo by six police officers. I was not allowed to talk to anybody and I accepted my condition. At 2.00 p.m., I was charged in the Chief Magistrates’ Court in Tororo and remanded to Morukatipe on the same charges, that is, the three counts. On the 17th, my lawyers applied for bail for me, and I am glad and very grateful to members who prayed for me and gave me their support so that the presiding judge gave me bail. I deposited my passport there and I will be reporting to the same court once a month. 

I also have to go and answer these charges in the Chief Magistrates’ Court. When we reached the Magistrates’ Court, the IGG who had said that they had investigated said that the investigations were not complete. There is a mention for this case on the 26th and thereafter I will be on and off. 

Mr Speaker, I really want to take this opportunity to thank honourable members who endeavoured to divide themselves up, leave the NRM retreat and come to have a retreat with me in prison during my trying moments, as well as those who came to stand surety for me until I was bailed. I am deeply touched by the support and the prayers that you gave me. 

I came in a bit late but I was glad that you had already mentioned and discussed the matter concerning my arrest and the manner in which it was done. At this time, I do not want to discuss the merits and demerits of the case because I think that justice will prevail. We are fighting for the independence of the courts and I believe that the courts will not be dejected. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, this is a matter which is in court. A clear statement has been made by the member telling us the circumstances under which he left Parliament and where he went up to Tororo. There is nothing that needs clarification. If you indulge in a debate, as a professional lawyer I see you prejudicing the interests of the accused person who is also our colleague. You rather leave it where it is and allow the courts to decide. 

As for the other matter, I told you that I will be handling it with the IGG for future incidences so that this does not reoccur. I think that for those who wanted to make contributions, in the interest of our friend and in the interest of justice we rather restrain ourselves and not comment further.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is not about the case of hon. Tinkasiimire. Could we interest ourselves in the condition of these people who are sharing cells in CPS?

THE SPEAKER: No; you see, he has made that statement but another person may change it, so how will we conclude? I am sure that somebody will say that it is not true. We do not have two parties before us; we only have one person who has been there. We can investigate in our own way. We have our Committee on Internal Affairs; the chairperson is here and he has heard what has been said. He will be able to investigate. I think we should do this rather than provoke a fully fledged debate on this matter.

MR OKUPA: This is not about the case. I am sorry if this had already been mentioned earlier; I remember in the past when members were arrested in a manner, which was not in the way your office knows, you had promised to hold a meeting with the heads of these institutions who handle these matters. If only you could operationalise that so that we do not see this happening again in the future, because it is not good for us all the time -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I have told you that the Police are complying with the arrangement. Whenever they want a Member of Parliament for interview or whatever, they first write to me and I call the member to talk about it before he goes and appears before them. As you have heard, this arrest was done by a new agency, which seems not to be aware of the arrangement that we have had. I have said that I will discuss this with the agency concerned so that we streamline the procedure.

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, I witnessed how hon. Barnabas was arrested and actually my concern is also on how police handles Members of Parliament. When we had gone to CPS to wait for hon. Tinkasiimire to be produced in court, it was around 7.30; the way the police officer, who I was later told was the O/C, came with a stick and started beating us and journalists in front of the camera - it was there for all to see. I think this matter needs to be investigated thoroughly. When the police are arresting Members of Parliament, they should not handle us as if they are carrying a murderer. When journalists are covering these stories concerning Members of Parliament, they should not be beaten the way this policeman was beating them. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think I will be able to persuade them to appreciate the situation. I have also told you that as far as the police are concern this is how we have been handling things. I will talk to those concerned, so let us not debate this matter, please. 

I gave in to hon. Alaso because she had skipped her chance. We had concluded but since our friend was here and he had requested to make a personal statement on the matter, I allowed him to do so, but now other new statements are coming up. Please, let us stop here. You can come to my office, discuss and give me further details, which I will use when I am talking with these people. The House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 5.07 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 24th July 2007 at 2.00 p.m.)
 

