Wednesday, 10 July 2002

Parliament met at 2.15p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, some time this week we gave you the opportunity to conduct elections for the Chairpersons and Vice-Chairpersons of the Sessional Committees. The Committee on Tourism had not yet elected their leaders, but they have now done so. Hon. Zachary Olum is a Chairperson and hon. Joseph Mugambe is the Vice-Chairperson. Congratulations.  

I would also like to inform you that those who have not yet registered with the Standing Committees should please complete the registration by Friday so that we conduct elections next week. Friday is the deadline for registration for the Standing Committees.

Thirdly, hon. Members, following the Local Council elections in Bushenyi, Mr Tayebwa and Mrs Buhanda were elected Speaker and Deputy Speaker respectively of the Bushenyi District Council. They are here to learn from the august House aspects of debate and procedure. They are seated in the visitor’s gallery. Please give them a clap.

The other matter relates to the general debate on the State of the Nation Address, which we shall conclude tomorrow. I will try to give as many hon. Members as possible the opportunity to contribute. I also assure those who will not have contributed between today and tomorrow that there is the general debate on the budget to take place next week. It will take six days. I will take note of all those who will have exhibited intention to contribute and give them the opportunity first next time.

The final matter is a message of appreciation from Mrs Jolly Musisi, who is thanking Members for the contribution made when her husband died. The husband used to work in the Parliamentary Canteen. Mrs Jolly Musisi, widow of the late Stanley Musisi, appreciated your financial and moral support during that difficult period. Thank you very much.

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

LT COL KATIRIMA: Madam Speaker, hon. Members, last Thursday, 4 July 2002 I had to excuse myself and took leave of the House while it was debating the State of the Nation Address by His Excellency the President of Uganda, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. This was in order to continue with the South-to-South Seminar at the Sheraton Hotel that had been discussing the African experience of the security sector transformations and lessons for Uganda.

By this action, little did I know that at the time I would miss what later transpired to be a very interesting and controversial debate dealing with the terrorist Lords Resistance Army (LRA), my constituency the UPDF, and Operation Iron Fist. Some hon. Members of the House from the Acholi sub-region were at the forefront of this debate, and my honourable name and that of one Kajabago-ka-Rusoke, a senior cadre of the Movement, that I know and respect, had been dragged in.

The Baganda, my people, have a saying that “tosalanga gwa kawala (omusango) nga tonaba kuwulira gwa kalenzi.” Meaning that in judgement, one ought to be impartial and listen to both sides before passing judgement. Last Thursday, you heard from one side and I am happy that today you have given me an opportunity to put across my side of the story for your information, assessment and final resolution.

The Banyankore, my people too, have a saying that, “kwobeherera orisiize kwataasya ozahi?” Meaning that if you tell a lie about someone who is away on duty to graze cows, where will you hide when the one on duty comes back, which he must? In other words, a lie told about me, a Member of this august House, while I am away would certainly be defused when I am back in the House. 

We should also not forget the saying by the British that “those who live in glass houses should not throw stones.” Meaning that retaliation for a stone you have thrown at others may break your own glasshouse. 

I must say that as an armed politician and a revolutionary, I believe in debate. The power of debate, and more debate in search of solutions to various questions, problems and issues, should not be underestimated.

It happened that some hon. Members from the Acholi sub-region on Monday, 1 July 2002 addressed a press conference at Parliament. Debatable issues attributed to them arose from the press conference, and were carried in the New Vision of Wednesday, 3 July 2002, among other print and electronic media. We should be struck by the very happy mood in which the hon. Members were at the press conference. Here, Madam Speaker, I wish to table a New Vision picture captured at the press conference. It is “document A” of my submission, which I will lay on Table.

I cannot talk about the authenticity of the debatable issues attributed to the hon. Members because I was not present at the press conference. Indeed, I have doubts in my mind that the hon. Members could not raise those issues attributed to them. Whether authentic or not, however, the fact that a press conference was held, and that the media highlighted the controversial issues, there was bound to be a debate on them. 

I was personally provoked by some four of the issues as reported by the press, following the press conference. One of the issues was that the hon. Members would reject the budget for my constituency because it has failed to wipe out the LRA terrorists. 

Two; that just like Obote to the Baganda, His Excellency President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni is the worst leader as far as the Acholi are concerned. 

Three; that there should be talks with terrorist Kony and his LRA. 

Four; that the UPDF has failed to defeat Kony and the UPDF do not know what they are doing. 

Certainly, my constituency was under attack and threatened, and I did not want to take the issues lightly. A bad picture had been painted of my constituency in the general public by these issues raised at the press conference.  

I felt these issues were debatable and I sought to debate them at all possible fora if only it could help the passage of the budget for my constituency so that it can carry out its constitutional mandate and put the performance record of my President right, also one of my constituents.  

I believed the civil society, Parliament, the media and all stakeholders had an interest in the issues of the press conference as reported and should have an opportunity of debating them.  

On 3 July 2002, a discussion group of some intellectuals and academicians including Mr Kajabago-ka-Rusoke and myself discussed Kajabago’s intended response to the issues that had been reported about the press conference with the view of enriching it. 

The group rejected the blanket accusation of the Acholi hon. Members of Parliament. We believed, and I do believe, that the Acholi hon. Members of Parliament are not of the same line of thinking when it comes to the issues that were reportedly raised in the press conference. We also doubted that all attended the press conference save for the three whose pictures appeared in the press and are covered in the document I have already indicated to lay on Table.  

The group did not immediately reject or adopt Kajabago’s document because of some apparent information gaps related to some of his observations and conclusions. E.g. the ones contained at paragraph (g) and (h), and wondering whether to drop and/or amend his positions. I will lay on Table this document so that Members can be able to see them. 

It was resolved that any action here should await further debate and research, and the issues raised in the press and the Kajabago document as amended be taken further afield among the wider public for their input. That is how the raw document of Kajabago and subsequent debate of Thursday, 4 July 2002 inadvertently ended up in the House. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to lay on Table what I call the right Kajabago document as amended by the discussion group, and to which I subscribe for the general information of the House, analysis and final resolution. This document is marked “Document B”. 

In conclusion, I pray for your support for the budget of my constituency and the true presentation of facts about our country’s leaders and history.  

It should also be noted that elsewhere, civil society is, and has been debating the issues ever since they were raised on 2 and 3 July 2002. For example, the one by Ofwono Opondo in the New Vision of 5th, the one of today by Moses Byaruhanga, and the one of Muwanga Kakooza of Bukedde. I have marked it “Document E”. There is also one by hon. Mao marked as “Document F”.

I beg to lay on Table all these documents so that the hon. Members note that the debate has been going on ever since it was started at the press conference. I thank you Madam Speaker and hon. Members.

MR OKUMU REAGAN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of order. This matter first came to the Floor last week when a document was signed by one Karusoke. One of our colleagues, hon. Katirima, was seen adding on that document a written statement. And after that, he photocopied and circulated the written statement to Parliament with allegations that cannot really be substantiated. 

I raised this matter on the Floor last week on the grounds that if hon. Katirima wanted to respond to my having addressed the press conference, he should have actually written a document and signed it himself. And I am extremely happy that he has actually -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You raise the point.

MR OKUMU REAGAN: I am just giving you the background, Madam Speaker, because last week you were not in the Chair when this matter was being raised. Copies of all these documents were forwarded to the Speaker and the matter was raised on them, Madam Speaker.  

So, what I am saying is that this matter was raised and I am happy that he has actually now owned the whole the document. He has accepted that even if he did not sign it, he was part and parcel of it. Madam Speaker, I think it would only be in order for this matter to be referred to a disciplinary committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the documents have been tabled in the House; they are now our property. I do not think that on the basis of what has been said, you can determine whether it is a matter for discipline, and a personal explanation does not attract debate. So let the matter and end there for now.

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT TO THIS PARLIAMENT ON TUESDAY 11 JUNE 2002

MS MARY AMAJO (Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the motion moved by hon. Ruzindana and I also thank him for the highlights and the discussion of the President’s address to the nation. I will make two or three comments about the address.  

First, on page 7 of the address, the President talks about sustainable economic growth and gives indicators. I am wondering if this address should not also give other indicators relevant to development, the holistic development in terms of human development. For example, every year the government together with UNDP comes up with a human development report. 

In the Human Development Report we are given human development indicators and the districts and regions of the country are ranked. I am wondering if this would not make relevant comparisons in the Human Development Report? For example, we get measurements in terms of the human poverty index. 

The people who have discussed this address have alluded to the fact that the growth figures do not give us a true representation of how the country is in terms of basic things like the levels of poverty. So I am wondering if the country will not benefit by making it more holistic in terms of indicators. How are we in terms of human poverty?

I would also like to ask, wouldn’t it be relevant for this address to likewise include the state of the environment? We know that sustainable human development goes hand in hand with sustainable human management of the environment. Just the day before yesterday this came up as we discussed the exploitation of the natural environment in many districts. We also know that without effective environmental management, there is a risk of increased vulnerability. And we know that vulnerability increases our risk of disaster. And disaster is very expensive in terms of human lives, property and even in terms of government expenses that go into attending to areas that are disaster struck. 

Still related to that, I would like to quote from the National Long-term Perspective Study code-named “Vision 2025.” It says, “the main concern about the use of natural resources must revolve around the concept of sustainability, because human development depends largely on the environment.” It goes on to outline problem areas of the environment, and summarises as follows: “Moreover steady improvement in economic performance in the recent past may add yet another dimension and weight to the stress on the country’s environment.” That is why I am saying that while it is okay to give us figures of economic growth, what about the effect of that growth on our environment?  

I would like to comment briefly on the President’s address on the issue of savings’ mobilisation through co-operative societies. Many Members have mentioned this. I would like to thank the President for his concern and, indeed, he has already started implementing this. We know that this was one of the items addressed in Kyakwanzi. I, however, got a little scared when I read this, because I know that government was one of the forces that caused the collapse of the co-operative system. 

The co-operative system in this country was the envy of many countries in the 1960’s and 1970’s, and indeed most of them in the region copied a lot from what was happening in Uganda. But because government could not set limits to their interaction with the co-operatives, they interfered with them and they carry a good part of the blame in the collapse of the system. 

The co-operative system is a basic private sector institution, if it is well maintained. I therefore, hope that since civic leaders were addressed, time will also be found for government to give this address, sensitise the people or draw consensus of the people in the private sector. It is they who will actually be in charge of the co-operative system in this country. I also caution that if the full capacity of the co-operative societies is not built, we are just wasting our time and we may not make any advancement. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI (Ibanda County South, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been trying to rise and speak daily, and today I am happy that I finally caught your eye. I will not talk about politics, but will go straight away to the policy issues.

I have to say that I am at a loss because I do not see any Minister of Health present yet I want to mostly talk about health issues. Well, I am informed that the Prime Minister is around, therefore, he can clarify on some issues that I am going to raise.  

I want to talk about the policy of government of making private hospitals sub-health centres. On this I will particularly dwell on my constituency of Ibanda South. I am sure there are many scenarios in other constituencies like the one I have to give. In Ibanda South we have a hospital called Ibanda Hospital and Rohoko dispensary, which is a government mini-hospital. It started in 1938, and I think by time even my father had not met my mother. 

That mini hospital, I am calling it thus because it was well stocked, lacked only an operating theatre. But the government went ahead with the new policy of making private hospitals full sub-district health centres. Ibanda was chosen by government to be a full sub-district health centre, so the mini hospital, which started in 1938, was left out. Yet it delivered many great people and some of them are in this House, like hon. Nasasira, but it has now been left to rot. 

The government absconded from its duties, and now the drugs are purchased by Ibanda Hospital, which is a private hospital. I call them investors since they came only to invest in medical services. After purchasing the drugs, they take off a share and give to Ruhoko dispensary. Ruhoko dispensary is not getting any development fund because already there is a hospital in existence, Ibanda Hospital. 

We had started building there a theatre in 1991. We had almost completed it and only electricity was the remaining factor, but government abandoned it because of that policy. I spoke to people on my committee and I told them that, “at the funeral of a cow, there is no stupid dog.” How can a private person purchase drugs for the government? I should perhaps give you the story of how the money – (Interruption)

MRS HYUHA: Thank you very much, my colleague, for giving way. I have been serving on the Committee of Social Services since 1996 and the social services issues are dear to my heart. I wish to inform you that the policy of Health Sub-districts has been adapted by government under the Health Strategic Investment Plan. And as you are aware, in this financial year, following the Budget Act, we have been participating in budgetary process. I wish to inform you that government provides money for both government health institutions and non-government institutions. 

In this financial year, the priority of the Ministry of Health is to complete and equip health centres at level four. But it is also true that the budgetary allocation to non-government hospitals has increased from Shs11 billion to Shs15 billion. I imagine the situation you are giving. Government could be giving assistance to the hospital you are indicating as a non-government hospital. So, if in your area they had identified Health Centre 4 and it has been at a halt, what we have taken on as a policy as far as the Committee of Social Services and also what government had presented before us, is that this financial year, they are going to complete Health Centre 4s. 

We agreed that 215 health centres at level 4, which were not completed and those that were completed should be equipped. So, if yours was constructed and not completed, let us wait until the end of this financial year. I imagine it will be attended to.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Members, we are giving Members only seven minutes.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I seem to be talking at a different wavelength with her. Exactly, what she is saying is what I am saying. I do not know whether we are understanding each other. The government made NGO hospitals, like that in my constituency, sub-district health Centre 4. All the government money goes to that Health Centre 4. Then the main Hospital I am talking about, where hon. Nasasira was born, he is here now (Laughter).  What I am talking about is now treated as Health Centre 3.  Therefore, it is getting all the drugs from the private NGO (Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Byabagambi, perhaps we could hear from the man who used to be Permanent Secretary to that Ministry, hon. Wagonda Muguli.

MR BYABAGAMBI: He was the Permanent Secretary by that time?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes.

MR BYABAGAMBI: May be he is the one who confused everything (Laughter).

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was the immediate Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Health. The adoption of the policy of Health Sub-district is part of the Sector-wide Approach to service delivery.  The meaning of this is that government was looking at the entire health sector rather than only government health units. It is for this reason that government started even subsidising the private health units not for profit as a method of increasing accessibility by lowering their user charges. 

In delivering services as a sector-wide approach, there was no need for government to appear to be competing with the private providers. That is why it was decided that in an administrative area, be it a district or a constituency, where there was already an existing private health unit, there was no need for government to duplicate efforts by financing a government unit.  

I would also like to clarify that it is not true that all the money goes to Health Centre 4 only. In fact, money to private units together with money for lower units like Health Centre 3 and Health Centre 2, is channelled through the CAO, who is the accounting officer.

In addition, the Head of the Sub-district Health Unit is directly under the control of the District Director of Medical Services. So, I would like to allay the fears of my colleague that the head of Ibanda Hospital is actually supervised by the District Director of Health Services in Mbarara, and all accountability is given to the District Director of Health Services and eventually to the Ministry of Health.  

All the work plans for both private units not for profit and for government units are discussed at the district headquarters by the council and are submitted to the sector ministry for inclusion in the annual work plan under specific agreement.

DR NKUUHE: Madam Speaker, I have been listening to both the chairperson and Ex-Permanent Secretary, but is it in order for the two Backbenchers to take over the role of the Executive, which is adequately represented here?  (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Members, I think you should be happy that you have Members in this House, who have worked quite long in the Social Services Committee and are able to give that information. Yes, they are quite in order, but please wind up.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I do not believe that the Executive has a monopoly over information. Besides, this is public information, which is available in all government documents and which any caring citizen could access. I would, therefore, like to retaliate that when I was in the Ministry of Health, it was not a mistake to adopt such a policy (Laughter).  

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I am glad about the information he has given me. I think – Clarification? I will not accept now; my time is running out. Will you add on extra time for me?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Well, the policy sounds very good when you are talking about it, but in practice - I am telling you what really is on the ground today - that local dispensary is dead. It is a bush now because the government does not want to compete with the NGO. They are giving Ibanda Hospital Shs280 million per year yet the local dispensary is receiving nothing. The theatre, which we started in 1991 is now a haven of concubines and whatever you can call them. I want to know what the government is after, killing its own institutions and promoting NGOs!  

Madam Speaker, the government recently abolished cost sharing in government dispensaries. But in my constituency Ibanda hospital is still charging fees. How then are my people benefiting from the policy of abolition of cost sharing, when the nearest hospital we have is Mbarara hospital? 

Sub-district health centres, which started yesterday, have got theatres in them. They are operating on patients but mine, which started in 1938, is left to ruins.

THE MINISTER OF WORKS, HOUSING AND COMMUNICATIONS (Mr John Nasasira): I just want to inform hon. Byabagambi how sad I am that a sub-dispensary where I was born, 50 years ago, has been left to the dogs. I went there and fundraised for it, and even when they were working on the Mbarara–Ibanda road I used my good office to ask the contractor to extend the tarmacked junction up to the hospital, another 200 metres. That they are letting it grow into a bush makes me very sad.

MR BYABAGAMBI: I hope the Prime Minister has taken the message and will inform the relevant Minister about that issue. 

Madam Speaker, we have got a lot of orphans in this land, especially AIDS orphans, without a mother or father. Yet we hear of scholarships being given by State House to even former presidential candidates! We do not know where the government is headed with all these helpless orphans. We had NGOs like UWESO, but as I talk now, UWESO is a micro-finance institution competing with Byabagambi in Ibanda down there. I do not know whether it is still doing the job of looking after the AIDS orphans and whatever it set out to do.

I had a lot to talk but due to the limited time, I better stop here. Thank you very much.

MS JULIET SEKITOLEKO (Youth Representative, Female): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. As you may recall, a few months ago we were here debating about the youth elections and for sure I would like to thank the Electoral Commission for conducting those elections. 

At the same time I must express my deep and great disappointment with the same Electoral Commission. Madam Speaker, we have around 27 districts that do not have Youth Councillors. Reason being, the Electoral Commission reluctantly sent old registers of 1996 to these 27 districts. So as I speak now we do not have youth councillors in about 27 districts, and the youths of this country are really disappointed. 

On the same note, the Electoral Commission used to give transport refund to these youths who would come to vote at the district headquarters. We use the Electoral College system of voting, and youths come from different parishes to the district headquarters to vote, after which Shs20,000 is then refunded to them as transport. But this time the Electoral Commission decided to abandon that. We do not know what happened. 

I would therefore like to appeal to the Electoral Commission to take note of this, as they seem reluctant to address it. We do not know whether they are waiting for the year 2006, for the next term, to conduct fresh elections and we forget all about the 27 districts. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR WILLIAM KIWAGAMA (Bunya County West, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to add my voice to those who are supporting this motion. I would like to thank the President for his clear and concise address to the nation because this time his address was so crystal clear that everybody understood it. That is why this debate is going on so well. 

The President talked about good governance. It is true there has been progress on good governance when you consider the series of democratic elections. The people have been afforded a chance to elect their own leaders from the grassroots up to the top. I must congratulate the NRM government on this success. 

There are, however, areas where the Ugandans are wondering what is happening. When you take the record of the UPDF, they have been able to deal with rebellions in different parts of the country. Starting with Lakwena, then the Teso rebellion, the ADF in the west, then Itongwa, and the bombings in Kampala. Many other problem areas have been dealt with successfully, but what is puzzling even us the ardent supporters of government is the northern problem. What has really happened, I do not know. With all the efficiency of the UPDF, the history of their discipline, what is happening? Can we be told the truth? 

Uganda as a country is bleeding through Acholi land. When you hear stories of what is happening there, the suffering of the people and the killing that is going on everyday, Uganda is very uncomfortable. What is that, that the UPDF cannot do to stop this suffering? What is it? The use of force, the military option, seems to be failing. For when you think of the might UPDF took to Sudan for the final act, and the deadlines we have been given, and the hope, we have been made to believe that soon the rebellion will end. 

It really saddens and surprises everybody when the whole of the UPDF, with all its might, is in the Sudan but Kony has come back home and is moving about unhindered! He seems to have the upper hand in Acholi land now. Where has UPDF gone? All of them have gone to Sudan? So, I am requesting government to do what they can, not to wait for December when we have been told us ‘by December, Kony will be no more.’ 

If the military option has failed, is there no other peaceful method? I would suggest that while we are using the military option, let us also use the peaceful means. In the end, soon the rebellion will end. But to say you will not talk, is really unfair to Ugandans.  

Another area I want to comment on is the infrastructure. The President was talking about the roads and other infrastructures. In the countryside, -(Interjection)- give me a little more minutes, please.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MR KIWAGAMA: Government has got certain roads they maintain in the countryside, but the majority of the roads are the responsibility of the district. In Mayuge we have about a mere 30 kilometres, which the Central Government is responsible, but the network of roads in Mayuge is in a very bad state.  So, I am appealing to Government to increase the kilometres for which they are responsible. 

I would like to comment just a little on health. The President reported that immunisation has gone down. But what is the reason for this? The reason is that the political leadership at the grassroot is unable to mobilise the people to take their children for immunisation. 

I am very glad to hear that the President the other day suggested that a law should be put in place to enforce parents to take their children for immunisation because this is very important if we are to have a healthy population. There is no development if the population is sick.  

The other thing about health is the old problem of pit latrines. When I was born more than 60 years ago and pit latrines were a problem at that time. Up to now it has not been solved. Very many families use bushes instead of digging their pit latrines. Why is it that this has not been enforced. I suggest that a similar law to that proposed by the President regarding immunisation should also be put in place to enforce every family to have a decent pit latrine for which everybody knows its use. You cannot be alive unless you visit that place; it is so important in the lives of people. But then the Government does not emphasis this aspect of enforcing people to have pit latrines. 

Madam Speaker, I thank you for giving me a few minutes but I would like to conclude with the question of education.  Government has done very well in this area, we have the UPE, classroom construction is going on very well in most of the primary schools. That is a very good thing, but as you know any –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kiwagama, please, wind up.

MR KIWAGAMA: Yes, I am winding up. In one year or two we shall have children in secondary schools three times as we are having now, but there is not enough being done on the ground to prepare for this. Although, government has been talking about a secondary school per sub-county, this is not enough. We need a secondary school per parish, otherwise many children will have nowhere to go. Or they will be just exploited by the so-called investors who are building these secondary schools everywhere just to exploit the ordinary person. Thank you very much.

MS WINNIE BYANYIMA (Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me opportunity and I congratulate the President on the state of the nation address and the Vice President for effective delivery of the same.  

Madam speaker, let me start with procedural issues. Traditionally, this House has come to expect that the President in his State of the Nation Address states his legislative priorities for the year, so that we can plan ahead and research and be prepared. Well, this time, like the previous year, I noticed that this was omitted. I encourage the President in future to let us know. 

Madam Speaker, the Constitution, which provides for this address, also provides in the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy, certain principles on which the President is expected to tell the nation the progress he has made. I have noticed that since the Constitution came into force in 1995, that the President has not in fact given us progress report on some of these principles. So, I take this opportunity also to encourage him to include them next time.  

Principle Number (VI) on Gender Balance, this has not been achieved and has not been reported on ever since the Constitution came into force. 

Principle Number (XV) on Recognising the Significant Role of Women in Society, that too is never reported upon.  

Principle Number (XVI) on the Dignity of People with Disabilities, I have never heard it in the State of the Nation Address. 

Number (XVII) on Balanced and Equitable Development, the Constitution asks the President to take special measures in favour of development of the least developed areas. That too is not addressed. So, I encourage the President to focus on these principles in the next year.

Madam Speaker, I would like to contribute on the recently passed Political Organisations Act and the climate it has created for Ugandans. I notice that the President ‘congratulates the House for passing the law and asks us not to waste any further time on sterile debate.’ Well, my reply is that certainly we are not engaging in sterile debate, but we are taking the law before the Constitutional Court to seek an interpretation. 

I am pleased to inform the House that together with my colleagues, hon. Wadri Ezati, hon. Sebuliba Mutumba, hon. Reagan and others not in this House, we have petitioned the Constitutional Court about this obnoxious law.

I also encourage Members of this House, many of whom I know are highly skilled in the law, to come and scrutinise our petition and help to improve it, to beef it up because we must not sit back. We must resist the entrenchment of a one party dictatorship in our country through constitutional ways.

Last year my constituents who were strong Movement supporters were not amused when they saw the President in their midst call meetings of political leaders, select, offer platform, endorse a candidate and pull others out of the race, completely ignoring the principles of the Movement in the Constitution; taking us directly in the direction of a one party state. That is why I am proud to associate myself with this petition because this is not a Movement System we are seeing in place. This is a one party system, which is further entrenched through the Political Organisations Act. 

So, I invite Members of Parliament, whether you support the Movement or you are a multypartist, at least you are opposed to a one party state that is prohibited by the Constitution; support our petition (Laughter).

Let me now turn to the security situation. I call upon the President to revisit his strategy on the insurgency in the North. Like my colleagues here, sincerely 16 years of the same strategy has yielded pain, death, and suffering for the people of the North. Can’t the President consider that these people he calls terrorists - some are probably terrorists - are still the children of Uganda and that talking with them could turn them from being terrorists to being peaceful people?  

This problem in the North is a political one and looking at it as a political problem is the beginning of the solution. It is not a military problem; it is a political problem; it is also a regional problem. 

We have said before particularly during the previous presidential campaign, that one solution is to get out of regional conflicts.  The President promised to withdraw all his troops from Congo at the height of the presidential campaign and indeed, withdrew one or two battalions. But once the campaign was over, I think it became business as usual.

So, we call upon the President to reduce his militaristic stance and consider using diplomatic and political means to achieve genuine reconciliation between our people, and between us and our neighbours. 

Madam Speaker, I will quickly comment on trade because it is very important for my constituency. It is through trade that the unemployed people in Mbarara Municipality, in other towns, and in rural areas will find jobs. But I am disturbed that even though the President keeps telling us about AGOA, AGOA, AGOA, and I suppose he gets a heap of praises from our American friends, he has not taken any trouble to put in place a trade policy. That up to now, we do not have any document that I can hold here and say this is our trade policy. That we have got so many structures engaged in promoting trade such as the Ministry of Agriculture and their PMA to the Export Promotion Council, the Bureau of Standards, Ministry of Trade and Industry and now recently to his own State House AGOA office, with two officials, whose credentials, capacities, skills, special attributes, facilities, magic, I need to understand.  

All these are the structures that are in place to promote trade. In the midst of this - I have taken time to study what is happening, for example, in the fish sector, our children are faced with food insecurity in this area of the lakes. Children who used to have a plentiful cheap supply of protein are now malnourished because fish is being fished unsustainably from our lakes, thanks to a misguided trade policy. A policy that is not there, that does not take care of domestic, regional and global needs. Whoever wants can take without taking into account sustainability, children, Ugandan needs, Ugandan jobs, women’s incomes and so on.

Madam Speaker, as usual, in this bad situation, the President has jumped in with a military solution to manage our fish resource. I see army men with guns chasing women at night who are carrying this immature fish and trying to sell it on the domestic market. This will not solve the problem. The problem is, to begin with, a policy that encourages sustainability and a supply that is equitable. 

So, Madam Speaker, I conclude by again thanking the President for responding to the challenge we gave him in the presidential elections and accepting that education should be the right of all children including the poor.  

I ask him that these bursaries that are going to be given out at secondary school level, will benefit the very poor and not become bursaries for the children of local government councillors, of Members of Parliament, of the local big shots. But that they will be a system of ensuring that orphans and the very poor are the ones to benefit from these bursaries particularly the girl child. 

I also urge him to scrap, once and for all, this scandalous State House scholarship scheme that favours children of people he knows, and that has no principle of equity. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR ARAALI BASALIZA (Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this important debate. I also stand to support the motion, which was moved by hon. Augustine Ruzindana and to thank His Excellency the President for the clear and precise position of Government policy contained in the State of the Nation Address.

Allow me, Madam Speaker, to make a few comments. I would like to talk about development. First of all, I would like to talk about infrastructure. I thank the President for having talked about the roads and I thank the Minister in charge of Transport and Communication for the good work he is doing.

However, I would like to talk about Fort Portal – Kyenjonjo – Kyegegwa - Mubende Road. Since the NRM Government came into power, the people of Kabarole have been asking for this road to be tarmacked. Yes, the Government has done good work on it, but there is one section, which has not been worked upon, and unless it is worked upon, there cannot be any proper development of the districts in which it is passing. 

I have thanked the Minister because some work has definitely been done, but we are asking for that section from Kyenjonjo to Kyegegwa to be completed. It is 55 kilometres, and unless it is finished, no business can be transacted properly. For instance, as I talk today, Madhvani cannot transport his tea through that road to Kampala because of the dust.
  
MR AMURIAT: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank my colleague for giving way. I would like to inform the House together with a few colleagues that we had the opportunity - this was courtesy of Capt. Byaruhanga and Capt Wudumuzi - of travelling to Fort Portal. I had the opportunity of seeing the section that my colleague has described. As a matter of fact, I believe there is criminal waste on that section of the road. The road has been built, the embankments properly built, all the drainage work has been accomplished, the sub-base and base of the road is intact, what is left to be done is just a small percentage to cover up the work in the priming course and a wearing course.  Unfortunately, this has not been done and the road is definitely going to be put to waste; not only is it going to cause a lot of dust and discomfort, but as a country, we stand to lose a lot of investment with the coming of the rains. This country cannot afford such a waste, and I wish to appeal to Government to expedite the completion of this work. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you are turning this information into contributions. Hon. Araali, I am not going to give you extra time.

MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA: This particular road, Madam Speaker, passes through my constituency of Kamwenge South, dispatches from Kyegegwa to Kyenjonjo and therefore, I thank you my colleague for giving way. I would like to add on to the fact that apart from tea being affected on this part of the road, we are also told that there are plans, or oil drilling is already underway in Kasese and Bundibugyo. Therefore, when you think of marketing or even bringing this oil to Kampala, you find that it is going to be very hard to do this. 

Most importantly, the equipment was moved from the site and this is a very expensive venture, and when they bring back the equipment, it will be another expensive venture. Therefore, we appeal to the Government to complete this 55 kilometres particularly because there is an English saying: “ If you do work partially, it is no work done.” And for us the people of Mwenge South, the people of Kyenjonjo who have continuously voted wisely, it continues to remain a scar on this particular government. So, I implore the government to work on this road without any further delay. Thank you.

MR NASASIRA: I thank hon. Byamukama for giving way and for voting wisely. In 1986 the only section of the tarmac road from here to Fort Portal (almost 300 kilometres) was Mityana to Kampala, which we are about to start constructing again, and from Fort Portal to Kagorogoro. That was a total of 92 kilometres. Since that time, out of 300 kilometres, we are remaining with 55km, which is even first class murram remaining for one layer. I appeal to the people from that area to give Government time and we will complete tarmacking that section of the road.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, let me remind you that you only have seven minutes. If you continue giving away your time for information, you will not be compensated. Hon. Araali, I think you have less than five minutes (_Mr Nyanzi rose_).

MR ARAALI BASALIZA: Madam Speaker, I am not allowing the hon. Member to give information because I have very little time. 

I thank the hon. Minister for the information, but I would like also to give him this information. On 22 October last year, His Excellency, the President wrote to the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister stating that, among other things, “ I was also informed that there are no sufficient funds to tarmac the Kyegegwa-Kyenjonjo section or Mubende.” That was when he came to Fort Portal. “As a matter of urgency, liase with the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communication and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and our development partners that funds for completion of this road are secured. In the event that the development partners are not funding the project, Government should put money in the budget and complete this section of the road like we did for Kyenjojo-Kagorogoro section.”  

I do not really know how much work has been done and when this section is going to be tarmacked. So, Madam Speaker, that is the plight of the people of the four districts of Kyenjojo, Kamwenge, Kabarole, Bundibugyo, even Kasese and Bushenyi for that matter. I hope we shall get a proper reply on that issue. 

I would like also to speak about health. Since I came to this House, I have been voicing the issue of Buhinga Hospital in Fort Portal, which caters for the four districts, which I have already mentioned. This is a referral hospital, which is in a dilapidated state because of the earthquake. It does not have any theatre, it does not have an incubator, it does not have an X-ray, and it does not have a scanner. So, the people are really suffering. The rich people afford to come to Mulago for treatment but the poor people remain there languishing because they do not have services. So, I call upon the concerned people to see to it that this hospital is rehabilitated as soon as possible, to save the people of Fort Portal and the four districts.

I would like also to talk about investment. Seventy two per cent of the investments are concentrated in Kampala, 16 per cent are concentrated in Jinja and 10 per cent in Mbarara.  But there is nothing in other districts. I call upon the Minister concerned to see to it that there is balanced development so that each town shares the investment in this country. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR AMASI PATAKI (Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I would like on behalf of the people I represent and on my own behalf, to congratulate His Excellency, the President upon completing one year of good governance. I would like to congratulate you, Madam Speaker and my colleagues the Members of Parliament, for completing one year of good legislature.  

The President talked of the Kony war as still going on. For the last 17 years, Kony has remained a menace. Kony has been killing people; Kony has not only killed the Acholis but also the people of Moyo, Adjumani. The Madi, have been killed in ambushes on Gulu-Atiaka-Adjumani road. For these last 17 years, we have lost people and property.  

As I speak now, Kony has reached Adjumani, just a few kilometres away from my constituency. He attacks refugee camps and my people are living there too. Kony continues to kill at large; this is not the first time. It is not only 17 years actually. I should say it is more than 17 because from 1979, 1980, 1981, the same Kony was killing people especially in other districts in West Nile. The people of West Nile, the people of Moyo, of Obongi, in Adjumani are peace lovers. They have even the capacity to go to the bush to fight, but they do not want to. There are over 10,000 ex-servicemen in West Nile and they are at home.  They could as well go to fight.

When the late Juma Oris and Bamuze tried to go to the bush, they did not get any support. Bamuze has come home. Kony will continue to kill us in that region and the Acholis if we do not lend Kony soft gloves. Kony has gone further to make life very difficult. Commodities in Moyo are extraordinarily expensive. In my place a kilo of sugar is Shs2,000 just because the transportation cost has become so high (Interruption).

When you leave Kampala at 7.00a.m, you reach Moyo at 8.00p.m. You have to be escorted by armed personnel. The business community loses commodities on the way and lives are also lost. So, the poor people cannot afford even to buy a piece of soap. A bar of soap costs Shs1,000. A litre of petrol is Shs1,800. Life is not good just because of some individuals like Kony are causing this kind of suffering. We even lost a road, our road Atiaka-Adjumani-Moyo road was supposed to be given first class murram, but in 1997 the Chinese construction firm lost its people in the course of their work and they left the place.  Up to now, there is still fear among the constructors who would have gone to work on that road. I do not know what plan the Minister has for that road.  

Madam Speaker, we do not want to retaliate to Kony. In 1980, people went to exile. Some died there, others have not come back just because the same Kony labelled them Anyanyas. And once you are called Anyanya, you are hit.  So, people had to flee to Sudan.  

I want to talk about the Political Organisations Bill, which the President says he signed. It is now a law and personally, that POB was passed during the Referendum.  What this House did was to add flavour only. It is the Ugandans to decide their own destiny. It is not the American, the British, the Zambians or the Gambians (Applause).  When my wife cooks food, I praise her food not my neighbour’s or other’s (Laughter). The Baganda say, ‘Webaale kufumba’, the man says to his wife -(Laughter)- and the wife says, ‘Webaale kupakasa’ (Laughter).

I would like to add, on a more serious note, that when this Parliament was about to retire for recess, one of the last bills brought here was regarding the regazetting of former protected areas into game reserves. They are about 39, if I remember very well.  I stand to be corrected. From the 39, two were stayed, that is Lamwonga in Obongi and one in Masindi. Today as I talk, the Game Warders in Lamwonga are harassing the wananchi there. They are moving from home to home taking people’s food! Women who are cooking their sauce is checked, if meat, is taken. They are killing the dogs of the Wananchi. They are chasing people out of the place. I urge the Minister of Tourism to take action immediately because my people are in trouble from the Game Warders who were taken there in anticipation that the area was going to be degazetted into a game reserve.  

Madam Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity.

MR BENEDICT ETONU (Amuria County, Katakwi): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the chance to add my voice to that of other hon. members to thank His Excellency the President for the State of Nation Address, and also to thank the Vice President for having put the address very calmly that day, which people understood.  

Madam Speaker, I will touch on a few areas. First, education. We all know that UPE is a very good policy, which has enabled many Ugandans to get access to education, but I would like to urge the Ministry of Education – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, are you aware of the Rules of this House? Take that telephone out of this Chamber.

MR ETONU: Mine was arrested, why don’t you arrest that one also? (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I would like to urge the Ministry of Education to improve on the teaching in these primary schools. In my constituency, I noticed pupils go up to P.4 and they cannot read. I do not know whether it is because of the size of the classes the teachers handle or maybe poor teaching by the teachers.  

In history of this country, most of the primary schools have had iron sheet roofs, which is a good development as opposed to previous teachings under the trees.  

I shall move to another subject, that is, health. We all know that health is very important. If we have healthy people, all developments can be done. I would like to urge the Ministry of Finance to ensure that enough money is given to the Ministry of Health. I will give you an example. 

Recently, hon. members may recall my son was sick in Mulago Hospital, although I am sorry to say he passed away. He was suffering from Kidney failure. At that time, there were no machines in the hospital carrying out dialysis. I had to go to Nairobi. When I got to Nairobi Hospital, there were over fifty machines and yet in Mulago, we now have three machines, which were repaired. Doctors in Nairobi Hospital were laughing at us.  They said, ‘we were trained in Mulago by Professors like Dr Kigonya and others, now you have to come all the way to get the knowledge which we acquired in Uganda!’  

I urge the Ministry of Health that diseases like Kidney failure are not a big deal in other countries, even transplanting. But here in Uganda, even to carry out a dialysis is a problem, not because we do not have doctors qualified to carry out this. So, I urge the Ministry of Health to take this seriously. 

Otherwise, from my experience in Mulago Hospital, very many things are lacking. And I request that we should at least have one well equipped ward treating people who could maybe afford to pay because this disease - I have got an experience. You cannot do anything else except to have the kidney transplanted. 

A doctor in London whom we tried to contact said he was planning to come to Uganda to help us set up this unit in our hospital. We are losing very many people in Uganda because of kidney failure. But I urge the government that we try to do something to save lives because apart from my son, other patients of kidney failure have all died (-Ms Mugerwa rose_) I will not take it because the bell is already ringing (Laughter).

 Let me now move to security before I conclude. I have been in this country for some time and insecurity is getting worse. I urge the Government to quickly solve the existing problem of insecurity. When I was growing - this is about 60 years ago - some elders told me that ‘do not postpone a problem, try to solve it that day because another problem may come up.’ You might be overtaken by events if you do not solve the Kony’s problem. 

I heard about a bus burnt in Luweero and I have also heard that Kony is now in Adjumani. The other day he was in Apac.   I do not know how mobile this man is (Laughter). 

Now, I would like to touch briefly – I will not do justice to myself if I do not talk about the issue, which was raised here, that Teso cows were taken by lorries to Ankole. We are not interested in those cows anymore. Let nobody drag us into unnecessary - because really it is 15 years ago and people who are giving this information now were there. Why didn’t they give that information that time? (Laughter) Isn’t this part of what is causing problems in this country?  

In Teso people are in a rebellion because of cows, now we have a problem of pastoralists, and you are now bringing another problem. I want to tell you hon. Members that in Teso, if you want problems, talk about cows and land, and you will get that problem.  

This issue of pastoralists who have come to Teso wetland is making the Iteso appear tribalistic. We have some tribes including Banyankole and Banyarwanda living in other parts of Teso but not in wetlands. They are living in the dry land. Now when the law exists - fortunately, I was in the CA when we passed this law. The law was passed and what is irritating the Iteso now are the colonialists - because I was there at that time when some Iteso were living in that particular land and the British government evicted them.  They are now saying if the law was passed and we have not stopped them from continuing to plough or plant the rice in the wetlands, who are these other people who have come and they are in this land? That matter is now tribalised and they say Iteso are being tribalistic. 

My son is married to a Munyankole. I do not hate them because they are my “Bako”. When we try to tribalise this thing, it means you are bringing other things, which are not true.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, ENTANDIKWA (Ms Akello Grace): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Member for Amuria, which is the constituency I come from, for giving way. I would like to inform him and the whole House that just as hon. Etonu was saying - but now in my own words - the people of Teso reconciled with the government of Uganda and have been living and working with it for the development of Teso.  When the war ended we put our minds to building Teso. We have elected the current government now twice and we believe it is our government. Therefore, we really do not want to bring politics from other areas to be dumped into Teso to divert us from the programme of developing Teso.

MR ETONU: I thank the hon. Minister for the information.  But let me say this: the cattle in Teso in 1925 were wiped by epidemic. But at the time of cattle rustling in 1986, many Iteso believed that our cows were taken to Karamoja.  They were rustled by Karimojong because we saw them; we know how they look like. But if they sold them to some other people, I do not know. But at least we know who took our cows.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Etonu, I think that is enough.

MR ETONU: If those cows went to Ankole at all, we are not interested in them any more. Already we have re-stocked our Teso region with cattle. So, we do not need to be dragged on because we cannot recover those cows. If it is true they could be in their homes, we would appreciate if they could return them. Thank you.

MS JANE ALISMEMERA (Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the President of this country for his State of Nation Address. I want also to thank the government for continuing to give security to the people of Bundibugyo district.  

However, the people of Bundibugyo would like to register their disappointment to all the governments in this country, that have made them poor by denying them infrastructure. They even get very worried when the Kyenjojo/Kyegegwa road cannot be completed. This means that the people of Bundibugyo may never get the road. 

I am saying this because the people have been looking forward to seeing the road. Some of the ministers Members of Parliament who were there during his campaigns in Bundibugyo, will remember that the President saying ‘when you are bathing your body, you start with the face and then the legs last.’ I being at the border, I imagine that at least if you are washing the face you start from Kampala, you go to Mubende, Fort Portal and the legs are Bundibugyo district. Now if the face is not going to be completed, how sure am I that the legs will be washed? 

Madam speaker, the people of Bundibugyo continue to blame all governments because they are the ones who have made them poor. There is now modernisation of agriculture, which has started there. DANIDA has gone there to train our people to implement better methods of agriculture, but I am wondering which roads they will use to bring their produce to the market.  

Recently we had a programme through the re-orientation programme on the road. We managed to secure 50 per cent to work on the road. I am saddened to see that even the government could not get for us the 50 per cent, at least if we were given a grant. But, why can’t they really look for a loan when they know that Bundibugyo contributes a lot of income to this government! 

We contribute a lot; we have a lot of crops and if you look at other districts, in fact, Bundibugyo contributes a lot. So, I do not want anybody to say how or where or what. This is well known. You can ask the Minister of Agriculture, you can go to Tourism, you can go anywhere; we have all the resources. 

I also want the government, including UPC which failed, But you cannot convince me by telling me - Madam speaker, can I be protected? (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Members, allow hon. Babiiha to talk about Bundibugyo and its problem.

MS ALISEMERA: I want also to request the Government to treat Bundibugyo and the Rwenzori region the same way it treats other regions when they are coming out of war problems We have had war, we have had all those difficulties, but we have not had a comprehensive programme where our people can get rehabilitated. We have had the Luwero Triangle; we have had the Northern Reconstruction Programme, but there is nothing called Rwenzori - maybe anything. 

So, we want also to be treated like other people; we want our people to be exempted from taxes because they are just beginning to be productive, so that they can also get some income to start paying taxes. We want also inputs to start productive activities. Madam speaker, I thank you.

MR HARRY KASIGWA (Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When you go through the State of Nation Address, it is evident that there is development across the country. However, one thing is missing out and this is the urban authorities in Uganda. There is nowhere in the State of Nation Address where the President mentions about the state of affairs in the municipalities, in the cities and in the towns, yet the other day when we were celebrating independence he talked about green flies. If you went to Mbale, you will compete with flies to eat food, which I find very, very, ridiculous.  

The financing and the infrastructure is so poor: Jinja Municipality, for example, runs a budget of Shs2 billion. It has an infrastructure of road network to consider, 130km of tarmac road, what is the way forward? We can no longer sustain ourselves, and we feel it is high time the government thought about urban areas because they have a direct bearing on investment inflows into this country.  

If you look at the poverty alleviation benchmarks in municipalities and urban areas, they consider the consumption of Blue Band or Colgate - but the truth is that we are extremely poor in the urban areas. In the last financial year, Jinja Municipality was given Shs34 million as PAF funds, which I found very ridiculous still.  

Secondly, on page 7, the President mentioned the amount of investments flowing into the country, there were about 130 projects totalling to US$215 million worth creating 11000 jobs. It is very unfortunate that 17 years down the road the government does not realise that its reporting mechanisms are very vulnerable. I am very sure 90 per cent of these projects quack projects. I have seen these fellows in Jinja holding Class D Investment Licenses and yet they are quacks. How do they get those licenses, Madam Speaker?  They are selling in shops petty, petty things, yet they have class D licences, which means they are equivalent to Madhivan.  

So, I still believe it is high time that Government -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, just a minute. Can we ask the Members who are in the lobby not to make noise.

MR KASIGWA: Madam Speaker, most of these gentlemen who come in as investors are not really investors. They come to earn a living like me and everybody else is doing in this country by selling Bagiya, petty, petty things and yet they qualify to get class D investment licenses, which I find very strange.  

Madam Speaker, in the statement, I came across two names, and I shuddered. Is that how we are going to run this country? Is the President saying that he has no confidence in his ministers? Have they failed to take decisions of government that he cannot trust them anymore? The best thing will be to let them resign if that is what we are witnessing.

Finally, yesterday we were involved in a debate, which I thought was very unfortunate for this country: a debate of ethnicity. I, Kasigwa, was born in Jinja and I represent the people of Jinja here. I am of mixed parentage. I have relatives in this House, in the names of Wapakabulo, Sabiiti and Prof. Mondo Kagonyera, and I live in Jinja, which I am very proud of. But in the 21st century, we are talking about ethnicity: that means we have failed to build a nation in Uganda. We are thinking of tribe, tribe, tribe, tribe! What signals are we sending to our children? I feel that is very strange, and I believe it is high time we learnt to live together. 

 To my colleagues from Teso, I would imagine that those people down there - I do not know what you call them – they have beautiful daughters. Inter-marry and let us forget about this crisis of Rwandese, Banyankore. Look at hon. Byanyima, she is very beautiful (Laughter). Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MS WINNIE BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the hon. Member from Jinja to come before this House and express his hidden feelings about the Member for Mbarara Municipality, who happens to be very properly married to a man who not through her choice may not be with her but whom she is still committed to? Is he in order to tell us his real feelings? (Laughter) Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the hon. Member from Jinja was only appreciating others who look like you (Laughter). So he is in order.

MR KASIGWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. But what I meant is that it is not a hidden fact that the Hamites are pretty people. So, if they inter-marry with the Nilotics, I mean what is wrong with that, Madam speaker? Thank you very much.

MR WILLIAM SITENDA-SEBALU (Kyadondo East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank His Excellency, the President for an articulate speech of the State of the Nation Address. I would also like to thank hon. Ruzindana for moving this motion.  

Madam Speaker, I would like to confine my short submission to one area in the President’s speech, that is the area of AGOA. The President correctly defined AGOA as African Growth Opportunity Act, and he went on to say that the definition of AGOA is not what is important, but the benefits the people of this country will get out of it.  

I would like to admit, as a leader, that I have failed to internalise the merits of AGOA. I would like to urge the government to organise more seminars about AGOA so that we leaders internalise AGOA properly and disseminate (_Mr Rwendeire rose_) not yet, let me finish up. I am saying that it is high time the ministers organised seminars so that we leaders internalise fully how we can operationalise and access AGOA, so that we can disseminate right information to our people in the local population.

Madam Speaker, I thank His Excellency, the President for his lobbying skills to bring AGOA, American market to Uganda. I want to give an example of my own scenario in my area, Wakiso district, where we have so many youth who are tirelessly involved in horticulture. All the tomatoes you see in Kampala are coming from Wakiso, in Nangabu sub-county. But it is really demeaning that when these people get the tomatoes during a bumper harvest either because of the dynamics of demand and supply, they cannot sell their tomatoes; all the tomatoes rot. 

I was suggesting that there is a component called value added as far as AGOA is concerned. What I have failed to appreciate is, how can a man down there in Wakiso who is engaged in tomato farming get to appreciate this component of the value added. If we had the dehydration and food processing units on every sub-county, we would be talking of completing the circuit of AGOA.  

There is a gap between the local producer and implementers of AGOA. A man brings the tomatoes and the tomatoes rot, how can they be accessed to the AGOA market?  Time has come for us to talk of dehydration and food processing units. In doing this we are even creating jobs for our youth, who have come from Makerere with degrees in food technology and what have you.  So, I suggest that as we talk about AGOA, we should also talk about dehydration and food processing units in every sub-county.

I would like also to talk about Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture. As we talk about AGOA, we should be talking about Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture. I had a chance to visit Israel recently, but people in Israel use machines: they even have small tractors in form of wheelbarrows. We are talking of modernisation of agriculture when our people are still using a hoe in this era of modernisation.  

When I met the President, I told him, ‘President, if we can have at least a tractor per parish, then we will be talking of modernisation of agriculture.’ Because, given the ailing situation of our youths, who are engaged in production, it is very easy for someone even if he is a going to plough about three hectares to use a tractor.  But you cannot talk of modernisation of agriculture when people are using simple hoes.

Madam Speaker, I would like also to speak about HIV/AIDS.  As I have been talking about the youth who are engaged in production, they are the most vulnerable sector in our agriculture. But it is very difficult for these youths to access dosages of the vaccine for AIDS. A doze for AIDS vaccine is Shs80,000 per week. This can only be afforded by the middle class. I was calling the government to bring in a subsidy so that they can at least reduce the price of the vaccine to at least Shs20,000 so that our youth who are engaged in the production sector can access the HIV vaccine. 

I would like to end by registering my disappointment over City Council. I have been telling you about a very bad scenario in Nangabo sub-county in Wakiso district. Most of this garbage you see from Kampala is damped in my area. Let City Council damp the garbage in Nangabo, but in a friendly, healthy manner.  

As I speak now, the World Bank gave us Shs2 billion to build a garbage recycling plant at Nangabo, but this money was swindled. Instead, they built a scarce sort of machine, which they put in acid. When you go there, if you are a layman, you can think something is taking place. I am speaking from a well-informed point because I am a chemist. What is taking place, Madam Speaker, is that they mix acid with water and think they are – and the person who is handling the battery is a “Muyindi” from Dot Services.  Have we forgotten our sovereignty? Why don’t we get people from Makerere with chemistry degrees to handle the water, which is going back into the system? Our people are drinking water, which is itching! I have done everything possible to see that my people get better drinking water. 

We are talking of AIDS, but just only eight miles from Kampala, people are dying of diarrhoea and dysentery. I challenge the Minister of Ethics and Integrity to intervene with the corruption in City Council. I beg to end here, thank you, very much.

MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA (Mwenge South, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion. I am particularly grateful for the advice given by the President on page 20, which says that we should channel people’s problems to the ministries concerned. I wish this were clear to the people we represent apart from what we must do in Article 79, because sometimes the demands are very high. 

On that side, I would like to make a few comments about three issues, the first is security. We have been hearing of very many reports of mob justice.  This is not justice. It should actually be called mob anarchy or mob madness or mob injustice. Yesterday in the Bukedde newspaper headlines, there was a story of a young baby boy whose head had just been cut off by a neighbour. Earlier on, still in Bukedde, we had a story of two people who were murdered in the sexual act. I have not heard any strong voice from government castigating what happened. More importantly, as Parliament, I think we should come out clearly to castigate what is going on around us.  

Madam Speaker, I also want to raise the issue of witchcraft and madness in different schools. What is happening? What is being done about these things? This is not new in Uganda; we have heard of many schools. If you look at the newspapers, I know people here have information to that effect. I would like to ask the government to intervene and create awareness about what is happening.  

My other point is on security within my own constituency and the district of Kyenjojo (Interruption). But you are taking my time.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Mrs Miria Matembe): Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the hon. Member and the House that these issues of immorality, moral decadence and unethical conduct that have invaded this nation have been seriously castigated and condemned by this government particularly through the Minister of Ethics and Integrity (Laughter). 

We have traversed districts where there are culprits, in mosques, and we have talked about moral decadence and unethical conduct. I see the Prime Minister – people talking about this (_Winnie Byanyima rose_) I want to finish first. These issues should be the concern of every Ugandan, particularly we leaders. 

Many times I have appeared in the press, on the radio, and I remain like a lonely voice when there are more than 300 Members of Parliament in this country. Even when they are battering women, even when they are raping them, and even murdering them, the Police say that the man was enjoying. What is enjoying?

These things have been happening and we have been talking. We have been educating the people. So, when the hon. Byamukama says government is doing nothing, I do not understand.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Is it in order for hon. Matembe to be unethical by refusing a point of clarification from hon. Byanyima?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I see no ethics in either accepting or refusing.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: I thank the hon. Minister for enriching my contribution, and I would like to clarify that I said, “not enough action is being done”. I want also to commend her for what she is doing.

The photo of this child was in the papers yesterday. I listened to the radio, I saw the television, but there was no emergency response. I also want Members of Parliament to come up with one voice and castigate these acts.

My second point on the security issue concerns Mwenge South in Kyenjojo district, which I represent. Recently, when I attended a council meeting, we were informed that LDUs were to be disarmed. We were also informed that guns were available to anybody who wished to get them at the counter. I also got an explanation that LDUs were disarmed so as not to use the guns in the ethnic and land wrangles. 

My confusion is this, if the Karimajong are being disarmed, if LDUs who have been trained for over a year are being disarmed, what will happen if murderers and thieves purchase guns from across the counter? What has the government put in place to make sure that the people who want to use guns to steal and kill do not get access to them? And if we are talking about ethnic wrangles, in Rwanda they did not need guns to kill each other.  

What I am trying to say, Madam Speaker, is that we should create the rule of law. We should create awareness about these issues so that people get to understand how to live with each other. I am perturbed by the sale of guns across the counter because in the USA where it has happened, school children have used them to murder their teachers and fellow students. Therefore, a policy, discipline, the rule of law, must be put in place to ensure that we manage these guns. I think we are not yet ready to get these guns at this level.

My third issue is on the land and ethnic wrangles. My biggest problem with this particular issue is the way it has been handled. Again, I want to talk about the rule of law because it seems that although we as Members of Parliament are mandated to protect the Constitution under Article 79, we have not done enough. I saw a situation where Article 21, which forbids discrimination, being breached. People were being discriminated against on the basis of the fact that they belonged to a certain tribe or origin. I am imploring the government and Members of Parliament to support us when we talk about these issues. 

I want to thank the government for dealing with the issue of Teso using the law. I hope that at some point, this Kibaale issue may be resolved according to the law. If it is not resolved according to the law, the President’s fate will haunt us forever. Posterity will judge us harshly.  

I would like to conclude by talking about pertinent laws.  Like hon. Ruzindana said, I was expecting to hear from the President some of the laws, which he would like us to enact as Parliament. This did not feature. I thought I would take this opportunity to talk about some of the laws, which have been pending. 

1. The Domestic Relations Bill: 

Every time we talk about the Domestic Relations law, people think about polygamy, and co-ownership of land. They forget that we are talking about security, governance, and tranquillity in the basic unit of society. Let me allay the fears of Members of Parliament and Uganda at large. The domestic Relations Bill does not prohibit polygamy; it restricts polygamy. I, as a woman rights activist, would have wanted it to prohibit polygamy because Article 31 – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, please listen to the Member.

MRS BYAMUKAMA DORA: Article 31 of the Constitution states that we should have equal rights in marriage, during marriage and at its dissolution. But when we talk about people being polygamous, it means that the woman does not have the same rights. So what I am trying to tell you is that this restriction is for your own good. If you are not financially capable, we are protecting the man, we are protecting the woman who will enter into this polygamous relationship and the children involved.  

On co-ownership, I have already made my statement and therefore, I will not say much more.  

I would like to talk a little bit about HIV/AIDS. Madam Speaker, we do not have any law on HIV/AIDS. I want to commend the Executive for doing tremendous work on this issue. However, we have not done enough work as Parliamentarians and therefore the successes registered will not be sustained because there are no laws in place.  For example, we need laws to protect health workers. We need laws to protect sex workers; we need laws to protect women in such relationships. We need laws to protect the heroes and heroines who are part of the vaccine trials. We need laws to protect orphans; we have no policy on orphans. We need laws on this issue in order for us to sustain and increase what we have done so far, because unless we have the laws, whatever has been done may be negated.

Finally, I would like to call for action on the Domestic Violence law. We have no specific law on domestic violence.  When we talk about domestic violence, we are taken as if we are not being serious. But when you see the number of women who have died at the hands of men, and men who have died at the hands of women, you realise that this issue is very grave. 

Therefore, I am calling upon Members of Parliament to act on this as well as the ministries to bring them on board. My biggest problem is that although we are Members of Parliament, we are constrained. Bringing a Private Members’ Bill on the Floor is next to impossible because Article 93 restricts us. Therefore, I urge the different ministries to bring up these laws and to make sure that we have them in place, because it is seven years since the Constitution was made and yet most of the enabling law has not been enacted.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR TOM KAYONGO (Lubaga North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion. I would like to thank the President for his elaborate address to the nation. I would like to comment on the state of our roads in Kampala, particularly in my area. 

Kampala City Council has no graders as I speak now, and you know that it was banded together with other districts. Its operations are like that of Kalangala and any other district. Kampala City Council as we speak has no grader and our roads are very poor. Two years ago the President went round the districts and urged Kampala City Council to tarmac all roads linking all divisions. Of course, you know the state of Kampala City Council. It has not been able to collect a lot of taxes because of politics and therefore, it cannot. So, I urge government to treat Kampala as a different district not like any other district in Uganda because this is the capital city of this nation.

There was a programme - I do not know where it ended - of re-sealing all roads that were once tarmacked in Kampala, but nothing has been done. I urge the Right hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business to make sure that the status of Kampala is lifted. I want to point out two roads: Kasubi – Nabulagala, which leads to the tombs, a tourist attraction recognised world-wide, and it is murrum! Tourists come from all over the world to tour the Kasubi Tombs and it is appalling. So, I urge the government to make sure that this road, which was once seen by Amin, as worth tarmacking, is tarmacked and lit.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, HOUSING (Capt. Francis Babu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and hon. Member for giving way. There was an hon. Member from Jinja who also made the same statement. I just wanted to give them some information that the central government has set up a committee between Kampala City Council and the Central government to look at the question of infrastructure. And in the near future, we are also looking for funds to try and help all urban authorities. We hope that when we are giving out our policy statement to the committee, we will be able to tell them exactly what is going on, on this particular front of urban authorities and where the central government is going to come in.  

However, I just want to confirm to the hon. Member that the Kibuye up to Natete road and the roundabouts that you see in Kampala was a central government intervention.

The Katwe - central government intervention with the World Bank to give the district some money. The money being used for the Nakivubo Channel was given to Kampala City Council as a grant and central government took it up as a loan and we will be paying it back to the World Bank. So, there are certain interventions to most of these urban authorities that have been coming. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I advise that unless there is a very major distortion of the Backbench, I would like the ministers to hold on until tomorrow. I will give them time to touch on whatever is coming from their ministries unless it is a major distortion. I will give all the ministers time to answer tomorrow.  

MR KAYONGO: Thank you hon. Minister for that information.  I would like also to appeal to the Minister of Works to immediately work on Hoima Road and Wakaliga – Natete – Bakuli Road to eliminate losing lives while drivers are trying to dodge potholes. Those two sections are really in a terrible mess.  

Madam Speaker, I would like also to appreciate His Excellency, the President when he touched on micro finance. Right now there has been a group in Kyankwanzi, which has been there for an induction course on how to create co-operatives. I doubt whether these micro finance institutions under the co-operatives are going to work because the majority of the people who have been in Kyankwanzi have been drawn from local leadership.  

You remember the Entandikwa Scheme; that is how it failed. A number of organisations have been trying to reach the poor, and I think they have done a commendable job. I thought government would come in to enrich these micro finance institutions. 

Uganda has been doing very well; many countries in Africa have been coming to Uganda, which is a study case now. Now, it is taking another trend. I do not know whether the Prime Minister’s office thought this was the best way to move.  

On AGOA, I wonder how this market has been penetrated by selfish people, and its security is now doubtful. A foreigner came and tricked our people, the Ministry of Trade and Industry and all other related bodies. In fact, they beat even the security of this country because a thief came and lured our people. They paid a lot of money and we just saw them on TV languishing in USA. We cannot operate like this. There must be a clear policy on how we are going to approach AGOA. How we are going to -(Interruption)

MR ERESU ELIANU: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. Yesterday, the hon. Minister of Internal Affairs delivered to this House a statement with regard to a gentleman who was supposed to have been kidnapped by FBI or CIA and taken to the United States for trial. The Minister stated that he would come with a complete statement today indicating even the name of the person.  May I, by way of procedure, request the Minister to produce that statement as per his promise of yesterday.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the Minister was here for almost two hours and you did not raise this issue. You are starting a procedural point to disturb our work. Proceed.

MR KAYONGO: Madam Deputy Speaker, why I doubt the security of our trade outside is that right now our coffee is being processed in Tanzania and producing a brand called Star. You know that our coffee is used world-wide to blend other types of coffee because ours is of high quality. They bring out a quality Star Uganda coffee. Who can guarantee to me today that, that Star coffee is actually a final product of our coffee beans? Nobody, because it is processed and packed outside.

Madam Deputy Speaker, let me comment on the UPE -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Try to wind up, hon. Kayongo.

MR KAYONGO: Let me comment on UPE. The Ministry of Education is tendering out services to different contractors to build classrooms countrywide. In my constituency, they tendered - because I verified this information. I asked KCC, they denied knowledge of the tendering. They tendered and built a school in Lugala, Lugobe, Namungona, Lubya. The school has worked for one term and the floor is peeling off. The roof is shaking.  They don’t have supervisors? This is how the Movement government has been ridiculed by many people including the multypartists saying that we are doing no work. It is because those who give out work do not supervise it. And I request the Ministry of Education that if it tenders out work, it must also have the capacity to supervise it. Madam Deputy Speaker, thank you.

MR LOUIS OPANGE (Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join the rest of the Members of Parliament to congratulate His Excellency, the President on his State of Nation Address. I want to make a few remarks regarding the infrastructure.

In 1996, the President pledged to work on our road, that is the Tirinyi - Pallisa - Kumi Road to be tarmacked. In 2001, in the same manifesto, that road was pledged but now there is nothing in the state of the nation’s address regarding the road. 

When I was in the constituency, people from Pallisa county asked me to find out from the President what he was up to concerning this road, or was it for vote catching?  

As far as the hospitals are concerned, we are happy that the structures are there, but when you go, say, to Pallisa Hospital, you cannot even get aspirins there! The death rate has also gone up because of the problem of corruption in the district hospitals.  

As far as Education is concerned, we are training teachers every year. Several teachers are coming out every year but people are on the streets and we always talk against unemployment. We are saying we are lifting the ban. As we talk now, in Pallisa county alone, we have over 200 teachers who are just languishing without being deployed. I am aware that Nyondo TTC, Kabwangasi TTC and even other secondary schools within the country have no teachers. Despite that, government is not doing anything as far as lifting the ban on recruitment of teachers is concerned. 

His Excellency introduced preventive health care measures. I wish to thank the President on his overwhelming victory on immunisation, but my worry is on HIV/AIDS. He quoted figures here that show that the HIV/AIDS prevalence reduced from 30 per cent to 8 per cent in 2000, then further to 6.1 per cent in 2002. Madam Speaker, the situation on the ground is not that exactly. These figures are lacking some support. 

When I was still with the Uganda AIDS Commission, we went round the country to inaugurate the District AIDS Co-ordination Committees. We visited most of the hospitals including Kumi, Atuturu and Soroti. In our investigations we found that three people out of the 20 taken for the sample, were HIV positive. If you go by percentage then that is already 15 per cent. 

Secondly, district leaders are not up to talking about AIDS. When we inaugurated District AIDS Co-ordination Committees, they came out openly against them, and we found out that the information was not reaching the grassroots. There are cultural and traditional beliefs, for example, in the west there is the issue of the spear, and in the east when your brother dies you have to inherit the -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Opange, I understand you are distorting some facts. The Minister would like to correct you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Capt. Michael Mukula): Madam Speaker, I thank my colleague for giving way. I want to sanitise the mind of my colleague and clear certain issues. The figures that have been -(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, is the expression, “sanitise the hon. Member’s mind” really parliamentary language? And if not, is it in order for the hon. Minister to use such expressions when referring to a Member of this House? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think that language is not parliamentary. The hon. Member has a clean mind, it does not require sanitising. Just inform him.

CAPT MUKULA: Madam Speaker, I thank you for the wise ruling and I withdraw that. I just want to clarify on the figures that my hon. colleague has given.

In 1992 the HIV/AIDS zero prevalence was at cent natal points. These were the antenatal points where the survey was carried out. It was at 30 per cent. By 1996, because of our protracted struggle together with the CBOs and NGOs and the concerted effort of government, the prevalence reduced. We were able to inform the people through open, effective advocacy, and the prevalence rates at these cent natal centres at the hospitals that were picked countrywide as sample areas, reduced. 

By 1996 the figure was at about 18.4 percent. By 1999, these figures had dropped to 6.8 per cent, and by the end of 2001, the figures reduced to what His Excellency the President communicated to the nation, of 6.1 per cent. 

You may wish to note that UNAIDS, the global organisation that was constituted by the United Nations, recently at the on-going conference on AIDS in Barcelona, came out very clearly to say that Uganda’s viral prevalence had reduced to 5 per cent. 

I want you to understand, hon. colleague, that there is no single person in this country who has not lost a person to AIDS. But you note that by the beginning of the 1990s, even towards 1996, even in churches, burying people used to be done in queues. You were almost burying people everyday. But you will note that the average number of people we are losing has now tremendously gone down. 

At national level, the figure of those who have the HIV virus stands at 1.1 million people. We have lost 800,000 people to HIV/AIDS. Those who have full-blown HIV/AIDS in the country are about 130,000 people. The point I want to develop here is for us to understand that even if we have had this significant drop, we should make sure that advocacy and the move for us collectively as a nation and its leaders should be increased so that we reduce the figures further. Countries like Senegal have one per cent prevalence. Zambia has 32 per cent prevalence. It is important for you to note that Uganda, because of the effective drive that we have put up, has been able to achieve those significant figures. I thank you.

MR OPANGE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the Minister for the information. I would also want to inform him that the situation on the ground is very pathetic, and we should work very hard to see that we curb it –(Interruption) (_Prof. Kagonyera rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Opange, you have tackled a very important matter, and the hon. Minister for General Duties in the Prime Minister’s Office wants to add something to it.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you hon. Member. It is extremely important that people get properly informed about this question of AIDS in Uganda. 

Number one; the people involved in doing the research are men and women of scientific repute. They are not witch doctors. They use scientific methods to arrive at the information they give us. 

Number two; you have two epidemiological terms here. One is prevalence and the other one is incidence. Some people use them indiscriminately but they are different. Prevalence means the total number of cases you have in a population. Incidence means the number of new cases. So, if you have a country like Uganda, with good medical attention people live longer and therefore the prevalence can remain artificially high. If they were all dying off like flies, the prevalence would be low. 

Thirdly, the statistical methods used are worldwide standard methods of analysis. Unless the hon. Member is willing to tell this House otherwise, a leader should make scientific and factual statements not generalisations. Because it is really a disservice to this country for a Member of Parliament to stand up without scientific evidence and start making such statements. 

I am saying this, Madam Speaker, because there was an article in the Lancet of this week by an ignorant fellow from London, saying that all we have been saying about Uganda is false. This is very unfortunate –(Interjection)- Can I be allowed to continue and inform the House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Therefore, I wish to inform the hon. Member that the evidence provided is scientifically derived –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, there is a point of order.

MS MUGERWA NAMAGWA: Madam Speaker, I am sorry for interrupting the Minister for General Duties in the Prime Minister’s Office, but this is a very important issue. I am wondering whether the Minister is in order to make us believe that all over Uganda, in all corners, there has been statistical information recorded of the incidences, the deaths and of the sick. Has there been research? Can you prove to us that there has been research?

I can give an example. I lost two sisters, they did not die in the hospital and their children died outside hospital too. I have never reported that yet I am sure they are part of the people who died of AIDS. Is it in order for the Minister to stand up and confuse the nation? Instead of giving us advice to take more precaution, he is stating that the statistical information that is available is the true picture of the nation. Is he in order? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the Minister was expounding on the various ways in which they have come by the statistics they have been giving us. I do not think he said he has exhausted all of them, but he has tackled those they have been using in this country to arrive at the figures that we have been given. So he is in order.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Let me finish what I was saying, Madam Speaker. The hon. Members should know that when I talk about statistical methods, I am talking about how you extrapolate information from samples to the total population. You do not go after everybody. That is not science (Laughter).

I therefore appeal to this House that as leaders, what we should do is to genuinely complement everybody in this country, including ourselves, who has participated in fighting AIDS. It is a fact that AIDS prevalence in Uganda is at the level that has been stated. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Opange, let me give you three minutes to finalise your matter.

MR OPANGE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As far as the statistics are concerned, there is always a sample survey and what we are querying is the sample and the scope used. Let me assure you that I was in the Uganda AIDS Commission. We should not be fooled into relaxing by information that the AIDS prevalence is reducing in Uganda. We should come out openly and see that we move further and possibly put laws in place accordingly. The most important thing is to encourage all the people of Uganda to test themselves for HIV/AIDS. The other important thing is to help government by actually telling the world the true position in the country. 

I would also like to comment on poverty eradication –(Interjections) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Members, do not heckle the Member. I have protected him for three minutes.

MR OPANGE: Poverty is just like AIDS. We need to use a multi-sectoral approach to fighting poverty. For the last 17 years we have been talking about poverty eradication and Entandikwa, and a lot of money was injected into the districts but no single coin went to the rural areas. People from Pallisa County are always saying, ‘hon. Opange, what is happening? People are exploiting us.’

COWE went to Pallisa County and collected Shs47 million on the issue of poverty eradication. One officer from the President’s Office went to Pallisa and blindfolded people that His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni had sent him to give forms to people so that they would eradicate poverty. A lot of money was collected –(Interruption)

MS AKELLO: Can I inform him on Entandikwa?

MR OPANGI: Let me complete, I may get lost. Secondly, -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Opange, you said that –(Interruption)

MR OPANGE: Madam Speaker, let me conclude my point first.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, but you said that no money went to Pallisa for Entandikwa. I think that is what the Minister wants to reply to.

MR OPANGE: I have not made the whole point, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is not about COWE. The Member alleged that no money went to Pallisa for Entandikwa.

MR OPANGE: Madam Speaker, I said that a lot of money was injected into the district coffers and no single coin penetrated into the rural areas where my people are. I would like to challenge the hon. Minister to produce the list of the people who actually benefited from the Entandikwa that was sent to the rural areas. There is a problem –(Interruption)

MS AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank my hon. colleague from Pallisa for giving way however reluctantly. Anyway, this information is good for him. 

In Pallisa we have four counties, each of those got the full allocation of Entandikwa money not just for the first phase but for the second phase too. Budaka got Shs60 million altogether for phase one and two. Butebo got Shs60 million, Pallisa got Shs 60million and Kibuku got Shs60 million. All of them got Shs60 million each. 

The allocation, as you know, was dependent upon the local committee, which was constituted by the people of Pallisa themselves, to give out this money to productive enterprises. We had no control over that. Therefore, since each of the constituencies in Pallisa got Shs60 million and there are four of them altogether, government disbursed Shs240 million to Pallisa. And that is under the Entandikwa scheme alone. I can verify this. If you wish I could bring records here of who got the money in which constituency, to the last shilling.

MR OPANGE: Madam Speaker, the information the hon. Minister has given us in this House is on paper. Pallisa is very near. The money possibly reached the district but it did not get to the people. 

When His Excellency was campaigning he promised the women of Pallisa County a special fund, one I expected to have been included in this national address (Laughter). 

I can assure you that poverty is a problem. The same poverty is being used; money is sent to the districts and it is only the district leaders and their councillors who are the beneficiaries of this money. 

The problem with the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture for the people of Pallisa County is that in five years to come we may not have seen it bear fruit, yet there are billions of shillings to be used on this programme. Pallisa County people are saying the government should use practical means and give them equipment, give them the improved seeds and the rest needed to improve the productivity of agriculture. As we talk now people are trying their best to increase the productivity but we should join hands. 

The question I should possibly ask is, when is this Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture taking off so that when we go out we tell the people the exact date? We want to tell them that, “in December this year we are going to start modernising agriculture.” 

Let me finalise on one point, Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have taken more than the three minutes I gave you.

MR OPANGE: Madam Speaker, allow me, this is a very sensitive issue that can benefit the people. 

In conclusion, as far as security and good governance in Uganda are concerned, I have this to say. For us in Eastern Uganda we fought this government, and many people died in the process. The NRA then would ask us, “where are the rebels?” If you told them that there were no rebels, they killed you. When the situation was okay they could kill people and use that to justify their stay in the region. 

What did we do in the Eastern to remove rebel activities? And our friends in the North could possibly adopt this. Madam Speaker, in Eastern Uganda there are four ways in which we fought rebel activities and ended up supporting the government. 

One; we requested the government to withdraw UPDF from the operational areas and restrict them to the barracks. 

We also requested the government to arm LDUs from those local areas, under the command of the UPDF.  

We encouraged the wanainchi and the politicians to report any rebel activities going on in the region and necessary steps were taken on any report received. 

We also encouraged the government to resettle all those rebels who were surrendering without intimidation, without being arrested and kept in Luzira. They were all later re-settled in their homes. 

Then the last one, we encouraged the government to kill the stubborn rebels. The point I am making here is, if the people from the region say no to rebel activities, there will be some semblance of peace in the North. We should come together and join the government and see that we move forward. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

PROF. LATIGO: Madam Speaker, the speaker holding the Floor has given a list of things to imply that the people in Acholi have not addressed the problem of rebellion. I know very well that the gentleman comes from Pallisa and the rebellion was in Teso, not Pallisa. Is he in order to speak as if there was rebellion in Pallisa when there was none?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, whether there was a rebellion in Pallisa or not, the hon. Member is a national Member of Parliament. He can talk about issues of security in this country wherever they are. 

Secondly, he did not talk about Acholi. He did not talk about any specific area, he just said rebellion and he did not say whether it was in Kampala or anywhere else. Please proceed and wind up.

MR OPANGE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The point I was making is Pallisa district was involved in rebel activities under the command of my brother then. I personally participated in making sure that the rebellion in the East came to a standstill. For that matter - and we are now seeing some bit of development in the country - we should all pray and we should all come out openly and say “no” to rebel activities in the North. The problem in the North is not for the North alone. It is for Uganda and we should all involve ourselves in it. If the soldiers are misbehaving in the North, let them go back to the barracks. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR KALULE SSENGO (Gomba County, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam speaker. Like my colleagues, I rise in support of the motion. I want to join my colleagues in thanking the President for his clear and precise address to the nation. 

I note on page one the steady growth of our economy of 5.6 per cent. While this is very much appreciated, we have a feeling that this growth should be translated to the man in the rural areas. People in the rural areas are very poor and they are arguing that this economic growth we are talking about is only for big towns like Kampala, Mbarara and perhaps Jinja. It is my hope that programmes like the PMA and the NAADs will be able to transform the lives of our people in the countryside.  

I am also impressed by the figures on AIDS. These are on page 15. While these figures are impressing, Madam Speaker, I am a bit worried that we may go back to the past because of the immorality that is going around. Some of my colleagues hinted on it, but I am really worried about the rate of pornography in this country. Almost daily you see pictures of naked women - lucky enough the men are not normally there – but it appalling. 

I am a frequent reader of Orumuri. I do not read Red Pepper because it is terrible (Laughter). Madam Speaker, if you look at the Orumuri of Monday, and you go to the open Shwenkazi on page 17, you will see those pictures there. It is a shame! How can we fight AIDS when people are exposing things in the open and small children are looking at them? 

When the Minister stood up and said she is fighting immorality, I really laughed because I do not see enough emphasis put on the matter. Why do we not put up strict laws against pornography? It is only once in a while that you hear of her quoted in the press, and that is all. Nothing is being done. Pictures of naked women are coming out everyday and this is one way of encouraging promiscuity, another way of spreading AIDS. 

I now move on to infrastructure. I note the number of roads that are to be tarmacked and I am really grateful. I remember I was with you in the NRC, Madam Speaker, and every financial year they would read out the list of roads to be upgraded and we would clap. I clapped for seven years without seeing a tarmacked road in my area. Now I am clapping for another year and still nothing.

On the list of roads that are to be upgraded, my area is not covered. We have been crying for the upgrading of roads from Mpigi down to Kibibi, to Kanoni, to Madu and the other areas, but nothing is being done. And there is no mention of it in the government programmes. I do not know whether the Ministry of Works or the Ministry of Finance forgot about us. I am appealing that for the remaining three budgets before we leave this Parliament, I want to see our roads in the government programmes.

I now turn over to water. I am happy to note that areas of Mawogola, Gomba and Bulemezi are getting a special programme for getting dams This is very good. You will appreciate that these are cattle areas and the other day when the President was talking to us, he said that he does not see why people do not import meat from Uganda. He even talked of beef in Japan where a kilo costs US$200. And he was told that these cows are fed on - is it wine - and they play music to them so that the meat is good!

Madam Speaker, these areas that are being given water are grasslands where cattle can be reared. This country can produce enough beef to export to these countries so that we can take advantage of this money in Japan. Instead of those people playing music for the cattle, we can keep them for them and export beef. So I am appealing to the government to have a special programme for people in these areas, a programme of rearing beef cows so that we can start exporting meat and be able to earn foreign exchange for this country. 

Allow me, Madam Speaker, to go slightly on corruption. Corruption is eating our country. If you went to the hospitals, if you are a common man, unless you bribe, nobody will attend to you. Much as we introduced this system of not paying for the drugs, it has not really helped because every time you go to the hospital they will tell you there are no drugs. 

At one time there was a proposal by the President to have two windows, window “A” for the rich men so that they can pay through the nose and have the services, then window “B” where people would have free services. I do not know what has happened to these two windows. It is good the hon. Minister of Health is around; I hope he will be able to answer back. At least let the rich people be made to pay a lot of money so that this money is used to sustain the medical workers, then let the poor men get the services they need, let them get the drugs.

Madam Speaker, I was disappointed by a story which was narrated by one of our priests who is working in South Africa. He has a relative who got an accident, this man was admitted to Mulago, and before they could touch him they insisted on having Shs20,000 paid. That money was paid then they gave him a bit of treatment. Two days later, they told him that he needed to go into the scan and they wanted Shs150,000. These people were determined to leave that man die because he could not produce Shs150,000. Now, the relatives went around, mobilised the money, paid it in and as soon as the money was paid, the man was discharged and he never went to the scan. So, this is the level of corruption we are having in this country. You make a man pay Shs150,000 for the scan, you do not take him to the scan, you discharge him. That is what is happening in our hospitals. 

Madam Speaker, it is even worse in the judiciary especially in these lower courts. I hope the government can take trouble to institute inquiries into these systems, because the situation is worrying us. Cases are there, money is being asked from people (_Mr Mike Mukula rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssengo, I understand you have made a distortion, can we hear from the Minister of Health.

CAPT. MIKE MUKULA: I thank you, Madam Speaker and my colleague for giving way. Just to clear one or two things.  One is that when cost sharing was scrapped in March last year, it was out of a very clear study, which was carried out by Prof. Turyamuhika. In his survey, it was clearly drawn that out of the total population of our nation, only 13 per cent could afford to pay for medical care. The other 87 per cent in most cases would lament, remain at home and sometimes get inadequate care.  

It was on the basis of that study that Government through His Excellency the President, took that initiative to say that there should be more increased budget towards ensuring that the 87 per cent of our nation that is suffering from inability to access medicine must be attended to. 

However, I want you to note that Uganda is a developing nation. By the time the government took over in 1986/87, the expenditure on health care by government was below one dollar. But I want you to take note of the fact that there has been tremendous increase in budget funding. As we talk to day, government contribution towards budget on the health sector per capital has risen to six dollars. When you compound that input including private sector, it has come down close to 12 per cent per capita (_Ms Byanyima rose_) 

May I generate this point so that I do not lose the (Interruption) 

MS BYANYIMA: It is the same point I want to ask about.  Madam Speaker, I want the hon. Minister to clarify to this House, isn’t it true that that six dollar per capita investment in the health of Ugandans is the lowest in Sub-Sahara Africa? And is it also not true that this very year, because of the tight management of our fiscal deficit, money that could have been invested in the health sector from the donors was turned away, and that there is a tight refusal to increase investment in the health sector so that we are at least close to other Sub-Saharan African countries, is that not true?

CAPT. MUKULA: Madam Speaker, responding to the question and the point raised by hon. Winnie Byanyima, the position is that the government of Uganda operates its budget in collaboration with development partners. Now, the development partners have developed a framework in both the financing of government and more so our sector Ministry of Health by what we call the envelope approach. In our budget framework, there is what we call a budget ceiling. That budget ceiling is aimed at maintaining the macro-economic stability and it has got a number of factors that are compounded in ensuring that we have to manage our fiscal policy and macro-economic stability in the country.  

It is also important for you to note that there are many sectors in the social sectors and more so Uganda, which are benefiting from the HIPC fund. Under this HIPC fund, our development partners, including World Bank, IMF and the other nations, have drawn a common strategy in ensuring that as we continue to increase our budget funding in the health sector, a number of factors are put into consideration.

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, you made your position very clear that at the end of the debate ministers will get the opportunity to answer many of the queries arising from Members’ contributions.  When the Minister of Health rose, I thought his contribution was going to be brief so that he just gives information and corrects any particular mistake my colleague has made in his presentation. Madam Speaker, is it in order for the hon. Minister of Health to make a full contribution on a matter which he will have an opportunity to contribute on when you call upon them to answer the queries of Members, and actually waste the time of the House, is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I will rule him out of order on that ground. I expected that he was going to answer specifically to what hon. Ssengo raised that a certain patient was asked to pay money and after paying it he was not treated. That is what I expected the Minister to talk about.

CAPT. MUKULA: Madam Speaker, I will prevail within your ruling and say very clearly that I will be very glad to get the information of the patient or the person who was affected so that we can be able to take appropriate action. And if it were possible, I would be able to have a word with my hon. colleague after this so that we can respond to any person who my have extorted money from the patient. But I would like to assure you that this is not the policy of government. I thank you.

MR KALULE SSENGO: I am glad that the Minister is now coming to the point, because I was very appreciative of the efforts of government. I know government is increasing its funding on medical services but my complaint was the corruption in the institutions. Madam Speaker, at an appropriate time, I am going to produce a write up of this particular case from the priest who experienced all these misfortunes, and I will pass it over to you so that the Minister can take appropriate action.

I note that on page 17 government has been distributing over Shs3.2 million coffee seedlings to our farmers. This is a very big achievement. In a similar vein, I am now appealing to the government to start doing the same with vanilla vines because vanilla is earning a lot of money.  Let some of this money that is being spent on coffee be spent on vanilla vines so that our farmers can grow more vanilla, export it and the country will be able to realise more foreign exchange.  

I am encouraged, on page 2, by the statement of His Excellency the President when he says that on policy matters where there are mistakes we must take steps to rectify issues on time. This is a very encouraging statement, Madam Speaker. I am taking it to imply that government will accept constructive criticisms where we feel we have got to criticise. 

There is a tendency these days for some people in government circles every time they hear of a criticism, they say, “you man, are you now turning against the Movement?” But this is not the case.  We always criticise in good faith! (Applause) Because we love this Government, we must criticise where we feel things are going wrong. When we do it people should not misunderstand us. When I criticise you, it does not mean I do not love you. In fact, because I love you, that is why I criticise so that you do a good job. 

Lastly, I want to turn over to page 20 where His Excellency says that it is very important for us to work together. He is talking of unity. Now that is very important and very encouraging. I want to take this opportunity, Madam Speaker, to appeal to all my colleagues in this House to work for unity. The good of this nation has nothing to do with one’s political affiliation. You may be a multipartyist, you may be a movementist, you may be anything, but this nation must come first. We are all Ugandans; let us all work for the good of this country.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disability): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this address. I want to start with cost sharing. The removal of cost sharing was a mistake! The Minister of Health must understand so. The Minister of Health must tell the President that it was a mistake and this is causing more hardship to the people than was the case before cost sharing was removed.

When there was cost sharing, the people working in the medical field at the end of the day had some little money to help them for transport to go to work, for food while they were at work. Today, after removing cost sharing, these people are so frustrated. First of all, there are no medicines in these health places. It was a mistake, it must be reversed in the interest of everybody and nobody should continue confusing the President that we need the removal of cost sharing. 

Madam Speaker, I thought I had better start with this matter before I go to the beginning of my speech and thank the President for his address.

I thank the President for his address and I would like to say, as I did at one time, that it was good that at least this time, we had somebody else to read his address. Some hon. members laughed when I said so last time. As I said then, during the President’s last term of office, we should be getting signals that actually there is a systematic arrangement for transfer of power. This is important! I mean it is no good for anybody to say that we should not discuss the political future of this country. It is in our interest to discuss the political future of Uganda. We must discuss it, we must create a consensus; we must know where we are going, come 2006. 

It is important that the President should from time to time delegate some of these responsibilities to other people.  Let me tell you, President Mandela, I think at least within his last three years of office, left a lot of work to be done by Mbeki. Mbeki was doing a lot of the executive work, presiding over Cabinet, doing a lot of things while mzee Mandela  (_Mr Reagan Okumu rose_) - I will take the information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No! I have not allowed any information.

MR MWANDHA: Well, the point I am making is important for all of us and at this time, let me echo and really salute hon. Bidandi Ssali, hon. Kategaya, hon. Wapakhabulo that we must start discussing the political future of Uganda.  Nobody else is going to do it except ourselves, and I must say that we actually let them down. We should have taken up the matter, discussed issues of the political future of Uganda from that time when the candle was lit. We all kept quiet. They were taken to Kyankwanzi, humiliated, and made quiet. They put up some committee; we do not know what the committee is going to report and to whom it is going to report, and when it is going to report. Madam Speaker, we must address the political future of Uganda. There is no other way than to address it.

President Museveni has done so well for this country. I for one as a disabled person probably I would not be in this Parliament if it were not for the policies of recognising the marginalised people. I am here because of the Movement, I love the Movement, I support the Movement, I do not believe that we should be made to keep quiet to discuss the political future of Uganda. 

The political future of Uganda must be discussed in Parliament, in rallies, in churches, in mosques, in bars, in restaurants, in families so that we create a consensus of a way forward (Applause). If we continue taking a back stage in discussing the political future of this country, we shall have nobody to blame other than ourselves and the future will not judge us lightly. Therefore, I want to differ from the argument that now we do not need to discuss the political future of Uganda, and I hope this message will be clear to everybody.

Madam Speaker, let me talk about instability in Uganda. The stories we are getting from the North are extremely worrying. You have to be having a stone-heart not to be worried about what is going on in the North. It is worrying! We must be modest and listen to the people who are suffering. What are they saying? They are saying: “Please government talk to this person. Talk to him, we are dying, we are out in the open air as if we are not human beings. Our huts are being burnt; our wives and children are being raped, people are being killed. Please, please talk to this man.” 

I think it is too arrogant for government to say: ‘we cannot talk to him. He has no programme; he has nothing.’ The man may be a thug, he may not have a programme, he may be stupid, he may be mad, but he is killing Ugandans; he is raping women; he is burning property; he is doing all these things! If your military option is not working, why can’t you think of other options? Why?  

Leaders are saying so, religious people are saying, ‘please negotiate’. Everybody is saying, ‘negotiate, we are dying, negotiate’. And in the comfort of Kampala, in air-conditioned offices, air-conditioned cars and everywhere in this lovely Parliament, we are saying we cannot negotiate because these people have no programme, they are stupid, they are killers, they are criminals – so what? But the people are dying! Where is the option? 

You say we have really surrounded them. Then they hit you from the rear. Now, who is surrounding who if they can hit you from the rear? Who is surrounding who? So, Madam Speaker, I want to support everybody in this country who says this government should negotiate with these people, whether you call them robbers or thugs or stupid or mad people, as long as we can stop the killing of Ugandans. This is very vital (Applause).

When my colleagues were contributing to this debate, they made various comments about the content and quality of this address. The fact that this was an address on the state of the nation should at least have given a programme of legislation to this Parliament. Most addresses on the state of the nation do this, and I would like to ask the Head of Government Business to advise that really this is one of the things for the future addresses that we should have a programme of legislation. It helps Members of Parliament to do research. Research is important. It helps them to go and consult with their electorates, but if you give us an address, which has no indication as to what business of this Parliament for the next 12 months, what do you expect us to do? That was a major omission.

The Constitution provides that the President once a year, will report on the state of the people who are maginalised. These include disabled people. Ever since that Constitution came into force, there has never been a report from the President on this issue. We would at least have thought that in this address, the President would have made a statement with regard to the state of the people that are maginalised. Here the disabled people have a problem. We do not have a policy on disability. There are policies on everything including children, the youth, the women, except the people with disabilities. There is no policy. Now, how – (Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, Elderly & Disability (Mrs Florence Sekabira): Thank you very, Madam Deputy Speaker and thank you hon. Mwandha for giving way. I would like to inform hon. Mwandha and the House that the policy on disability is now on the way and soon you will be able to access it. We have a draft policy.

It is also important for me to inform hon. Mwandha that as much as I appreciate that disability issues have not been reported in the President’s Speech, what the Constitution provides is that people with disability should be represented. He has to report on how far government has gone to provide for disabled people especially in representation on constitutional bodies and other bodies. 

Hon. Mwandha is well aware that right now on the National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) board - because we are talking about poverty - we have a farmer with disability, Arthur Brick Mugerwa, who is ensuring that farmers with disabilities are properly taken care of. It would be of interest to the hon. Mwandha maybe to convince this Parliament that he is aware that on the Education Commission we have Miss Okot Helen Winfred representing the disabled. He is also well informed that people with disabilities are yet or may be Parliament is yet shortly to receive the disability counsel because Cabinet has already handled it.

So, in one way or another, I am saying that work has been done, so it is a matter of even him as one of the leaders carrying the same information to the other people. It is one thing having your issues raised and another thing for a report to say, ‘we have been able to have a representative of farmers with disability on NAADS, we have a person of disability on the Education Commission’, and the Education Ministry has gone far in this area. So, I thought this information would be important for him to be aware of and the House at large. Thank you very much (Applause).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mwandha, please wind up.

MR MWANDHA: Okay, I would like to thank the Minister for that information.  

In summary, I think it will be terribly wrong for this House to accept the position that we should not discuss the political future of Uganda!

Secondly, we must be modest enough to consider other options and stop this carnage, which is going on in the North. 

Thirdly, I think it is important that the President should do what the Constitution requires of him with regard to people with disabilities.  Thank you very much.

MR SULAIMAN MADADA (Bbale County, Kayunga): Madam Speaker, I will begin by saying that the people of Bbale are quite knowledgeable that the cardinal role of Government is to deliver services to them, and that is the basis of my comment on the President’s speech.  

I would like to begin on this issue of good governance, particularly where the President talks about several reforms and actions that have been taken to improve service delivery. He said that it is important to streamline and define roles. Quite aware that the principle directive of the state policy is that we are based on decentralisation, where we have had a problem by experience, we need to streamline and define roles in areas we find conflicts.  

First, our experience from previous district and sub-county councils, there have been a lot of conflicts, and sorting out these conflicts has been quite expensive. There is need for a clear way to sort out conflicts in the district councils. So, it is a challenge for both Parliament and government to re-address the law on local government to ensure that the conflicts at local government level do not cost the taxpayers. You have seen the experience in Iganga where the chairman going to court with the speaker. You have seen the experience in Masaka Municipality where sometimes they go to the IGG. They do not know how to define issues. You have seen experiences in Kayunga Town Council where offices are being locked. So, it is a big challenge to us to ensure that such conflicts do not waste a lot of taxpayer’s money.  

Besides that, chunks of money are going to local governments but monitoring funds is still a problem. I think we need a law, which we can use to monitor the funds going to local governments. You realise that many people are talking about shoddy buildings, a lot of money being spent in constructions but central government after sending money, there is no direct system of seeing what is going on. So as we talk about corruption being decentralised -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Madada, I have not allowed you to take information. We are trying to wind up.

MR MADADA: I wanted to assure my brother who wanted to give me information that I am talking from experience having been in the district council for 14 years. I am saying there is no direct monitoring of funds that are going to local governments from the centre. And as you talk about corruption, corruption is being decentralised down there.  So, as Parliament, we need to look for a way we can monitor funds down there, otherwise we have a problem.  

Then we have the issue of the security organs that under – they are between local governments and central government.  For example, the local administration police could be administered may be at local government level; recruitment may be at the central government. There is a problem there that we need to address and manage the local administration police in addition to putting in place a good law for the LDUs and therefore, sort out those differences.

I want to go to the area of education on page 14. The President has rightly put it that there will be an increase in the enrolment of the UPE programme. He also talked about expansion of secondary schools for every county. I have a worry here, and they are saying that by 2003 each sub-county should have a secondary school. I have been in Bbale, I have four sub-counties but since we talked about this, I have not seen any secondary school, but 2003 is about to come.  So, I have a problem. Therefore, I would like to know from the Minister of Education whether this is serious assumption or it is a commitment of government. If not so, let us be advised and see the way forward.  

The other point is attracting investment in secondary education. If government cannot afford to provide secondary education, we could give investors who can afford, to put money in secondary education, so that we can be able to sustain the outflow of pupils from primary schools. That would be a good point to look at.  

The other point I have looked at on page 17 is where we have clonal coffee seedlings distributed to all parts of this country. This is a good programme, but there is need for government to follow up the distribution of these seedlings. We can continue distributing the seedlings and the effect may not be there. There should be a deliberate plan to follow up how effective these seedlings are distributed down there. Are they properly utilised? Are they making an effect? Let us put a lot of money for education and mobilisation of people and follow up programmes. Otherwise many government good programmes will die on their own without being followed up.

Lastly, in his speech, the President mentioned collaboration with civil society, media and the state and Parliament. I would like to emphasise that as an interested partner of civil society, there is a lot of lip service about collaboration with civil society. I would like the government to go further and see how they can really help the civil society to properly work with the government to develop this country. Thank you very much.

MRS SEBAGEREKA KAKOOKO (Woman Representative Kayunga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I bring greetings to the Members of Parliament here, and His Excellency the President, and I thank all of you hon. Members for the support given to the State of Nation Address.  

Madam Speaker, I want to start with the conclusion on page 20, where the President says, “I finally urge hon. Members to continue to work together for the good of this nation in good partnership with the Executive”. I sincerely feel that the President is urging us to be patriotic. We might have our own personal differences, we might have a lot of things that we are not happy about, but unity in diversity is very important at this very crucial moment in the development of this country.  

He appeals also to the judiciary. Madam Speaker, there are many Ugandans languishing in the Ugandan prisons without their causes being heard. I appeal to the judiciary to see that justice is given to those people legally detained, because somebody to languish in the prison and nothing is heard or talked about them is inhuman.

I want also talk about people who get held in Police cells. You are not supposed to keep somebody for 24 hours without his case being heard, but in many rural Police stations you find youth, women held there because of very, very, small cases and those cases are not heard. So, I want to urge the Judiciary also to look into this.  

Madam Speaker, I want also to talk about the LC system. LC Is are very important people; they are doing community work especially the LC I Chairperson. They never sleep; somebody has been robbed, they knock on the door; somebody’s house is burnt, there is a family trouble, they are working on them. Nobody ever sees or quantifies the work these people do: it is voluntary; it is community work but nobody seems to really take care. I appeal to government at least to give these people an office as a token of the appreciation of their work. 

Madam speaker, I want to talk about tourism and agriculture. These are the two ministries, which would help in creating jobs and alleviating or eradicating poverty.  The kind of tourism Uganda used to have in the 1960s and 1970s was lost because of turmoil. This has now eroded us. I feel that if Ugandans target another kind of tourism, other than seeing animals, seeing animals could be an added advantage. But we could concentrate on our flora and fauna so that we have echo tourism. We can improve on our agriculture and combine agro-tourism so that when we are having agro-tourism we can also expose our agriculture as well as our good and beautiful flora and fauna.  

I am the Chair of the International Federation of Agriculture Producers, an international body, which has had the good, the bad and the evil of agriculture. I think agriculture in developing countries is one of our saving grace if we really put money into it. 

On HIV/AIDS, I feel and I want to agree with the Minister of Health and the Minister in the Prime Minister’s Office that the new cases have gone down; they are not increasing like in the 1980s and we are not adding new ones. So, I feel that when we have something good we should actually part ourselves on the shoulder, and say that we have done something good. We have sensitised the community, there are so many people using condoms now than ever before. So we should take that up (Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MRS SEBAGEREKA: Yes, Madam speaker. I would like to thank the President for having given us the Kayunga/Bbale road, but the efforts will be wasted if the road does not continue to Galilaya. So, I appeal that the road from Kayunga should be graded first class murram up to Galilaya. 

In the presidential State of the Nation address, I did not see something about waterways. With those few words, I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR JONATHAN NYENDWOHA (Buliisa County, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like also to join my colleagues to appreciate the State of the Nation Address. At this juncture, I would also like to thank the Movement Government for the big strides it has made in all sectors. I view good governance and security as very important aspects in our lives, and I think if we have good governance and security, the rest will be easy to attain.  

I also thank the government for at least involving nearly everybody in the governance of this country. Some of us have lived for some good years and when we look behind we see there is a lot of improvement, and I think we should appreciate it.  

I think Members of Parliament were very central in the promotion of good governance. I appeal to you that while discussing national issues or enacting laws for this country, the love for this country and good service for Uganda should transcend our individual or personal interests or our petty and artificial difference. When we come here we should not think in terms of multipartists or movement or reform or any other sections. Let us think as Ugandans and make laws that will benefit the majority of our people. 

I request the government to ensure that there is proper co-ordination between MPs, RDCs and the Executive itself. At times when we are in Parliament here, you hear a certain minister is in your constituency when you do not aware. How can we really operate! I thought we are one and we are doing the same thing. At least the ministers should have the courtesy to tell us that they are going to our constituencies and what they are going to say and then we accompany you.  

Madam Speaker, I want to give you a very short story before I say something else. When l was at Mirama Primary school - and I was an old man when I was in that primary school - there was an old man who could not build himself a house. It was the school always to build this man a house. One day our headmaster thought the house was nearly falling on this old man, so he told all of you go and – others were uprooting grass, others were cutting trees and other were digging out soil. But all of a sudden the clouds changed and it started raining. We immediately we took to our heels and this old man was properly watered. The man came to the school and abused the headmaster very seriously. He forgot that all along the headmaster and the school had been building him a house. Likewise, Government is trying very hard to promote good governance, but if we allow some security organs and some RDCs to interfere unnecessarily in the local politics and elections, the people of Uganda will forget all what the Government is doing to promote good governance. I would therefore ask the Leader of the Government Business to make sure that these people remain neutral so that they can play their rightful roles of arbitrators.  

I want to say something about insecurity. I want to commend the government for what they have done since they came to power. There have been so many rebel groups, but at least they have maintained the security. I am sure if the Members of Parliament can encourage and give a genuine advice to the government, I am quite sure that even Kony will be defeated.

I ask the Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Internal Affairs to borrow a leaf from the Ministry of Health.  The Ministry of Health has a principle of ‘prevention is better than cure.’ We should not wait to combat insecurity, we should try to stop insecurity. I think we should aim at that one. 

Madam Speaker, I do not know what is actually happening.  Our borders are open 24 hours and everybody enters any time he wants. We have got a lot of influx of Congolese coming to Buliisa county. These people are already causing insecurity in that area. We have informed the ministries concerned, but I do not know whether they are acting. It appears they are moving at their own pace, but for us we are saying that pace is too slow. Already these people are cutting people’s cows, they are stocking arrows, and the local people are questioning how they are coming in and why in a big number always.  

Madam Speaker, there are some internal settlements I want to -(Interruption)- Give me some time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, seven minutes -(Interruption) 

MR NYENDWOHA: I am finishing very soon. Internal settlement: I have heard all of them have been actually subjective and they have diverted us from the true issue.  We are not tribalistic, what we are saying is that internal settlement should be disciplined and orderly. This is what we are saying (Applause). 

In Bunyoro at least we have some laws although they are not written. If you want to come near me, you come and ask me, ‘do you have a piece of land, I want to use it?’ And then I will say, ‘Okay, you can use it.’ Even some people do not use their land, but those who want to use it come and beg, and say, ‘you lease for one season or two seasons.’ If there is that mutual understanding, nobody will raise an alarm. But if somebody just matches in your compound, in your bedroom, it is a criminal case. People have been imprisoned for trespassing.

Lastly, Bugungu or Bagungu have a lot of cattle. I ask all Members of Parliament, including myself, who come from these areas where we have a lot of cattle - for example, we are being told we should produce children who we are able to look after; we are being told we should produce children we should send to school. We are also telling the herdsmen, including Bagungu in my constituency that they should have cattle which their land can accommodate (Applause). You do not just start getting so many cows when you have just one acre. Where will you accommodate them? So, I think this is our responsibility as leaders to advise these people that they should have enough cattle.  

Madam Speaker, I want to conclude with UPE -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SEPAEKR: No, I think you have finished.

MR NYENDWOHA: I am just giving -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SEPAKER: No, hon. Member, the seven minutes are up. Please take your seat.

MR NYENDWOHA: Okay, thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, tomorrow the general debate will continue from 2.00p.m to 3.00p.m and then from 3.00p.m to 4.00p.m, I will ask the Members of the Executive to respond and then finally we shall ask the mover of the motion to make the closing remarks. So, we adjourn to tomorrow at 2.00p.m. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 6.08p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 11 July 2002 at 2.00p.m.)


