Wednesday, 16 July 2003

Parliament met at 2.26 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I just want to inform you that hon. John Odit, who is the Chairperson of the Sessional Committee on Agriculture, welcomes those who may be interested in attending the agricultural show in Jinja. So, you can register with him.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I am sorry I do not have the papers ready now. We have a technical problem with our power. I pray that I will be able to lay them at a later hour.

PETITION TO PARLIAMENT ON THE BUSOGA PEOPLES CHARTER FOR CULTURE AND DEVELOPMENT

MR MARTIN WANDERA (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to present a petition to Parliament on the Busoga Peoples Charter for Culture and Development, under rule 22 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. The humble petition of 2,192 residents of Bugiri District states: 

“1. That they are aggrieved that The Busoga Peoples Charter for Culture and Development involving the districts of Bugiri, Jinja, Kamuli, Mayuge and Iganga (hereinafter referred to as “the Charter”) was signed by the Chairman of Bugiri district without consultation with the concerned –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You mean Bugiri District of Busoga?

MR WANDERA: Bugiri District.

THE SPEAKER: It is Bugiri District of Busoga.

MR WANDERA: Of Busoga, but Mr Speaker, as you are aware this is not my petition and under the rules I am not supposed to add my words. So, I am reading the petition as given to me by the petitioners. But I entirely agree with you.

THE SPEAKER: No, I am only assisting you because we may say there is no such thing as Bugiri District of Busoga.

MR WANDERA: Yes, Bugiri District of Busoga. I think it was an inadvertent omission by the petitioners. 

“The Chairman of Bugiri District signed it without consultation with the concerned people of Bugiri district;

That the said Charter infringes on some articles of the Constitution of Uganda; that the said Charter is illegal in so far as it was signed without a valid resolution and breaches other laws enacted by Parliament and they pray that it be debated by Parliament.

2. That Parliament should exercise its function contained in Article 79(3) of the Constitution, which provides that, “Parliament shall protect this Constitution and promote good governance of Uganda” by pronouncing itself on the constitutionality and legality of this Charter.

3. That since the formation of Bugiri District, there has been progress in terms of local infrastructure development. Many schools and health centres have been built and roads constructed. This has improved people’s welfare compared to the time when Bugiri was administratively part of Iganga district and Busoga as a whole. 

Bugiri people have always been cognisant of the ethnic diversity within the district; have lived harmoniously; accorded and enjoyed mutual respect of all among all ethnic groups within the district. The idea of the Busoga Peoples Charter is now threatening to kill the harmonious relationship and the spirit of development, which hitherto was obtained within the district. 

4. That the petitioners wish Parliament to note that Bugiri District did not legally assent to the Charter and the said Charter is likely to lead to oppression of minorities within Busoga, cultural subjugation, exploitation and above all it kills the whole essence of decentralization.

5. That the Charter is an instrument of co-operation entered into in accordance with Article 178 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. The said Article also provides in clause 1(a) that such co-operation shall conform to the democratic principles enshrined in this Constitution. It is clear that the democratic principles and the fundamental rights established in this Constitution have been ignored or flouted. 

6. That the Charter has the following provisions relating to culture: 

(a) It brings the people of Busoga under a united entity under the cultural leadership of Isebantu Kyabazinga.  [Article 1(a)]

(b) It aims at promoting, strengthening and preserving the positive cultural values, heritage and languages of the people of Busoga, in consort with the institution of the Kyabazinga. [Article 1 (d)]  

(c) It provides for contributions to the financial sustenance and well being of the Kyabazinga institution. That is in Articles 1 (h) and 28 (I) V.  

(d) It aims at the systematic development of cultural language and policy for Busoga. Article 16 (ii)

7. That the provisions relating to culture are contrary to the spirit and letter of the Constitution. Article 37 of the Constitution reads: 


“Every person has a right as applicable, to belong to, enjoy, practise, profess, maintain and promote any cultural, cultural institution, language, tradition, creed or religion in community with others.”  

The provisions in the charters, that is the preamble, Articles 1(a), 1(d) and 46 are therefore in conflict with the Constitution in so far as they create one culture to which all the people of Busoga will be subject irrespective of their diverse cultures, practices, and beliefs.

8. That Article 36 of the Constitution protects minorities. Non-Basoga in Busoga region may be a minority (though the majority in Bugiri District) but that does not make them lose their culture, language and traditions because of their desire to have one united cultural entity under the Kyabazinga. The cultural leadership of the Kyabazinga over the Basoga (wherever they may be) is respected and is unchallenged, but cannot be used to impose Busoga culture on non-Basoga within Busoga.

9. That clause 3(d) of Article 246 of the Constitution reads: “subject to paragraph (c) of this clause no person shall be compelled to pay allegiance or contribute to the maintaining a traditional leader or cultural leader.” 

The effect of the preamble, chapter 1(a), 1(d) and 1(h), and chapter IV Article 46 of the Charter, is to force people to pay allegiance to a particular cultural leader. They also have the effect of forcing people to contribute to the maintenance of a particular cultural leader. They are, therefore, unconstitutional.  

10. Chapter III of the Charter creates many, and expensive institutions that will have to be financed out of taxpayer’s money. The new institutions include: 

- The Isebantu, Kyabazinga, 
- The Institution of the Kyabazinga (whose number is not known), 
- The Busoga Peoples Forum Convention (over 10,000 members), 
- The Peoples Forum Council (over 200 members),
- The Executive Committee (38 members), 
- The Chairman of the council, 
- The Speaker of the Forum, 
- The Forum Secretariat (whose number is unknown, but certainly big), 
- The Secretary General, 
- The Deputy Speaker, 
- The Sergeant-at-Arms, and 
- Forum service staff (number unknown, but certainly big).

11. That these new institutions need facilitation by way of salary, transport, offices, allowances from the co-operating districts and local councils. There must be a massive injection of funds if the forum has to operate. The district and sub-county councils in Bugiri District are financially handicapped. Most of the local councils are not in a position to finance their own meetings. 

These councils are now being asked to finance at least one forum convention, four forum council meetings, six forum executive meetings annually and a permanent staff of Forum Secretariat, council, and other employees who will work for the forum at the headquarters and within the co-operating districts.

12. That the institutionalisation of the institutions of the Kyabazinga and Isebantu Kyabazinga in the Charter is unconstitutional since only councils, trust funds or secretariats can be formed for purposes of co-operation under Article 178(1) of the Constitution.

13. That the petitioners fear that the local funds will be committed (by the district council) to the forum, which is far removed from them and over which they have no control. There is no clear formula for consultation as to how the forum shall be funded. Recently, the organizers of the forum convention extorted Shs 500,000 from each sub-county without consulting the respective councils. The sub-counties, which refused to contribute voluntarily, had the dues deducted at the district level.

14. That the forum organisers also directed the sub-county authorities to transport eight people each to Naminage in Kamuli District, at the taxpayers’ expense. The sub-counties obliged without consulting the local councils. The expenditure incurred in connection with the Charter activities is clearly in violation of section 83 of the Local Governments Act.  

15. That this unauthorized expenditure of public funds without any form of accountability is a recipe for financial mismanagement. The people of Bugiri District feel that if the organisers of the forum can behave like that before it becomes operational, then it will be very easy to extort local funds once the Charter becomes a reality. Local funds are limited and should be used scrupulously. 

16. That the forum is an expensive idea and the petitioners believe that it is aimed at benefiting a few people outside Bugiri District. For example, forum councillors (over 85 percent of whom are from outside Bugiri District) will have power to determine their own emoluments and gratuity (Article 40). As a result, a great financial burden has been placed on the people of Bugiri District with no means of challenging the emoluments so determined.

17. That the accounting officer of the forum will be the Secretary General, who is not a public officer. He is only accountable to the Executive Committee of the Forum. The Government financial regulations require accounting officers to be public officers. According to Article 50 of the Charter, the bulk of forum funds will be basically public funds. To make a non-public officer an accounting officer is, therefore, illegal.

18. That according to Article 54 of the Charter, the audit of the forum accounts will be entrusted with a private firm of auditors appointed by the council of the forum. The Auditor General has no responsibility of auditing the forum accounts. This is contrary to the provisions of clause 3(b) of Article 163 of the Constitution, which requires all publicly funded programmes and institutions to be audited by the Auditor General.

19. That Article 50(viii) and (ix) of the Charter imposes a tax (disguised as contributions) on holders of political and public offices in Busoga and on prominent Basoga living in or outside Busoga. These taxing provisions are contrary to provisions of Article 152(1) of the Constitution, which provides that: “No tax will be imposed without the authority of an Act of Parliament.”  

Furthermore, they are contrary to Article 178(1)(b) of the Constitution, which provides that: “The councils, trusts funds or secretariat so formed shall not have power to levy taxes.”

20. That the Charter has provisions relating to quorum of meetings of the organs of the forum. The quorum for meetings of the convention and council are one-half and one-third respectively. The quorum for the executive committee is also one-third. These provisions make it possible for business to be conducted without representation from Bugiri District. Bugiri is likely to have only 45 out of the 305 councillors, about 1,500 out of the 10,000 members of the convention and only five of the 38 members of the executive council. 

Lack of minimum district representation at council, convention and executive meetings is likely to lead to marginalisation of Bugiri District, because it has minimum representation in these organs. The democratic spirit of co-operation expected under Article 178 of the Constitution is therefore lacking.

21. That the Charter, Article 12, gives the forum power to co-ordinate and harmonize district development plans contrary to the provisions of Article 189 and the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution, which reserves that power to the Central Government.

22. That the Charter purports to have responsibility over some other matters, which are clearly the preserve of the Central Government under Article 189, and the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution. These include the following: 

- The establishment of industrial parks (industrial policy), 
- Export processing zones (external trade), 
- Major irrigation projects (land and water resources), and 
- Commercial farming through zoning (agricultural policy).

23. That the functions of the forum as specified in chapter II of the Charter as so extensive that they make the existing sub-counties and district councils redundant. That the residual role of the Bugiri District Council and sub-county councils within the district after the coming in force of the Charter will be to give money, assets and responsibilities to the forum. There is, therefore, a need to amend the Constitution and the Local Governments Act to redefine the role of district and sub-county councils and administrative units, since they have been rendered irrelevant under the Charter.  

24. That the Charter was concluded without consultation with the affected people. This important issue was purportedly discussed in a secluded place and without any form of consultation and public discussion. When the people of Bugiri heard rumours about the Charter proposals, they demanded to discuss the draft. However, they were not given the opportunity to do so. 

That the provisions of section 34(2)(b) of the Local Governments Act have not been complied with in so far as the delegation of powers by Bugiri District to the forum has not been followed by public notifications.  

25. That it is apparent that the Charter addresses fundamental issues of participation of people in development, decision-making and cultural rights, for example, language, heritage, traditions and cultural institutions. These should not be resolved without thorough consultation with the people concerned. The Charter is again in conflict with Article 172(2) of the Constitution, which expects co-operation to be in accordance with the democratic practices enshrined in the Constitution.  

26. That the accession to the Charter required a valid district council resolution. There was no such resolution in respect of Bugiri District. There was no duly constituted meeting to consider accession to the Charter.

27. That the purported resolution authorizing the Chairman of Bugiri District to assent to the Charter was contrary to the provisions of sections 29, 31(1)(c) and 31(7) of the Local Governments Act, and the democratic spirit established in the Constitution because of the following:  

There was no notice of meeting of the Bugiri District Council at which the resolution was passed. The resolution was passed contrary to the provision of Regulation 91(1), Third Schedule of the Local Governments Council Regulations, which required a notice of seven days. No notice was ever given to the councillors. 

This regulation could not be avoided because Bugiri District Council does not have authority to ignore regulations enacted by Parliament. Failure to give notice as required meant that the people who attended the Kamuli meeting could not consult their constituency as expected under regulation 8(1).

The purported ouster of the applicable regulations enacted by Parliament was invalid in so far as it relied on assumed powers of the Speaker to make proclamations. In any case, no proclamation has been gazetted as a Statutory Instrument in accordance with the provisions of section 14 and section 16 of the Interpretation Decree 1976.

According to regulation 9(3) of the Local Government Councils Regulations, district council meetings are supposed to be privy to members of the public. The meeting was purportedly held in a secluded place in Kamuli District, and the people of Bugiri District were not aware of what was going on.  

The purported proclamation to hold a meeting outside Bugiri District and reliance on Articles 95(2) and 184(2) of the Constitution was a misunderstanding of the roles of the Speaker of Parliament and the Speaker of a district council.

Parliament can hold sessions in any part of Uganda because it has jurisdiction throughout Uganda, but a district council can only exercise powers within its area of its jurisdiction as provided in section 31(1) of the Local Governments Act. In any case the definition of “session” in Article 257 of the Constitution excludes its applicability to a district and what transpired in Kamuli.  

28. That these defects in the procedure must have been deliberate since the councillors were conversant with the applicable regulations. The defects suggest that there was an intention to deny the concerned people of Bugiri District any knowledge of the contents of the Charter, to pass the Charter without consultation, and to follow less than transparent methods of work. The absence of a valid resolution renders Bugiri District’s purported accession to the Charter null and void.  

29. That it is apparent the Charter in its current form reflects a negation of some of the provisions of the Constitution and other laws of Uganda. People of Bugiri District should not be subjected to its provisions, including Article 57 on Arbitration, Article 58 on Amendment, and Article 59 on Cessation of Membership, because they have never agreed to them. It should, therefore, not be noted or approved by Parliament without review.  

Therefore, your petitioners pray that Parliament makes the following finding:

1. That co-operation envisaged in Article 178 of the Constitution can only be entered into as a result of transparent consultations with the people concerned in accordance with the democratic principles enshrined in the Constitution.

2. That the Charter infringes on the fundamental rights relating to culture, language and traditions.

3. That the Charter unconstitutionally imposes a tax on some section of the population.

4. That the Charter purports to take over some functions constitutionally reserved for the central government.

5. That the Bugiri District Council did not follow the law and the relevant regulations for the execution of the instrument of co-operation.

6. That the unlawful resolution of Bugiri District Council renders Bugiri District’s accession to the Charter null and void.

7. That the Charter forces Bugiri District to directly or indirectly contribute to the sustenance and maintenance of a particular cultural leader.

8. That the Charter forces people of Bugiri District to pay allegiance to a particular cultural leader.

9. That the Charter exposes minorities within the Busoga geographical region to discrimination and exploitation.

10. That conditional, unconditional and equalization grants cannot be disbursed by the District Council of Bugiri to the forum until there is a constitutional amendment of the relevant provisions.

11. That in the alternative and without prejudice to the foregoing, the Charter remains in abeyance until a comprehensive review and amendment to the Local Governments Act, Public Finance Regulations and the relevant statutes, and after Parliament has reviewed its provisions and passed an enabling legislation.

12. That the people of Bugiri District were denied a say of the formulation of the Charter, and should be given a chance to publicly debate and reach a decision where they should be part of the Charter.

13. That the issue of the Charter, which is so fundamental and controversial, be subjected to a referendum within Bugiri District in accordance with the provisions of the Referendum and other Provisions Act; 

And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray that it is in the interests of the people of Bugiri District that the above prayers are granted by the Parliament of Uganda.” 

I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, this is a petition and it falls under rule 22 of our Rules of Procedure, part IV. I hope you are familiar with the rules. You have heard it. Any contributions?  

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I do not have much to say about the petition save that I am disturbed to note that the 2,000 signatures the presenter referred to, cannot physically be seen.

THE SPEAKER: We shall examine the petition. If there is nothing you want to say about it –(Interruption)

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am a little concerned about the timing of this petition. I know that this Charter was entered into sometime last year, and one of the key instruments behind that was the former Vice-President, Dr Specioza Kazibwe. Should I take it that now is the appropriate timing of the petition, since she is no longer the Vice-President?

MR MOSES KIZIGE: Mr Speaker, I just want to let the House know, and to put it on record that Bugiri District is fully participating in the Charter activities. The last meeting we had for the co-ordinating committee was on Friday last week, at Mayuge, and the meeting was chaired by the Chairman Jinja District Local Government. We have been anticipating this petition - the co-operating districts – and we will respond as and when required. But it has nothing to do with the resignation of the Vice-President. She is still the Chairperson of the Interim Committee of the Busoga Peoples Forum.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the petition has been presented. It is originating from the District of Bugiri, of Busoga. A Member of Parliament has presented it. We are not in position really to examine it here. The best we can do is to send it to an appropriate committee, since this is a district matter. So, let us request the Committee on Local Governments to examine it and make the appropriate report. After that, we will be able to fully deal with it. I understand copies are being given out to you.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Supplementary Schedule No.2 of March 2003 to June 2003 of the Financial Year 2002/2003. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Let the papers be handled by the appropriate committee, which will make a report to us.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

(i) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2002/2003.

(ii) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2003/2004 ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE.

(Debate continued.)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, DEFENCE (Ms Nankabirwa Ssentamu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am standing to throw light on two issues that were raised during the debate concerning my portfolio, the Ministry of Defence. 

Hon. Winnie Byanyima raised a question as to why the Government does not use the option of a third party as a mediator to end the Kony insurgency. Mr Speaker, allow me to inform her and the House that I think it is very important to critically analyse the kind of conflict this government is faced with in Northern Uganda. When you analyse this conflict, you will know the difference between other conflicts and this, and you will be in position to prescribe the right methods and procedures through which a government could deal with this conflict.  

The Northern Uganda conflict has been critically analysed by the Minister of Defence, the Commander-in-Chief, and the entire Government of this country. We have come to the conclusion that this is not a revolutionary war like all other revolutionary wars whereby the causes are justified with clear objectives. The strategies used by the LRA have been confirmed to be strategies of terrorism, and the leader of LRA has been put on the list of terrorists. Therefore, Mr Speaker, it becomes very difficult to engage a third party as a mediator as we understand it, whereby two parties that are in conflict present their cases and objectives to the third party and then you begin discussions.  

However, efforts have been made since this conflict started. Hon. Betty Bigombe really worked hard to make sure that a third party is engaged in talks with the LRA. There was a meeting in Rome in Italy whereby this effort was –(Interjection)- if only I could be allowed to develop my point, Mr Speaker! 

I was going to tell you the efforts we have made towards using another party, and I had just mentioned what happened in 1993/94. There was a meeting in Rome where a third party was engaged. The person who was sent by the LRA to negotiate was killed by Kony himself. 

Also, Mr Speaker, other countries have been involved. I remember the former President of Kenya, President Moi, was involved in this conflict. We have involved the great leader of Libya, Muammar Gaddafi, to make sure that he talks to President Bashir. All these are third parties, if I may mention, and the negotiations are still continuing. We have also involved the President of America to make sure that they prevail over those other countries, which we think have been helping the LRA. 

It is not true that we completely ignored using third parties in solving this problem. But we have prescribed a method because terrorism is not a problem for Uganda only; it is a global problem and we have to make sure that we handle this issue globally. So, the question that the honourable member put across has been dealt with, except that it is not easy. It is not the same as when a country is faced with a war, which is justified, whereby people join willingly to fight the Government. 

What is happening, honourable members, is that Kony recruits by force. He abducts children and kills innocent people. His tribesmen do not support him, and he kills them; they do not come out to join him willingly to fight. That is why this thing of a third party is not seen as really having been involved by the Government.  

The second question, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the hon. Minister of State for Defence for giving way. I persistently stood up to seek clarification on a matter of grave importance. The period the Minister is referring to in regard to Madam Bigombe is ten years ago. What attempts have you made in recent months, or recent years, to ensure that peace talks intended to end that bitter war, are held? 

I want to be specific. Recently, Parliament passed a motion urging the Government to make arrangements to talk to Kony and his group, possibly outside Uganda. This is because when you were also fighting in Luwero, you did not talk to Lutwa within Uganda. Let us be sincere, let us be specific; what arrangements has the Government made - are you now making sure that you talk? You should never fear to talk, as Kennedy, the former President of the United States said.

MR MWANDHA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to seek clarification from the Minister as to whether this House should understand her comments as the Government having abandoned any further attempts to involve third parties in resolving this most unfortunate situation. Thank you.

MR WACHA: Thank you, Sir. The honourable minister’s argument defeats my understanding! If she is saying they cannot talk to Kony because he is a terrorist and yet recently there were moves to talk to him; is she saying that they cannot involve other parties in these talks because terrorism is a global matter? Our argument is that perhaps Kony cannot talk to them now because he has not built enough confidence. Involvement of a third party, or an arbitrator, is to instill that confidence in Kony.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Madam Minister, you said in your opening statement that the Government, you in Defence, the President and the whole team did an analysis of the Kony war and came to the conclusion that you presented. Could you be so kind as to avail Parliament that analysis so that we examine it? Maybe some of the assumptions you used in your analysis are wrong, leading you to think that no third party can be involved in these peace talks.  

Secondly, since you do not believe in a third party intervening, and you have now dismissed the peace talks, what should I tell my people in the camps? How long should they be there waiting for the end of this conflict? Thank you.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Always, opposition armed groups are referred to as terrorists. When they win they are heroes. Therefore, I was requesting the Minister to talk to these opposition groups, not that we believe in the ideology, but simply that we recognise there is a conflict and for understanding both sides on the conflict, you need a third party, Mr Speaker.

MR ANANG-ODUR: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Minister for giving way. I have a little difficulty following the argument. She is saying that Kony and his group are not revolutionary according to the analysis, and that the war is not justified. When people decide to go and fight, who decides whether the war is justified or not? Is it those who are being fought or the ones who are fighting? 

I am saying this because, you know, hon. Kamuntu is a very humble man. I am sure he would have wanted to also say that in the early ’80s while those who were in the bush were certainly in their opinion revolutionaries, in some quarters they were in fact being referred to as bandits. But of course now they are great revolutionaries, one of them leading us. 

Secondly, the way she has mentioned the involvement of third parties is confusing to me. Does the Government of Uganda involve third parties in what will help it defeat Kony or in order to mediate? She made reference to America, for example, which was asked to help and it put Kony on a terrorist list, therefore now making it impossible for Uganda to talk to Kony. Were they involved to mediate or just to help us to fight? The same goes for Sudan and Libya. 

Mr Speaker, if we want to talk about a third party, we are talking about a neutral person who will make it possible for both parties to talk openly and agree on something positive. That is my understanding. Thank you very much.

MR JOHN ODIT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This document, which is being read is not in our possession. But if I listened very carefully to the Minister’s contribution, she has repeatedly emphasised the fact that Kony is a terrorist. Unfortunately, Kony is killing his own people. Is he killing fellow terrorists or he is killing the citizens of Uganda, his own people? 

I am saying, Mr Speaker, that the Minister has repeatedly used the word “terrorist” to describe Kony but at the same time she is saying that Kony is killing his own people. Does it mean then that Kony is killing fellow terrorists or killing the people of Uganda? I want to know clearly whether the people are his own people, whom he is busy killing, and what kind of people are these? Thank you.

MS NANKABIRWA SSENTAMU: Mr Speaker, I thank the honourable members for the clarifications they have raised. I only want to request them that when we are dealing with this issue, let us try not to be emotional and rather raise questions that can guide the Minister of Defence and the Government to deal with this issue. 

For example, Mr Speaker, I prefaced my contribution by urging everybody to critically analyse the type of conflict we have in Northern Uganda. Then I went on to say that having analysed that, the strategies used by the LRA are strategies of terrorism. The Government has made efforts towards finding a mediator, but it does not come as easily as it would have if the conflict were between the Government and a group that declares the cause for fighting. Its objectives should be stipulated and that group should communicate to the Government to say, “we are fighting because of a, b, c, and d”. 

I do not know whether hon. Lukyamuzi knows the reasons why the LRA is fighting. Mr Speaker, hon. Lukyamuzi wanted to know the recent efforts, because when I mentioned Betty Bigombe it was so many years ago. Indeed, it is many years ago, and he wanted me to mention the recent efforts. I can mention this, which even the blind could see. President Bush’s visit: we received a paper here telling us the issues that were going to be discussed between President Museveni and President Bush, and Northern Uganda was a key point. So, that is a point. 

We discussed it in Cabinet and we agreed that the Northern question should be a key issue, which should be continued to be put before those powers, which we know are faced with a similar problem as this government. 

Hon. Lukyamuzi is trying to equate the NRA, when they were in the bush, to the LRA. The two groups are different. They used different strategies. The strategies of the NRA were those of soliciting for support from the people. Otherwise, the NRA would not get the support they got from the people of Luwero and other places of this country. The LRA is recruiting by force - by abduction. The Lords Resistance Army has not put up the agenda why they are fighting, across to this government. The NRA or NRM put the agenda across. They said, “we are going to fight because of a, b, c, and d”. That is the difference, which can be seen by everybody. So, equating LRA to NRA does not arise. 

Secondly, who chooses the mediator? The mediator should be agreed on by the two parties. Who is the mediator that the LRA has chosen; what is the country that Lords Resistance Army has chosen to talk in? (Interjection) (Mr Lukyamuzi rose_)- hold on, please. I want to make this clarification.

Mr Speaker, to answer hon. James Mwandha, the Government has not abandoned the procedure of using a mediator - and hon. Ben Wacha too. I did not indicate that because LRA is using strategies of terrorism, therefore we are ignoring talks and we are not going to think about using a mediator. In fact, the reason I went on to mention the input by various governments and presidents was to say that we are also considering that line. But it is not easy because of the reasons I have mentioned.

THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you my colleague for giving way. I thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to give further information on this question of the involvement of a third party and on the question of the venue of talks being outside Uganda. 

In addition to what the Minister has said, we have had, and I think I have had occasion to say this before in this House, the involvement of the community of Saint Egideo. The community of Saint Egideo is a Rome-based Church organisation. It is not entirely Church-based, but it is also a civil society organization based in the Vatican, which has had experience in conflict resolution. They were at the center of bringing about the resolution of the conflict in Mozambique in the war between FRELIMO and RENAMO, and they have been involved for a very long time in this.  

Secondly, the Carter Center is also involved. The former President of the US, Jimmy Carter, has got a conflict resolution center based in Atlanta, USA. Him and the leader of the conflict resolution team in Atlanta, Dr Holfman from Canada, have been involved. All this was of course with the consent of the Government. 

The Saint Egideo group organised a meeting in Rome in December 1997 where the two sides met, the delegation from Kony and a delegation from the Uganda Government. I happened to lead the Ugandan Government delegation then. The Carter Center has also organised meetings. We have had meetings in Atlanta; there were meetings in London, and then our delegation was led by Dr Rugunda. This was in the Sixth Parliament and actually this Parliament was represented on that group led by hon. Absolom Ongom. So, efforts have been made many times.

The Carter Center still has our mandate to continue with that contact; the Saint Egideo Community still has the mandate of the Government to continue their efforts. Therefore, it is not correct to read that Government has actually changed its position on this at all.

The reason why Kony is called and qualifies as a terrorist is because he is one. Kony is a terrorist because we passed a law here describing what a terrorist is, and he squarely fits the definition of a terrorist in the law that you passed in this House.

Furthermore, we all know the universal definition of a terrorist. It is that person who carries arms and unleashes indiscriminate violence against unarmed people. That is a terrorist, and that is precisely what Kony has been doing in the North. Obviously hon. Odit did not get it right because no one has said that the people he kills become terrorists because a terrorist has killed them. I would like to inform you that they are victims I thank you.

MS NANKABIRWA: The hon. Member for Kinkizi was giving me information. I do not know whether the member was giving -(Interruption)

MR BAMWANGA: I want to give information to hon. Nankabirwa. Mr Speaker, I have no knowledge of defense matters but I would like to inform her and to add on to what hon. Mbabazi has said, that Kony is a terrorist simply because he is killing innocent, unarmed people, and because he has no human face. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: But when are we ending this subject?

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I want to thank hon. Mbabazi for his input. Prof. Kamuntu said that armed conflict is always referred to as terrorist activity. I do not know whose theory he is using. It is not always the case. That is the information I want to give him.  

Hon. Odur wanted to know who decides that a war is not a war of justice or that it is not a justifiable war. The way you fight it. If you force people to join you, this means they do not agree with your cause, therefore your cause is not justified and you are fit to be abandoned. So, it is the way you fight that determines whether you are fighting a just war or you are on your own project.

Mr Speaker, let me go to the second and last question. A point was raised as to why Government uses untrained people instead of the UPDF and the Police. I think the point was targeted towards what is happening in Teso. When I gave a statement here, I told Members of Parliament to note that maintenance of peace and security is not the responsibility of the UPDF only; it is the responsibility of everybody. The Ministry of Defence has been using whoever comes up to say that he or she has anything to contribute towards maintenance of peace.  

When we were handling Karamoja, Mr Speaker, so many elders came up to ask for permission to make a contribution, and we listened. They gave us intelligence –(Interruption)

MR ANDRUALE AWUZU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This issue of civilians helping the Army to fight is very important. It decided the war against the West Nile Bank Front categorically, because the youths of West Nile took up arms and joined the Uganda People’s Defence Forces to fight the West Nile Bank Front. 

When the West Nile Bank Front attacked and came beyond Okolo, their aim was to come up to Pakwach Bridge and cut off West Nile. But the people went as far as picking bows and arrows to fight people who had guns. So, you can see how committed they were, and as a result these rebels were defeated. (Applause).
In Teso the same thing has happened. If the same thing had happened in the North, I believe that this war would have taken a much shorter time. Thank you.

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Speaker, the Minister of State in charge of Works has made a very serious statement here. He says that the people of West Nile took up arms, the youths got arrows and fought the West Nile Bank Front, and that is why the war ended. 

He also alluded to the fact that the people of Teso took up arms to fight and they ended the war in Teso. He went on to say that if the people of Acholi had done the same thing, if they had taken up arms, this war would have ended. Mr Speaker, it has been clearly stated and it is on record, even in the records of this Parliament, that when the UPDA negotiated with Government and came out, the remnants, that was Kony at that time, had started disturbing the countryside. The people asked the Government to give them arms 

At that time they said very clearly, “if we do not finish these people, they are the ones who are going to cause more problems”. It is on record that the issue of the arrow boys actually started from Kitgum. The word “arrow boys” was in reference to the Acholi taking up arms to fight Kony in Kitgum. Is the Minister in order to insinuate that the reason the LRA conflict is not ending is because the Acholi have not played their role, when we have done all we can? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Well, it appears the Minister lacked the information. Now that you have given him the information, he can no longer hold that position.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH, GENERAL DUTIES (Capt. Mike Mukula): Mr Speaker, I thank the honourable colleague for giving way. I had not intended to speak, but I think I could be able to help the House with some information. 

Honourable colleagues appreciate the issues of the arrow boys and our response in Teso on that matter. When the Lord’s Resistance Army, the terrorist group, made an incursion into Teso sub-region, we the leaders of Teso did not wait. We all went back home because in a time like this, leadership is most needed. Mr Speaker, Teso has gone through insurgency in the past. We, collectively, were able to bring that war to an end. 

I want to put it on record that I had relatives who were in the command of UPA. But it was our duty, including the leaders at that time, the Ministers at that time, to do something. A minister at that time, the late Ekinu, was a martyr. He was killed by the rebels, trying to bring peace to the Teso sub-region. He was in the NRC. The late Aporu, Okurut Stanslas and there was another one, were all there.  

Mr Speaker, the point is, the members of the Executive at that time took the initiative to go down. They said, “the only way you can be able to bring peace and stability to this country is to give yourself and your life at the altar, so that you sacrifice as a leader to bring peace and stability to the region”. We have done it in the past and we repeated it this time.

If I did not have to present a policy statement, because my colleague Brig. Jim Muhwezi is out of the country and hon. Kamugisha is in Washington, I would be in Teso with my people, not here. Mr Speaker, we do not have to wait for the President. I do not have to wait for the President to come and camp in Teso, no. We will remain on the ground and ensure that first of all, we know how our people sleep and how they wake up in the morning. 

Mr Speaker, I want honourable colleagues to understand that I can now be able to give a rough sketch of how Kony operates. The ability for Kony to use terror, the ability for Kony to be able to use surveillance that is crude but able to penetrate, the ability for Kony to use -(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: I thought that the honourable minister rose to give information. Information must always be precise and to the point. Is it procedurally correct for the hon. Mike Mukula to make a whole contribution, even longer than the contribution made by the person he is giving information?  

THE SPEAKER: Well, it depends on the kind of information; he has a lot of information.

CAPT. MUKULA: Mr Speaker, I thank you very much for your wise counsel and guidance to the House. 

Information on security and the lives of our people is not like growing potatoes or beans, where you would come in and give information, which is superficial. We are talking about Ugandans who are dying. If my honourable colleague could only understand that it is painful to lose and continue to see hemorrhage in this country, I am sure he would only be patient to get this kind of information I am trying to give.  

It is important for colleagues to understand that some of the methods that are being used in that area can only be appreciated if you study the methods of work of this type of group. For example, Kony uses mad women. The women, who went to Lwala Girls School to penetrate and carry out surveillance before the girls were abducted, appeared to be mad. Later that night when the girls where abducted, Otti Vincent and Tabuley were sharing money that they looted from the shops in Otuboi. Tabuley told the girls, “You beat up some of our people”. The girls had beaten up one of the purportedly mad people. This is part of the surveillance they have been using on the ground. 

By yesterday, through efforts that we had been able to put on the ground, we uprooted Bungatira’s group, which had made an incursion recently. From Bungatira’s group, we have 11 of his operatives, including the surveillance teams that he had been using. This was through the efforts of the arrow group, the popular intelligence network of our own people. Old men give bicycles to the young people to take information to our communication command and control center, working together with the UPDF. -(Interjection)- No, no I want to put it on record.  

The point is that, the information that I have given has got no security implications. We only know because it is important that other people should also know. If they are to change their tactics at all, it will become very difficult for them to operate. 

I want to put on record the element of terrorism that Kony has been able to exercise on the ground. There were children who attempted to escape from the captivity of Kony. Their hands were tied up, they were raised onto a tree and cut into pieces with a panga. This was done while the other captives were watching. What kind of animosity and barbarity is this?  

Mr Speaker, I will get time to come and give a case study of the Teso resistance to the Lords Resistance Army. Our people will not allow Kony to flourish in our area; we shall not allow it! I want it on record. We shall fight Kony to the last man, and our leaders will remain united. We have put aside politics because when it comes to security, polarized politics is put aside. (Applause)

It is important that hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, or any of the opposition Members of Parliament, know that the stability of our Constitution is crucial if we are to remain united. When New York was attacked by these groups that bombed the World Trade Center with airplanes, President Clinton who was in Australia went back home to join and mobilise. He came to work with the Republicans to bring peace and stability to the United States of America. 

It is high time our people learnt that Uganda is one country. If you have a passport of Uganda and you are a national of this country, it is your duty to preserve peace and stability in this country, and support the President and UPDF in the fight against the Lords Resistance Army. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Have we not really exhausted these issues, so that we move to other matters? 

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, using the words of the Rt hon. Prime Minister, my contribution has been irrigated by the members who have given information. I have been irrigated –(Laughter)  

I will just say that the Government is not using untrained people. These people you are seeing as civilians are cadres. We have so many cadres who have made a contribution towards the maintenance of peace. Those wearing civilian clothes are not mere untrained people. This government is not using untrained people. In Operation Wembley, and even in other operations we have been carrying out, we have worked jointly, the Police, UPDF and the civilian cadres. 

Mr Speaker, I have ended my two clarifications, but I beg to give this Parliament this important information. Yesterday around midday, a UPDF MIG 21 fighter, when coming back from its routine flight exercise, plunged into Lake Victoria. There was only one person on board. Some debris was recovered from the waters. Our divers, together with divers of the French Military Force based at Entebbe, have been making an effort to reach the plane in the waters. We hope that these efforts will succeed. Civil Aviation Authority, marines and UPDF are all working together to make sure that we recover the debris. The fate of the pilot is not yet known. We hope that our worst fears will not be confirmed. 

I thought that I should give Members of Parliament this information about the accident that happened yesterday. I thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members, for your attention.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, TRANSPORT (Mr Andraule Awuzu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As you said before, a lot of the questions that members asked during the debate on the budget will be answered in the ministerial policy statement. But there were some urgent questions, which were asked by members, which I could attempt to answer.   

The first one was about the condominium law.  Members wanted to know why the law is not being implemented, and why the houses are not being sold. You passed the law here, but then there are technical problems that had to be settled before we could start selling the houses. 

I am glad to inform the members that National Housing and Construction Company has now finalized the technicalities and very soon they will be selling condominium properties. The Government is also making necessary arrangements to sell the condominium properties of government. As you know, there are a number of flats in all the different towns of Uganda and these will also be sold to tenants.

The second question was, the northern bypass has been talked about since last year, what is the problem? It is true there was a problem with the Kampala northern bypass. This road will circumnavigate Kampala from Bweyogerere up to Masaka road. The designs have been made, the route has been surveyed and the people to be compensated have been identified. The problem was that the Government valuer came up with a figure, which the development partner thought was rather high. Even we in the Ministry of Works thought that figure was unnecessarily high, and we thought it was not fair. So, we demanded that the exercise be re-run. It has been done again and therefore some time next year the work on this northern bypass will start.

The third question was about regional imbalance in the road network, that is, between the Western part of Uganda and the Northern part. The Government tries to make sure that roads are constructed in all parts of the country. To the best of our knowledge, there is no working in favour of any part of the country -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Sergeant, please tell those members not to make noise. 

MR AWUZU: Of course, we cannot do roads in all regions, kilometer for kilometer. Roads have got different lengths, and when a road is done in one place, we cannot do the same number of kilometres in another region. 

But we know, for example, in the Central in the last ten or so years, we have done the Mityana-Mubende road up the Toro border. We have done the Entebbe road, and the Kyotera-Mutukula road. The Busunju-Hoima road, up to Kafu, which is the border between the Central region and the Western region, is also due to be done. The work is supposed to be continuing, it is only that the contractor made a mistake by changing contractors mid-way when the work had already started. 

I am an engineer, but as you know, in legal matters you cannot pay money to a person different from the one in a contract. We signed with one contractor, but now the work is being done by another contractor. We certainly cannot pay money to this new contractor, until all formalities are finalised –(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I want to thank the Minister for giving way. I am the Vice-Chairperson of the Works, Housing and Communications Committee. During the last two weeks, we visited almost the whole of Uganda, inspecting roads.  

The Minister has stated that there is no imbalance in constructing the roads. The information I want to give him is that for the last two financial years, the Ministry of Works has not done any single contract road in the Mbarara station. When I say Mbarara, I mean Bushenyi, Ntungamo and Mbarara Districts. There is no single road. 

But when we went to Western Uganda, to the Fort-Portal station, they have done four contracts in the last financial year. When we went to Pallisa, we found two contracts in the last financial year. The information I wanted to give you is that really there is an imbalance.  

MR AWUZU: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank my chairman for the information he has given.  I was just going through region by region, and I was saying that there really is no imbalance regionally. To the best of my knowledge, Mbarara and Fort-Portal are all in the Western region. 

As I was saying, in the Western region the road from Mbarara to Ibanda was done, the road from Fort-Portal to Kyenjojo has been done, and we are about to complete the road –(Interruption)

MAJ. BUTIME: I just want to inform the Minister that if the roads in Mbarara were finished three years ago, why should he bother having a project there? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR RUKUTANA: I want to inform the honourable minister that contrary to the allegation that there is no contract road that was done in Ntungamo, the Ntungamo-Kagamba leg was completed last year.

THE SPEAKER: Let us proceed, honourable members. When you start mentioning districts, then you will hear Kotido and Nakapiripirit also come up. Let us proceed.

MR AWUZU: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank hon. Tom Butime for giving me that information. In fact, I was just about to say that the road from Ntungamo to Kagamba has been done. We have already given out the contract for the road from Kagamba to Rukungiri, and we hope to do the road from Rukungiri to the Congo border. We shall also try our best to connect Kanungu, because it is the principle of the Government that all district headquarters are connected by tarmac roads. 

In the eastern region, we have done the road from Iganga to Malaba and Busia, and soon we are going to work on the road from Bugiri to Jinja. And you also know that the road from Jinja to Kampala has recently been done. 

In the Northern region, we have just finished the road from Arua to Pakwach, and very soon the road from Pakwach to Nebbi will be finished as contracts are about to be awarded. There are two contracts for the roads from Pakwach to Karuma and Pakwach to Oliyo and Oliyo to Karuma. So, I think from the aforesaid - yes I am being reminded to talk about the road from Kafu to Masindi.  It is true it is in very advanced stages of procurement under a loan from the Arab Bank for Development. We are also about - some time within this financial year – we shall tarmac the road from Kafu to Masindi, and also beyond Masindi up to the junction between Hoima road and Butiaba road. Therefore, I think it is evident that we are not segregating against any region of this country.

The fourth question was about KCC traffic lights, which was asked by hon. Salaamu Musumba. It is true that the Japanese have installed new lights through a grant given to the Uganda Government, which Government has passed this on to KCC. They did five intersections, three of them on traffic lights and two on roundabouts. But then when these works are finished, we shall hand over the infrastructure items to the city council, and it is the duty of the city council to actually maintain them. So, it is not the duty of the Ministry of Works to maintain these lights.

Kampala City Council was trying to get these lights maintained with the Japanese who are currently here on their Phase II of the City Development Projects, but they said that they were not informed in good time. When they finish the Natete–Wakaliga road, they are going to do the Clock Tower to Munyonyo side, and during that phase they will be able to maintain the traffic lights.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Minister of Works for giving way. Immediately he mentioned Kampala City Council, I had to come in because I am one of the representatives of Kampala City Council in this Parliament. Although road construction is in districts, it is supposed to be handled by specific districts. Knowing that Uganda is not a federation, the Ministry of Works is supposed to cover overall demands in the road construction network.  

Kampala City Council is the Capital of Uganda. Mr Speaker, in Wankulukuku area there are about 15 big industries, which greatly impact on the Consolidated Fund in terms of taxation. I would like to know that under the circumstances, why should the Ministry of Works not - on an emergency level - assist in repairing Wankulukuku road? It harbours 15 great industrialists paying heavily in terms of taxation.

As I speak now, on that road there is a small lake called Lake Lukyamuzi, and you cannot believe that –(Laughter)- is it because Ken Lukyamuzi, who regularly criticizes the Government, happens to reside that side of town and so the Ministry is totally ignoring that road?

CAPT. BABU: Thank very much, Mr Speaker and honourable minister for allowing this information. I also represent a constituency in Kampala City. In fact I represent the heart of the town, but more than anything else, I think hon. Lukyamuzi should be fair. Just the other day we were with him on Wakaliga road, which goes from Bakuli up to Natete, and the Government - even when it is short of funds - procured a loan and that road has already been given to the contractors and they will be doing it. In Kampala Central Division they have not even given me a road; they gave it to hon. Lukyamuzi.  

Hon. Lukyamuzi, first and foremost, you must tell this House that you are luckier than some of us because the Central Government worked on the road from Kibuye to Busega. They are now working on the road from Bakuli to Natete. Not only that, a lot of other roads will be done when the funds become available, including the one with Lake Lukyamuzi on it. In fact more than anything else, although I would like to see that road done, I also want Kampala City Council in the way they collect their money to also contribute to alleviating this heavy burden the Central Government is shouldering. Thank you very much.

MR AWUZU: Thank you my colleague for that information, and thank you hon. Lukyamuzi for the information you have given. But I think you have got the reason why that lake was wrongly named Lukyamuzi. I believe the reason that lake has been named Lukyamuzi is because you live in the wetlands where the lake itself is –(Laughter)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, in accordance with the town planning authority law, since the 1970s the area where I reside, namely Nalukolongo, was zoned as an industrial area. Hence you have Sembule; you have Petrol; you have Kobil, and so many industries around. And the very area where I stay is a small town, and I am a small mayor there. Is it in order, by the dimensions I have attempted to articulate in law, for the honourable minister to give an impression here that I am staying in a wetland when the area is openly zoned as an industrial area? (Laughter).

THE SPEAKER: Well, it is a question of fact, but I do not know whether you should be residing in an industrial area. (Laughter)

MR AWUZU: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the wise ruling. I would like to inform hon. Lukyamuzi that I have got a lot of experience in town planning because I was a Resident Manager for Reconstruction and Development Corporation in Arua, where I worked for more than 10 years. Town planning was one of the aspects of our work, and I know very well what zoning and planning in an urban area is all about. Therefore, hon. Lukyamuzi has accused himself by saying that he is residing in an industrial area. You should be residing in a residential area. (Laughter). Thank you.  

The sixth question was about Information and Communication Technology (ICT), which was also asked by hon. Salaamu Musumba. It seems she had the impression that Government is doing nothing about ICT. I would like to inform her that Government is aware of the importance of ICT. These days as far as tele-medicine, tele-education - even we are looking forward to a day in the near future when we should be able to export the brains of Ugandans. They do not have to go outside the country - we have other exports of Kyeyo where you don’t have to be outside the country physically. 

Ugandans will be able to export their brains when they are here in Uganda. They will be doing work on computers and passing it to the outside world via the Internet. The Ministry has already evolved an ICT communications policy and the paper is with Cabinet. Soon it will be a Government policy paper.

Finally, there was another question on Karamoja roads. The honourable member who asked this question did not see anything that was going to be done for Karamoja in this financial year. I would like to say that Members of Parliament have all been given our policy statement. If you turn to the yellow pages, that is at the end of the policy statement, you will see under Moroto and Kotido Districts, which are our district stations in those two areas - Nakapiripit is under Moroto - you will be able to see the roads we are going to handle this financial year.

MR BADDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Minister has told us about the projects planned for this financial year concerning road transport. However, I have not heard him talk about marine transport, and we know very well that this Parliament approved money several years ago to buy a ship for Kalangala, to ply from Luzira to Kalangala. The Minister told us last year that it was to be constructed at Luzira by a Dutch company. 

A month ago, one newspaper reported that the construction of the ship had started at Luzira. I personally visited the site but there was nothing at all. Could the Minister clarify to us when the construction of this ship will start? 

Then the last clarification I would like to seek from the Minister concerns the ferry, which plies Bukakata to Kalangala. On this ferry, one engine was removed about one year ago. So, the ferry is operating less one engine, and it is really very risky for the travellers on the lake. Could the Minister tell us when this engine will be installed again? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: If you allowed the Minister to complete his points, maybe he would have tackled the point you asked about. I think you rather seek clarification from the Minister after he has completed his statement. Otherwise, he will keep telling you, “I was coming to that”. Let us allow him to complete what he wants to say. If at the end he has not covered what you think he would have covered, then you can come in.

MR KIWALABYE: Mr Speaker, in light of what you have just said, would it not be procedurally proper for the Ministers to respond when all the contributions have been made by the members? The Member for Kalangala was going to raise the issues pertaining to marine transport and now the Minister is responding. I think that all the members should finish their contributions and then the Ministers respond.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are right, but we said that today the Ministers would respond to the points, which were raised during the general debate.

MR AWUZU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am glad hon. Badda seems to know the facts very well. In fact all the statements he made about the Kalangala ship are correct, except where he referred to a report in a newspaper. As you know very well, these papers rarely tell the truth. 

What I can tell you is that the contractor has been selected, and very soon the construction work of that ship will start at Port Bell. And it will take about one year. So, everything is under control. You should not listen to hearsay from the newspapers, but you should get information from the Ministry of Works.

On the question of the ferry, I would like to inform you that a ferry does not need any engine to float. Therefore, it is not risky for the ferry to have only three engines. The four engines are there, and the two engines are on stand-by. In fact that ferry can operate very well with only two engines. In fact it has three. It still has one spare engine, but in case one of the three breaks down, it can run on the other two.

Finally, on the roads in Karamoja, as I was saying, you will find in the yellow pages the roads we are going to do. But I would like to inform honourable members that under the emergency programmes in Karamoja, including the disarmament of Karamoja, there are 100 kilometres of road that are not going to be funded by the Ministry of Works. There is alternative funding for the disarmament of Karamoja. That will be an additional road in Karamoja, which is along the borders with the neighbouring districts and also along the borders with neighbouring countries, that is Kenya and Sudan. 

I would also like to say that the same is true for the North. Under the emergency road maintenance or road building programmes, we are also doing 100 kilometres of road in the north of the country. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MRS NYOMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to be clarified to by the Minister. I did not hear him talk of the landing site at Nabuganyi. How far has he gone with it? I raised it, but he has not answered my request. The landing site in Nabuganyi, across River Nile connecting Nabuganyi, Kayunga District, to Mbulamuti, Kamuli District.

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Actually, I do not know why the Minister is shy to comment on Fort-Portal-Bundibugyo road. Thank you very much.

MRS BALEMEZI: I thank you too, Mr Speaker. I would also wish to get clarification from the Minister. He has been promising to provide Mukono with water transport on Kome and Buvuma Islands, to the furthest Islands of Bugaya and Bwema, but I have not heard of any water transport provision.

MR LUBOWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am a Member of the Works Committee, which has been going round this country. When we visited the western side, we saw a vessel at Masindi Port. His Excellency the President promised that when they accomplish the work of removing the water hyacinth that causes constriction along River Nile, it would be turned into some kind of ferry. We discovered that has not been done and apparently the vegetation is no longer there. What is going to happen to that equipment?

CAPT. MATOVU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have not heard, from the Minister’s submission, about the road maintenance policy. Government sinks a lot of money into these roads but you find that after two years the road is in pieces. Does the Ministry have any plan to repair and maintain our roads, particularly the road from Lyantonde through Lwamagwa to Rakai? 

The people of Kabula are actually pressing for a district because to access Rakai they have to pass through Masaka. It is just four to five Kilometres to the district! The same goes for Rakai to Kibaale and Ntantamuki. So, I am worried about the maintenance plan, Mr Minister.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this was a general debate on the budget arising from the motion by the Minister. During that general debate some few points were raised, and we are going to have other debates to deal with the committees. Most of these questions should be asked of the Minister when we are dealing with the report from the Chairman, Works, Communication and so forth. 

MR AWUZU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true that we are going to handle most of these questions when we come here to get our budgets passed.

On road maintenance, I would like to say briefly that you do not maintain a road once and it stays for the rest of its life, or for the rest of your life. Because with all the rain we have in Uganda, we have to do maintenance on the roads every year and it does not matter whatever intervention you do. Even if you put tarmac that road will deteriorate and it has to be maintained.

The Masindi Port ferry does not belong to the Ministry of Works. It belongs to the Ministry of Agriculture. The one on the lake was brought specifically to remove the blockage on the Nile-Kyoga estuary. So, it is not under our control.

The landing site at Nabuganyi, we have to get funds to construct that landing site, but unfortunately, this financial year we do not have funds for putting that ferry on the landing site. However, we hope that in the near future we shall be able to do that.

The Fort-Portal–Bundibugyo road, I am not shy to talk about it because I remember during the debate I talked about this road. It is not true that the Ministry of Works is sabotaging work on it. It is true money was availed for half the cost of that work, and the Government had to put in counterpart funding, which up to now is still not available.

Water transport, as you know the Government is trying to privatise all types of transport, not only transport but other commercial activities; and transport is one of those, which is being privatised. As you know, air transport has been privatised and liberalized; and for road transport the same thing has happened. Taxis are now the ones operating now, but soon we are going to get buses to operate in Kampala and upcountry.  

About water transport, it is the same thing. It is true we have ferries where we have roads that are separated by water. We are doing our best to provide a ferry as a link between those two points. But our aim in the long run, especially with ships and so on, is to have this run by private companies because as we have said before, the Government is not a good operator of commercial enterprises. Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH, GENERAL DUTIES (Capt. Mike Mukula): Mr Speaker, I rise to respond to questions raised to my sector Ministry of Health, and there were three questions - when you summarize them.

One honourable member raised a question to the effect that: what steps is the Government taking to come up with a law or policy to consolidate our impressive fight against HIV-AIDS in the country? First of all, I would like to take the opportunity - in response to this question - to thank President George Bush and the American people. President Bush came to Uganda last week and made a very firm commitment in support of our fight against HIV, a commitment of US $15 billion, and Uganda has been included in that programme.  

The Ministry of Health, working together with a number of other organizations, is taking a multi-sectoral approach; and working together with the Uganda AIDS Commission is in the process of developing a national policy on HIV/AIDS. You recall that when we had a statute, which established the Uganda AIDS Commission in 1990, a number of strategic initiatives were put in place because we were acting - at that time - on an emergency basis. But I wish to state that because of the multi-sectoral approach and open methods of work, we have been able to reduce the prevalence from 30 percent in 1990 to about 6 percent now.

However, honourable colleagues, it is important for us to note that we should not be complacent. We should continue to consolidate these gains, because if we remain complacent, it can easily get out of control again. So the Government of Uganda is in the process of coming up with a national survey. Once we come up with a national survey, we believe that we can be able to get accurate information and this will definitely help us to improve our initiatives and strategies, which will be district based.

However, we believe that as we work together with our development partners, we may actually be able to dispense ARVs to a number of our people free of charge. It is estimated that the number of people who may actually need the ARV support is between 100,000 to about 150,000 people. It is also estimated that we have about 1,000,050 Ugandans who have the virus, but those who have CD4 - CD8 count and definitely require the support of ARVs, are about 100,000 to 150,000 people. 

We expect to get this support and funding from the Global Fund on AIDS, Malaria and Tuberculosis, the commitment of the American Government here of US $15 billion, and other development partners. We also expect that the prices, globally, are bound to drop as we continue to negotiate. 

Mr Speaker, it is also quite clear that Uganda is the only country so far, which has moved very rapidly towards the management and prescription of Nevarapine to reduce the mother-to-child transmission by over 50 percent. This is being dispensed countrywide.  

We are building capacity within our regional referral hospitals of making sure that the CD4 and CD8 count machines are made available to all of these hospitals. On top of that, research on the vaccine is at an advanced stage in this country. Uganda is on the lead here and I think that we must commend our researchers who are doing a pretty good job on this front. We will be able to give a comprehensive report when the policy statement, which has been circulated to members, comes before this House. But I thought I would be able to respond to this question that was raised.  

The second question was about the steps being taken to address the lack of oxygen facilities and to save the lives of our children in the hospitals or the health units. As you know, we have the Health Sector Strategic Plan (HSSP). This our road map, which has been drawn out of a very clear and effective strategic study. The study was very scientific and we are continuing to build the capacity at the Health Centre IIs, Health Centre IIIs, Health Centre IVs, the district hospitals and the referral hospitals. I want to assure you that all efforts are being made to make sure that oxygen is made available at most of our units at the national level. We will be giving a comprehensive detailed document to Members of Parliament in this regard.

The third question was how is the Government addressing the status of regional referral hospitals, which are very poorly equipped? Mr Speaker, this is a very good question because these are concerns, which hon. Members of Parliament do encounter when they meet their constituents. I want to put it on record that the Government of Uganda has worked very well, using the Health Sector Strategic Plan, and is mapping out key demands, and prioritising the areas of concern. 

As you know, one of our areas of interest in the Health Sector Strategic Plan is to reduce infant and maternal morbidity and mortality rates and making sure that services are brought closer to the people. 

Mr Speaker, under primary healthcare, our concern with our development partners has been mainly to build capacity and to build more Health Centre IIs, Health Centre IIIs, and Health Centre IVs. This is the key strategic focus of the Government. However, on the referral hospitals, our initiative is aimed at ensuring that the national referral units, Mulago and Butabika, are effectively equipped. The resource envelope is definitely a question of concern, but in the last three to four years, Mulago Hospital has received equipment worth US $14 million. 

Butabika hospital, which is another national, referral hospital, has also been granted - and I thank Parliament for the effort and support - a loan of US $48 million through the African Development Bank. I want to put it on record that construction has began; procurement is now on course and we expect to refurbish and build, within the ten referral hospitals, six mental units. We expect to equip these under this loan, and Butabika will also be fully supported under this initiative.  

I also want to say that using our own resources, which have been budgeted for in this financial year, Fort-Portal Referral Hospital on the hill of Buhinga, will be funded under the support of the Government of Uganda. This will be to the tune of close to Shs 1.6 billion. We are going to carry out comprehensive renovation of the hospital, including the sewerage system, and also equip the hospital.  

We also intend to build capacity in Masaka hospital and to equip it with imaging equipment and definitely build capacity on the ground using the ORET funds, the Spanish loan, and the Global Fund on AIDS, Malaria and Tuberculosis. 

THE SPEAKER: But don’t you really think this would come in another time?

CAPT. MUKULA: Mr Speaker, I thank you for that position. However, I want to put it on record that we have already equipped 66 health theatres. We have also procured multi-purpose ambulances, which have just arrived. We think that using these efforts we will definitely be able to build capacity on the ground.  

Mr Speaker, we need more support and we believe we can see light at the end of the tunnel. I thank you.  

THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER, GENERAL DUTIES (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like, before I respond, to take into account what you told us earlier on that many of the questions raised would be relevant when we debate the ministerial statements. I wonder whether in those circumstances I need to respond to some of the very specific questions raised, or if I could wait until –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: It is only those questions, which were raised during the general debate. But I advise members that since you may not be able to go to all the committees, if you have queries to raise in respect of the various ministries, feel free to write to the chairperson concerned. They will air out your grievances so that they are taken into account when the Ministers appear before these committees. That way, when the reports are read here they will take note of what you have raised to them. But what I expect now are answers to those queries, in general terms

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Prime Minister is appearing before the sectoral committee next week, on the 22nd. Therefore, if there is anybody who has got some questions they would like to raise, I hope the chairperson of the committee will be happy to have them.  

There are a few issues, which were raised, but I want to beg the indulgence of the House because at the time they were raised I was not in the House. Therefore, I have only been advised as to what those issues were. Just in case I do not make an appropriate address to what you raised, I beg your indulgence. 

The only issue I want to respond to regards micro finance. As members know, we have the micro-finance industry in this country, which is supplementary to commercial banking. This is an industry that deals with people who are not in position to oblige with the requirements of commercial banks, like having security, detailed feasibility studies, you know, that kind of thing. The Office of the Prime Minister has one micro finance institution under it, and this is the Micro Finance Support Center, Limited. 

The Micro Finance Support Center is an organisation that was established by law and is limited by guarantee. This institution is actually almost wholly funded by money borrowed from the African Development Bank. This money is lent to intermediary entities. These are organisations that have knowledge, and even legality, to operate micro finance. 

One member raised the issue of support for agriculture through the micro finance industry. As far as we are concerned, in the Government, we can only talk about the Micro Finance Support Centre, and it operates only about 10 percent of the industry in the country. The rest is operated by other organisations over which the Prime Minister’s Office has not got any powers. They are controlled either under the recently passed deposit taking institutions law, and that Act is implemented by the Ministry of Finance and the Bank of Uganda. It regulates all those organisations that cannot take deposits but have got authority, under the law, either as societies or NGOs, to be able to competently administer micro finance lending.  

These organisations are supposed to do business according to the best of business practices. In other words, if a proposal does not make good business sense, it is not supported. That does not mean that they do not lend to agriculture. On the contrary, when the Micro Finance Support Centre was still disbursing money in a retail manner - we now wholesale to these organisations. We no longer lend to end-users; we lend to intermediary entities, which do the retailing of the money to various borrowers. 

Actually, the experience we have, which I believe other micro finance institutions also have, is that agriculture is not necessarily risky. What is very critical about agriculture is the type of business in which the farmers invest their money. I will give an example - unfortunately these people did not sell the commodity. I gave some people some seeds and some land and they planted some lettuce. Unfortunately, they did not realise that only you town people eat lettuce. It is eaten raw and our people in the village do not generally like raw things. But, if these people had sold this lettuce, which cost them only Shs 50,000 to grow, they could easily have made between half a million and Shs 1 million. 

I counted the plants but they were already spoilt. Had we brought them to Kampala, they would have got between half a million and Shs 1 million for an investment of only Shs 50,000. So, there are so many agricultural enterprises that are highly profitable. We invested money in Mityana. The hon. Member for Mubende is not here, but she could bear witness to this. Actually, the people who borrowed this money made quite some money. 

Even in parts of Northern Uganda in the present Pader District, it was then part of Kitgum District, we lent ladies money for agriculture and they paid back. These people borrowed on nothing except for the promises I had, but they never lost any money and they were able to pay back. So, you should actually put pressure on these organisations to lend money to people involved in agriculture. The important thing is to carefully identify the enterprises to be lent money. Otherwise, we lend money to poor people who are, however, economically active. Ours is not so much of capacity building. There is a section of capacity building, but normally we want to identify people who are already involved in something but need to be helped in order to do more, or better.  

Members may want to raise the issue of the poorest of the poor. If people are destitute, then that is the responsibility of the Government, not the Micro Finance Support Centre. They lend to commerce because even in trading, there are very poor people who need to be supported and they do well. By the way, when these people have made some money from commerce, especially the women, they tend to put some of the money into agriculture, which is at that time their money. We lend the money -(Interruption) (_Mrs Zziwa rose)- Could I be allowed to finish and then the honourable member can ask her question?

We recommend that at least 60 percent of the money we lend these institutions be lent to women, the youth and generally marginalised people. That is our principle advice to these people. In other words, we do not want them to selfishly lend our money to those who are already doing quite well. We prefer that they lend money to women and other groups that are marginalised. I think that is what was raised, Mr Speaker, thank you very much.

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Speaker, there was the point of the mediums through which the micro finance money is accessed. The mediums, I think they are called intermediary agencies, are the basic problem. You find that when the micro finance organisation has to extend money to the people, it gives it through intermediary agencies and in many districts these agencies are non-existent. That is why many people cannot access the money. 

The question is, what efforts are being put in place to at least help small organisations to develop capacity so that they can qualify to be intermediary agencies and access money? Many women cannot access this money because there are no intermediary agencies. In Kampala specifically, there are hardly any.  

MR KASAMBA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to seek clarification from the Minister in the Office of the Prime Minister. During the President’s campaign and in his manifesto, he mentions having micro finance institutions at parish level for youths, for women and for persons with disabilities. I would like the Minister to clarify on how far this programme is being implemented. Is it coming in a different format?  The people out there are anxiously waiting for the fulfillment of the President’s manifesto.

Also, we have been discussing with the Minister - and maybe he could clarify on it - when is the Bill concerning multi-facility investment coming? We have been discussing with the Minister in the corridors, and I think it is high time he clarified on that issue. 

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The clarification I want to get from the Minister is, he has talked of intermediaries, but there are districts, which have no intermediary groups as those he is talking about. You find a district where there are about five of them, whereas other districts have no –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think that is the same question that the hon. Member for Kakuuto –(Interruption)

MR MUTULUUZA: Yes, I wanted to find out whether there is a policy in place to help those people without intermediary groups. Thank you.

MR ANANG-ODUR: Mr Speaker, the Minister explained that part of the activities under the micro finance institutions would be funded by money, which the Government is going to borrow and then lend to intermediary agencies. I am aware that most of these institutions charge very high interest rates. Perhaps the Government cannot control the private ones, but I am wondering whether those that will benefit from the borrowed money the Minister is talking about, the 10 percent, should the Government not have a say on the interest rates they are going to charge? The tendency in this country is that the Government borrows money at very low interest rates, but when the money goes to the commercial banks, they charge rates which are not proportional to what they pay to the Government.

Mr Speaker, I do not come from Rubabo, but I am wondering why Prof. Kagonyera did not go in time to help these peasants bring their lettuce, which got spoilt, so that they could get some money in Kampala. Why did he go late and then just count the lettuce, which had already been spoilt?

MR YERI OFWONO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want clarification on the issue of the President’s manifesto. I want to supplement my colleagues who talked about that and say that we were promised Shs 10 million per parish. I do not know when this promise will be implemented. 

At the same time, what is the Government doing to build capacity for the existing micro finance organisations? How is he assisting the existing micro finance institutions to take off? Because a lot are still lacking capacity, even the ones that are already receiving the money. Thank you.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Margaret Zziwa talked about intermediary agencies not being available. Unfortunately this is not true of Kampala. There are plenty of them in Kampala. I would -(Interjection)- well, after here I will physically walk you to one in your constituency.  

May I be allowed to continue, because that is a fact, I think we should not waste time over it.  

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Speaker, Kampala District has a population of 1.8 million people, at least during the day, and –(Interjection)- give me a minute. Let me just give you this information, because accordingly, in the five divisions we have only four registered intermediary agencies and these four are not adequate. 

In Nakawa Division, there is one in Bugolobi; if you go to Lubaga there is one, which was associated with hon. Tom Kayongo, called Ludda. In Kawempe there is none and in Kampala Central there is Uganda Micro Entrepreneurs Association (UMEA). These four are inadequate and they are specific to market people. Where do others go, those in small businesses?

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I am extremely happy that the honourable member has changed her mind. She had said they were not available, and I am a reasonable listener. So, I am glad she has changed her mind. But what I would also like to add is that perhaps she is talking about those, which directly borrow from the micro finance support center. But I have said that center controls about 10 percent of the money. Around Kampala there are so many of these micro finance institutions.  

We had a function sometime ago, I cannot remember when; had you attended you would not have believed –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You have said that in Kampala they are there, how about where they are not?

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr Speaker, the honourable member –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, I have said –(Interruption) 

PROF. KAGONYERA: I am going to answer that.  I actually had the temptation of bringing with me an outreach map of Uganda, to show you in picture form where we are operating in the whole country. Unfortunately, I cannot remember off-cuff in which districts – my head is blank - there are only a few. And in fact when the hon. Mukama talked about it, I had a serious problem with some of –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Please, avail us with these maps tomorrow so that members are informed.

PROF. KAGONYERA: I will bring the maps here.  But I am sure we have facilities in Masaka District -(Interruption)

MR RUKUTANA: Thank you, hon. Kagonyera. The information I want to give is that, yes, it is true that there are some areas where micro-finance has not taken root. But there is an outreach plan, which has been formulated by the Government, which will ensure that every area, whether it is competitive or not, will receive micro-finance. Incentives have been put in place for some operators to access all the areas of the country and take the services of micro-finance to the people.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. That strengthens the statement I was making. Actually, our work is not only to disperse money, we even build capacity. Where there are no intermediary entities, we work with the leadership - which should include you, Members of Parliament – we work with you to establish intermediary entities in your constituencies. 

I challenge the hon. Members of Parliament: anybody who does not have a micro-finance intermediary in his or her constituency should start now and establish one. Because you are not going to explain to the people, especially when I come, as to why you do not have one, because we can help you to start one. Yes, we can!  

Someone asked about the Bill for non-deposit taking institutions. I will request hon. Rukutana at an appropriate time, when he is not busy with the hon. Member for Ntenjeru North, to answer this question. When he is winding up, the Minister will tell the House -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: What I can say is that the Minister is out of time. According to our records, he ought to have brought that law sometime back, in March but he has not done so. So, it is not a question of him telling us; he is out of time and it is on record. He undertook to bring that Bill to deal with that particular situation, but up to now there is nothing and no report has been given.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr Speaker, in the process I have already answered hon. Mutuluuza’s question.

Hon. Odur asked about the interest rates. Fortunately, he studied economics, and I am aware he got a very good degree from Makerere University.  Therefore, the question of interest rates should be fairly easy for him to understand. What happens is this: we control the interest rate at which the micro-finance support center lends our money to intermediary entities, and that is a maximum of 12 percent per year. We advise them that as far as it is possible, they should not charge high interest rates. In some places, like hon. Kamuntu’s place, where these intermediary entities have matured, they have reduced their interest rates to as low as three percent per month, which is 36 percent per year.  

By its nature, the micro-finance industry is very expensive. Its operational costs are much higher than those of normal commercial banks. I will give an example. A lady may borrow Shs 80,000 and she buys a bicycle. If she is ten miles away from the micro-finance center, it will cost that micro-finance center as much as it costs a commercial bank to recover about Shs 20 million from you. They will have made about Shs 5 million from you, but that micro-finance center will not have made even Shs 10,000 from this lady. 

Therefore, by its nature, the micro-finance industry is a very expensive one. The choice had to be made between charging interest rates that will make the industry sustainable or reducing those interest rates to such a level that they are not sustainable.

The other thing that we must do as leaders, Mr Speaker, is to help our people improve their culture of borrowing and returning money, because many people do not return the money. These intermediary entities have to recover the money, unfortunately from law-abiding citizens. As you know, much of this money is not borrowed based on security. So, the temptation not to pay back is there. 

I am glad to say that in spite of all that, the vast majority of the micro-finance institutions we deal with have done quite well. They are doing a commendable job, and therefore, I would like to request my colleagues in Parliament to really go out and support the micro-finance industry. It is one of the most important interventions you are going to make as leaders to help our people fight poverty. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, TRADE (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I will respond to issues that were raised on the Trade and Industry Ministry during the course of the debate. 

I will start with Capt. Byaruhanga, who wanted to know why there was no order in business. He says that the manufacturer is also the wholesaler and the retailer. Our answer is very simple; this came about because of the liberalization of the economy, which also included the liberalization of trade.  The practice may be disadvantageous to the middleman, but it is advantageous to the final consumer, who buys cheaply. However, this does not affect all manufactured goods. Government will soon bring to this House, amendments to a number of commercial laws to streamline trade practices in a liberalized economy.

The next issue was raised by hon. Joseph Mugambe, who happens to be the Chairman of the Sessional Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry. He raised issues on the World Trade Organization (WTO). This is a very wide subject on which he has sought information from the Ministry. I glad to report that tomorrow morning at 10.00 a.m., my ministry officials will be meeting the sessional committee to give a comprehensive brief on WTO.

Hon. Rwakimari wanted to know what my ministry has done to secure a market for milk. Mr Speaker, the first market for milk is Uganda. Uganda’s per capita consumption of milk is only 30 litres per person per annum, and this translates to less than 2.5 litres per person per month. This consumption is very low, compared to what the World Health Organisation (WHO) recommends. The recommendation by WHO is about 200 litres per person per annum, which is about 16 litres per month and about half a litre per day. If milk and other products in this country were consumed according to WHO recommendations, certainly there would not be enough for everybody. It is therefore important that all of us leaders sensitise our people about the importance of milk as a food. 

However, Mr Speaker, Dairy Corporation Limited and the Diary Development Authority have found markets in neighbouring countries. Uganda now exports milk to Rwanda, Tanzania and Kenya. Nigeria has also expressed interest in our milk and other diary products. The Diary Development Authority is working hard to obtain an international certificate for our diary products, after this we shall be in position to export to Nigeria.  

The fourth question was raised by hon. Bintu Jalia. She asked about markets for grain, especially maize. The market for maize and beans, since the year 2001, has been good. Government assisted grain traders in this country to come together and form an association known as Uganda Grain Traders Association. This association was further assisted with storage infrastructure and cheap credit finance. 

Mr Speaker, Government will soon come to this House with a bill entitled “The Warehouse Receipt System Bill”. This bill will provide for a system that allows a farmer or trader to warehouse produce and obtain a receipt, which will then enable him or her to obtain credit to enable production or purchase of more produce. The system enables one to continue with business even when the market is poor. One does not have to sell at giveaway prices. 

A question was raised about sugar prices. It is true that we have three sugar factories in the country. Their total annual production leaves a deficit of about 80,000 metric tonnes, which have to be imported. 

The recent shoot-up in prices of sugar has been caused by an apparent shortage, which was caused by the closure of Kakira Sugar Works and Sugar Corporation of Uganda, for annual routine maintenance. These two factories have now resumed production, but they have not yet built up the necessary stocks to satisfy the demand. The shortage is only temporary and we shall soon experience a normal situation.

The hon. Rev. Kefa Sempangi –(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Thank you Mr Speaker, and I thank the Minister for giving way. I would have thought that these two factories, which are the major suppliers of sugar, should not have colluded to close their operations at the same time thereby creating scarcity and a hike in prices, in their own interests. 

Did the Government take steps to ensure that there were adequate regular supplies of this essential commodity during these closures? Are they happy that these two factories would close their operations at the same time?  

DR NDUHUURA: Thank you very much, honourable member, for raising that. I can only say that we have taken note of it, and we shall accordingly inform the companies to make sure that they do not close at the same time, in future.  

The hon. Rev. Sempangi wanted to know what the Uganda Export Promotions Board is doing to promote exports. The Uganda Export Promotions Board is formulating a national export strategy to support high value crops. This strategy identifies a crop according to its market requirement, in terms of market access, quality standard, quantities required and ease of packaging. The strategy also talks of setting up Export Promotions Villages (EPVs) to be able to realize the required quantities in the required quality standard. 

The same honourable member identified lack of air transport as a problem. As far as we are concerned, this is not a big problem as yet, because commodities like fish, flowers and foods are being exported through Entebbe, without any big problems  

Lastly, hon. Ruth Tuma wanted to know the plans that the Government has in place for the small-scale industries. I would like to respond as follows: 

One, Government supports an association of small-scale industries known as Uganda Small Scale Industries Association, or USSIA in short. 

Two, Government has also pledged to build a common facility center for the micro enterprises. 

Three, Government has also pledged to build a permanent ground for the micro enterprises. The pledge awaits availability of the necessary funds. We have actually budgeted for these two, but they are categorized as un-funded activities. So, it is not until funds are made available that we shall implement them. Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

MRS ZZIWA: Thank you very much, honourable minister. I thought there was a second clarification to that. I want to air it out because it was also my concern.  

It seems that there is lack of extension facilities to small-scale industries. There is hardly an effort from your ministry in all these interventions that the Government normally puts in place. These interventions are in place but people do not know the procedure they can follow in order to access the assistance that is available. For instance, when the Apex I and Apex II funds were secured, people were moving from place to place trying to find out how they could access the Apex funds. There is nobody from the Ministry to assist them accordingly. 

Somebody wanted to find out – and perhaps I should also echo this - how are you going to assist these local small-scale industries, in view of the fact that we are moving towards a private sector driven economy? We should now see them being assisted, maybe like it is done in the Ministry of Agriculture where they have extension workers. But there is hardly any extension worker in the Ministry of Trade and Industry. I heard of something in the private sector, but I do not know whether it stills exists. This was the concern of the House. May you kindly inform us?

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, Mr Minister. In my first year in Parliament, I was a member of the Tourism, Trade and Industry Committee. There were historical sites that were earmarked for improvement. Last year, they promised that money would come, but we did not get it. I am wondering whether that money has now come? We had even passed a loan application for that money. Thank you.

DR NDUHUURA: Starting with hon. Mutuluuza’s question, I do not think I have a ready answer for you now. I promise to give you an answer when I have found out exactly what that is. 

Hon. Zziwa is concerned that we are not assisting the small-scale industrialists with finance and that they are disorganized. Yes, it is true there has been a problem in the Uganda Small Scale Industries Association leadership. But it is up to the members, whom we actually guide, to change their leadership. We cannot force their leadership out of office. 

All I can say is, we have got a desk in our ministry, which offers advice to small-scale industries. On top of that, USSIA and our ministry work very well with the Uganda Gatsby Trust, which is located in Makerere University, Faculty of Technology. When a branch of USSIA is affiliated to Uganda Gatsby Trust, they can access funds that are available in the Trust. That is why we advise small-scale industrialists to go for small credit. 

However, if you are talking of the big ones, then at least those ones know where to go. For the moment, the small ones, once they are members of USSIA and their branch is affiliated to Uganda Gatsby Trust, there are surely funds for small-scale industrialists with the Uganda Gatsby Trust -(Interruption)

MRS ZZIWA: I have a request to the honourable minister. Since he acknowledges that there has been disorganization in the association of the small-scale industries, may your ministry work out an arrangement, which I can equate to what the Ministry of Agriculture does, to go out and reach the small-scale industries? Look at the many urban small businesses; may I request that this desk is not a physical one you set up somewhere, but that you go and reach out to these small-scale industrialists who are mainly located in the urban areas?

DR NDUHUURA: Thank you very much. Maybe I should have pointed out that apart from giving credit, the Uganda Gatsby Trust also gives extension services. But these services are given to members who are organized in a USSIA branch. So, Uganda Gatsby Trust gives extension services. 

Our ministry cannot give extension services because after the restructuring, we are short of staff. I did not talk about this but at least there are two members here, hon. Pereza Ahabwe and hon. Mugambe, who have visited our ministry and they actually raised this matter here on the Floor of Parliament. So, we cannot spare any staff to give extension services in the field because we do not have the staff.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, LANDS (Mr Baguma Isoke): Mr Speaker, I thank you. I have come here to respond to three issues that were raised during the general debate on the Budget Speech. Issues were raised on water, environment and land.  

On water, the hon. Rwamirama, hon. Kalule Ssengo, hon. Katongole of Kyaka and hon. Sekikuubo expressed concern about the supply of water for animals in the cattle corridor. In the Budget Speech there are details about water. In my policy statement, there are details about provision for 50 valley tanks, one at parish level, covering the districts of Luwero, Nakasongola, Masindi, Sembabule, Rakai, Mbarara, including Isingiro North. For Isingiro North, there is also money to extend piped water from Mbarara to Kaberebere Township, by National water and Sewerage Corporation this financial year. 

Each of the 50 valley tanks I have talked about has a capacity from 4,000 to 10,000 cubic meters. These are not valley dams These are construction holes excavated in the valley, in a wetland accessible by animals or where the water will be pumped out into troughs for use by cattle and then treated by residents for domestic use –(Interjection)– they are all answered. 

In addition, Kampala District Members of Parliament wanted to know what provisions there were for the rural poor. For Kampala, the National Water and Sewerage Corporation has this financial year planned to connect 6,600 new consumers on the mains. For the rural poor, there are standby taps and 139 kiosks in the peril urban Kampala where people buy a jerrycan of water at Shs 20.

MRS ZZIWA: I thank the honourable minister. The information I want to give is that, yes, there has been an effort between National Water and the Central Government, through the local Governments, to connect water in various parts of Kampala under the Local Government Development Programme. But still the corporation has not fulfilled its portion. That is why many taps are not yet connected.

For instance, in the parish of Kyebando, almost 40 taps have been mounted but there is no water running because National Water has not received money from the centre. Consequently, a jerrycan of water costs Shs 100, and still the poor cannot afford it. They go back to the water, which is in Naguru next to the Indian Crematorium. That is where the poor people go to collect water. So, we would like to get confirmation from National Water about when they are releasing funds so that these water taps, which have been dug and laid, are connected.

MR KAYONGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like the Minister to clarify because he has been to my constituency and he addressed a big gathering twice. This is one of the assurances, which have not been fulfilled. The people in Kasubi, Zone II -I remember one day the President was dragged to a well where faeces were got from the water and he directed that a tap be constructed in that particular area. Up to now, two years down the road, that tap that you promised, honourable minister, has not been erected. Would you please clarify on when they are going to be constructed? Thank you.

MR ANANG-ODUR: Mr Minister, just one small matter.  You have told us you are going to construct 50 valley dams in the cattle corridor. I listened very carefully to the districts you have mentioned where valley dams are going to be constructed. I am wondering what plan you have for Apac, Lira, Soroti, Katakwi, Kumi, Pallisa, and may be a few other districts, which fall in a cattle corridor.  What is going to happen to them?

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek one small clarification. It is very brief. I want to thank the Ministry of Water –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honestly, I see a problem in this. I do not think the Minister will really do justice to these specific questions you are asking him now. He may try, but I do not think he will be honest to himself to answer you when he does not even have the technical staff. Actually, he is not the Minister in charge of the water. I do not know whether these questions should not be kept until we deal with the Ministry of Water and the committee. 

And if you will not able to attend, you direct those questions to the chairperson of the committee. Otherwise, he may pretend – but of course I do not think he will give you a meaningful response. That is my honest assessment of the situation.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Mr Speaker, I thank you for your good assessment of the terrain. However, since we are all residents of Kampala and the places mentioned are accessible, I will take up this matter seriously, because I personally know where it hurts most. I have been there and there are specific commitments by His Excellency and also National Water and Sewerage Corporation. We shall get the details either when the plenary is considering my statement, or in the committee. But, there are financial provisions to cover this area.

Sir, let me go to the environment. The hon. Otto of Aruu County raised the issue of Uganda Breweries polluting Lake Victoria with untreated effluent, a case that was witnessed by the Standing Committee on National Economy when touring the various projects under Lake Victoria Environment Management Programme. I too witnessed what the honourable member raised. We saw a pipe coming from the Uganda Breweries factory, leading to the lake, and this pipe had burst. At the leak point there was steam sending out untreated stuff into the lake.  

Sir, I have since that day got in touch with NEMA and the management of Uganda Breweries. NEMA has signed a compliance agreement with the company. Within nine months they would have established an effluent treatment plant, like we did in the case of Hima Cement Factory, which was polluting the air with a lot of dust. NEMA also signed a compliance agreement whereby a magnetic precipitator was installed within a specific period and that pollution was corrected. Uganda Breweries will correct the same within nine months. 

I hasten to add that old factories that were established before the NEMA law came into force did not comply with any environmental impact assessment. It is the new industries, like I know a fish factory in Jinja, which I inspected and found that it was empting effluent from the factory into the lake. We stopped them and taught them how to treat that effluent until it is safe, biologically and chemically, to be emptied into the open water. The new industries cannot be established without complying with the EIA specifications. 

The new industries cannot be established without complying to the IEA specifications. We are now working backwards, so that the old industries can also comply with the environmental standards.  

Lastly, on land, my neighbours, hon. Kasirivu Atwooki of Bugangaizi and hon. Besisira of Buyaga, wanted to know what Government is doing to resolve the Kibaale land question. Last month I gave a statement to this House, part of which covered this matter. The National Political Commissar also gave a statement in this House indicating how his intervention in April last year in the political turmoil in Kibaale district identified the historical land problem as being the epicentre of every political and social economic problem there.  

Uganda Land Commission has now received 146 land titles surrendered by the mailo land owners, 80 parcels have been verified, and Shs 3 billion is available on the Land Fund account, which is separate from the Treasury general account -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You said three million; 1,2,3 million?

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Billion, Sir. When we check the annex to the Budget Speech, there is Shs 9.4 billion allocated to the Land Act implementation, of which Shs 1.7 billion is targeting refurbishing the Land Fund. 

Also, arising out of the Kiyonga Report, Government has appointed a Land Fund Task Force to oversee the process of compensation and repossession of this land, and the acquisition of registerable interest by the tenants in occupancy. I will give details in the committee and definitely in the plenary when it is my time to discuss my policy statement. I thank you, Sir.

MR BADDA: Mr Speaker, the honourable minister has told us that Members of Parliament were going around inspecting projects, and they found faults in some factories and they advised them. The Minister also added that when he was moving about, he found fault with a certain fish industry and he taught them what to do. 

I want to ask, hasn’t the Ministry got inspectors to go around all industries to make routine inspections, other than waiting for the Members of Parliament to go and inspect, or the Minister himself, which they cannot do all the year around? Can the Ministry not employ special staff to work as inspectors of industries in this country, to see that factories are not disposing of things in an environmentally unacceptable manner? Thank you.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Mr Minister. As much as we appreciate your efforts to bring the old factories on board good manufacturing practices, I would request you as a responsible citizen first to look at those factories, which are most dangerous and are polluting our environment. Take an example of BAT. They are emitting a lot of effluents into the air, to the extent that even the officers of Ndugu Rugunda at the Immigration Department work while windows are closed. 

My request is, please, my colleague here has said that if you do not have the department to inspect the factories, you better create one. But I know very well that in the Ministry of Industry - I do not know whether Industry or Labour - there is a section, which is in charge of inspection of factories. If they could manage to come to a small factory like that of Byabagambi, what about BAT? What about other big factories, which are polluting this environment?  

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Mr Speaker, I share the concerns of the honourable members regarding factory inspections, with particular reference to the environmental standards. The factory inspectors in the Ministry of Industry and Labour look at the safety, the hygiene and the conditions of the workers. The environmental inspectors, NEMA has got only one. 

Then, we have gazetted every district environmental officer as an environmental inspector. These are the people who make surprise visits in order to check and then report to NEMA and then the officer, the Director in charge of Environmental Impact Assessment, moves in to advise the scientists and managers within the factory on how to address the problem. We have been very careful not to put padlocks on these factories; we make corrective installations as they produce. This is what happened to Hima Cement, Gomba Fish Factory and to the tannery that was emptying - even Mbarara University Hospital was emptying – yes, into River Rwizi. 

But, we are all inspectors. We all inspect because environment is survival, and whoever sees a problem should report that problem to NEMA. NEMA runs a UTV programme every Sunday evening and it always has a message calling upon people resident in Uganda to let them know where they are problems That way, the people handling that matter are educated and also helped technically on how to address environmental pollution done by gases, emissions into the air, noise, and fluids. There could also be obnoxious smells - bad smell is also – and who knows, even radioactive chemicals. 

So, environmental issues are new in this country. NEMA is only making seven years, it has a staff of 44 people and environmental officers are 50. Six districts do not have environmental officers. Our capacity is that much, but we are calling upon all of us to be scouts and inspectors and report problems promptly to NEMA for correction.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this was a general debate in the House but it is becoming a Committee of Supply. It was a motion by the Minister of Finance, but now we have turned it into a motion dealing with sessional committee reports. 

We shall deal with the estimates of each ministry. The Ministries will report here and we will agree with them or not. That is the proper time to deal with some of these details, which we are trying to elicit from the Ministers. The Ministers are trying to give these details and yet we are dealing with a motion that was moved by the Minister of Finance.

I really think you should restrict yourselves to the general debate. When the time comes to debate policy statements of the Ministries, you shall deal with these matters in detail. I think that is what it should be. Otherwise, we should deal with this motion then we wait for the time when the committees have finalized dealing with the Ministries. When they report here, that is when we shall deal with agriculture, health, education rather than dealing with education while we are dealing with this motion, which we were supposed to conclude yesterday.

Let us leave this issue. Did the chairperson have a few comments? Honestly, we are turning this thing into a different issue. Do not turn this into a session where you deal with policy statements. The Prime Minister wants to make a brief statement. Make it, but it should be brief; do not go into details about your policy statement.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank honourable members for what they have said. 

Honourable members talked about wastage of resources, and in particular hon. Musumba. I want to mention that mismanagement of time is also wastage, and this is a national problem that we should address.

The second issue was to do with restructuring of ministries. The point was made that the Ministry of Local Government should be a department under the Prime Minister’s Office. This matter will be addressed by the Ministry of Public Service. However, I should mention that I have very serious reservations about it. When you look at Table 7, page 4 of the Budget Speech, there are very many transfers of resources to local Governments. The transfers of a recurrent nature amounts to Shs 568 billion, and the development budget is Shs 741 billion.  

Many of the local Governments have a low accounting capacity, low implementing capacity, limited democratic accountability and weak planning capacity. So, in my view, you require a fully-fledged Ministry to guide these local Governments.  

A point was made about so many monitoring institutions. I want to say that we foresaw this problem a long time ago. The President’s Office, the Prime Minister’s Office, Finance, Local Government, Public Service were descending on local Governments in a disconnected or uncoordinated manner. I set up an inter-ministerial committee in February 2002, chaired by the head of Public Service. He has produced a report and today we have been discussing the consequences of that report. When it is completed, we shall see how we have cured this problem.

With regard to the issue of Northern Uganda, I want to say that we are dealing with this Kony thing as a phenomenon. It is a primitive, brutal and subtle system, which is not fighting a conventional war. It has no clear frontlines and has sanctuaries in the neighbouring countries. Solutions to handle it include the following: 

One, the terrified population must be mobilised, and I am very happy to mention that many ministers have done that. Hon. Okot, hon. Okello and others have done this, and the UPDF is being deployed in strategic positions. So, that is very important. 

There is also a view that the internally displaced persons in camps must be given additional security, for example by increasing the presence of the Police. When that is done, then we shall have production centres near the camps and the people in the camps would not be idle. They will be able to produce food and also market their food. This is likely to cause a difference. 

We welcome external assistance, for example President Bush has pledged US $100 million to combat terrorism in Eastern Africa and the whole of Africa. We also want an exchange of intelligence information, so that the accounts of those terrorists that are abroad may be frozen.

Let me finally say that the Minister of Finance will be clarifying on this matter. Many people have criticized the increase in the price of petrol and diesel, but I do not think that their alternatives have been viable. For example, you may want to tax land, but some of it may be tenanted. You may now be encouraging the landowner to push that burden to the tenant. So, you need a study before you propose these alternatives. 

I want to suggest that taxing fuel, as we are doing now, we cannot escape from it. It is easy to administer. You get sizeable amounts of money, and the alternatives you have suggested are not as viable as you may think. May I take this opportunity to once again thank you all? The Minister of Finance will be answering other questions. I thank you.

THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Mr James Mwandha): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In the interests of time I will not attempt to make a comment on things that are going to be discussed in the committees.

At the beginning of this debate, the Budget Committee presented its report on the macro-economic plan and the indicative budget framework for the fiscal year 2003/2004 to 2005/2006. I think the contributions from members indicated that indeed they have internalised this document. 

I want to draw the attention of members to the fact that the Ministry of Finance has given a response to the document, which we submitted to the President, according to the Budget Act. And this document should be very useful when committees are talking to the Ministers about their various sectors.

We also want to draw the attention of members and committees to the recommendations we made last financial Year. This should be the starting point for members. They should find out whether the Ministers have complied with the recommendations that we made. If compliance was difficult, we still believe that the Ministers should explain to the committees that there were other challenges, which could not enable ministries to comply with those recommendations. So, that is very important.  

Mr Speaker, as you might have noticed, PMA as a programme of the Government has had serious bashing from members. Unfortunately, the explanations given by the Minister of Agriculture did not go a long way in allaying the fears of members about this programme. The programme, which is supposed to be multi-disciplinary and multi-sectoral, ends up by having everything everywhere.  

You have roads to promote PMA, you have educated people to promote PMA, you have works - so at the end of the day sitting here and listening to the Minister - I thought that this programme has very serious challenges. I think the Government must address the comments that were made by members about this programme. And they may find it necessary to re-design this programme, otherwise we shall end up throwing our good money down the drain. 

If Members of Parliament cannot understand PMA, who do we expect to understand PMA in this country? I think this is the challenge, which I noticed during the discussion of this motion.  

I have asked the Budget Office to peruse the Hansards and summarize the concerns of members on all the sectors during the discussion, and with cooperation from Hansard, my staff in the Budget Office will make summaries. In due course, we shall make these available to the various sessional committees so that they can seek detailed responses to the concerns of members, which could not be done during this general debate.

Finally, yesterday I recommended - and I want to repeat my recommendation - that the Government should start producing White Papers on policy issues. We should have had a White Paper on PMA, and people would not have doubted as to what the intentions of Government are in as far as the Plan for Modernization of Agriculture is concerned. 

We should have had a White Paper on the small-scale industries, also. The hon. Member for Kampala was raising issues about small-scale industries, and the answers were very scanty. We could have had a White Paper on PEAP so that everybody in this House understands what PEAP is about, so that everybody is on board.  

In this respect, I want to give a document to the Leader of Government Business, which is a White Paper on Integrated National Disability Strategy by the Government of South Africa. We should have a White Paper on disability. 

I would like also to thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing almost everybody to say what he/she wanted to say during this debate. I observed you were patient, and I would like on behalf of members to thank you for this. Thank you for listening to me, honourable members.

THE SPEAKER: I think your response – was it not a long one? What I propose we do is that tomorrow the Minister of Finance should wind up his motion. And with the guidance of the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget, he has prepared us on how we shall turn ourselves into a Committee of Supply because we have not done that yet. He was justifying why we should turn ourselves into a Committee of Supply. We shall do so by preparing ourselves in the committees, and then approve the allocations of funds.  

So, I think that now is a convenient time to adjourn, so that tomorrow you prepare yourselves. We shall take a short time and then dispose of this motion. Then the committees will go to sit, full day for about two weeks, to prepare their reports and meet the various ministries and commissions.  

But before we do so, there is an announcement. I have been requested to inform you that our hon. Member for Apac, Betty Amongi, will be having a traditional marriage ceremony on Saturday, 19th July in Minalukulu sub-county, Oyam South, Apac district. Transport to the function will be available at Parliament, and departure will be on Saturday at 7.00 a.m. 

Hon. Nankabirwa, Minister of State for Defence, has kindly agreed to provide security and escorts from Karuma trading centre. The escort leaves Karuma trading centre, that is for those who may not go with the public transport, at 11.00 a.m.  Honourable members who wish to go for the ceremony may contact hon. Juliet Sekitoleko, hon. Margaret Ateng and hon. Anang-Odur. This is the information, which I wanted to pass on to you. 

With this we come to the end of today’s business.  The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.50 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 17 July  2003 at 2.00 p.m.)



