Tuesday, 11 July 2006

Parliament met at 11.02 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to welcome you to this morning’s meeting and to apologise for the delay. We were still finalising the composition for two or three of the standing committees so it has taken us a bit of time. But we are now ready to proceed with part of this work.

CONSTITUTING SESSIONAL AND STANDING COMMITTEES OF PARLIAMENT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like us this morning to deal with the sessional committees first and deal with standing ones a little bit later for the reasons I have explained.  So, we shall do it in two phases. Right now, I would like to deal with the sessional committees. 

Now these sessional committees are not quite full; we do have some vacancies in a number of these committees. So, in case there are Members who have not been allocated, they can inform us. The following are the committees where there are vacancies:

•	Defence and Internal Affairs, two vacancies
•	Gender, Labour and Social Development, two vacancies
•	Finance, Planning and Economic Development, one vacancy
•	Presidential Affairs, one vacancy
•	Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, five vacancies
•	Physical Infrastructure, one vacancy
•	Public Service and Local Government, three vacancies
•	Tourism, Trade and Industry, one vacancy.

So, I will ask the clerk to read out the names as proposed for the sessional committees.

11.06
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Kabakumba Masiko, NRM): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Elly Tumwine has expressed interest to be on ICT and he is swapping with hon. Brig. Okello to go on the Committee of Gender.

We did agree that every Member of this Parliament must be catered for. So, it is against that background that Members expressed interest and we agreed between the Clerk, the Whip of the Opposition and your office, but that is just a slight change because they have also agreed in their caucus of UPDF to change like that.

11.7
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri, FDC): Madam Speaker, with due respect to my colleague, hon. Princess Masiko Kabakumba, I wish to propose that we first go through the list, if there are areas where amendments are to be made, they be effected later. Otherwise, if we have got to interject on every other step, we might stay here until the cows come home. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us first hear the lists and as I have indicated, there are some vacancies. In case there are changes, they will come later. Let us first hear the full list.

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, I understand the representation on committees is on numerical strength. So, whose slots are those that are not filled? Are they for the opposition or for the ruling party?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Listen to the list.

COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION AND TECHNOLOGY:

1.	Baliddawa Edward  - Chairperson
2.	Muyinda Najjemba Rosemary- Deputy Chairperson
3.	Dr Serunjogi K.  
4.	Dr Tumwesigye Elioda
5.	Ngabirano Charles
6.	Nabeta Igeme
7.	Wangwa Rutangye Erinah
8.	Tinkasiimire Barnabas
9.	Turyahikayo Kebirungi
10.	Kyeyago Jowali
11.	Gen. Elly Tumwine
12.	Bahati David
13.	Katende Sematiko
14.	Kajeke W.
15.	Oceng Alex
16.	Sempala N.
17.	Apiliga Moses
18.	Okulo Epak
19.	Magulumaali Mugumya
20.	Kithende Kalibogha

MR WACHA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My understanding is that, we are constituting these committees now. I have just heard that committee has a chairperson and deputy chairperson. The rule says that the chairperson and the deputy will be elected by the Members from amongst themselves.  Now, if we constitute the committees now, when did this committee meet to elect the chairperson and the deputy chairperson?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it is clear which committees are chaired by the majority party and which committees are chaired by the minority parties. So, if they have sat among themselves and elected, for me I have been given a list.

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, even if it is clear that those committees are going to those sides, there should at least be a semblance of election. That is what the rule says. We should not set a precedent of ignoring our own rules. Let them go, even if they decide this is already decided upon by our caucus, no problem. But there should be a semblance of elections according to our own rules. We cannot depart from the rules.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which rule is that hon. Wacha?  Those rules were amended; they are designated by their parties.

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, I am one of those who sat in the rules. I am one of those who even up to now –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please bring the rules; tell us the rule and we look at it and we agree which way to go.

MR WACHA: Bring the rules, I will read it for you.  They have not been distributed; I am telling you a fact that the rules say so. I cannot deceive you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Give me the rule number so that I can look for it here.

DR EPAK: Madam Speaker, if I remember correctly, I think even the Administration of Parliament Act states so. For instance, I am hearing my name in a committee for which I never applied. Who is making all these decisions on behalf of people? The Administration of Parliament Act is very clear that the Independents write to the Clerk for the committees of which they want to be a Member. I wrote and I know which committees I applied for. (Interruption)

Can the honourable member there keep quiet while I am talking? I am speaking to the Speaker and to the House and I would appreciate if an honourable member would not be responding to my clarifications. We are following both the Act and the rules. Now, if people went to the caucuses and decided otherwise, then we might as well decide now. Which decides? Is it the caucuses or the rules we have set for ourselves? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have been made to understand that the NRM has a chief whip who deals with issues of the NRM; the opposition have a chief whip who is dealing with issues of the opposition and independents. So, if you do not know that arrangement, that is what I was told; that there is a coalition within the opposition, which is also working on these issues.

DR EPAK: Madam Speaker, first of all, I have never heard of any meeting of the opposition caucus. Secondly, we have the Administration of Parliament Act and we have the rules to adhere to.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Epak, if you are not satisfied with that committee, you say you do not want that committee and tell us where you want to go. That is very simple.  

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I am so sorry to hear that a person has never heard about opposition caucus meeting. It is even clearly written very boldly on the white board as of now, and this morning we had an opposition group meeting. That is point number one.

Point number two, it is true that the Independents did apply to the Clerk showing their interest as to where they will wish to serve, and I have the whole list here. For example, 11 Members of the Independents applied to serve on the Local Government Accounts Committee and yet by procedure there are only two slots for the Independents on any of these committees. Surely, we had to use our discretion to designate them where appropriate. Otherwise, if we were to go by what they had applied for, then we would not go anywhere. That is the much that I can explain for the time being.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition, do you want to say something – (Interjections) - no, I am waiting for the objector to tell me what he is objecting to.

11.16
THE LEADER OF OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Madam Speaker, I was provided with that copy of our Rules of Procedure that is being prepared for publication, and Rule 160 on composition of sessional committees sub-rule (6) says: “The party or organisation in Government shall designate the chairperson and deputy chairperson of each sessional committee provided that no active Member of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces shall be designated chairperson or deputy chairperson of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs.”

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, I have just been consulting a Member of the Ad hoc Committee on Rules, which dealt with these rules and my attention was drawn to this particular sub-rule.  Apparently, it was put there when I was not there –(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then that is too bad.

MR WACHA: I do not know why my colleagues are laughing. I sincerely do not know why they are laughing but I will continue to say that the original, which I know, did not have this provision. But now that this is here, I apologise to you, Madam Speaker. It is normal that matters are handled maybe in the absence of other Members, but this is a novel arrangement; very normal indeed. I apologise to you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Have you completed that list?

COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS

1.	Hon. Rose Namayanja	- Chairperson
2.	Hon. Lt Jessica Alupo -	Deputy Chairperson
3.	Hon. Tom Kazibwe
4.	Hon. Badhul Katongole
5.	Hon. Lt Saleh Kamba
6.	Hon. Pius Mujuzi
7.	Hon. Samuel Abura Pirir
8.	Hon. Frederick Mbagadhi
9.	Hon. Col Phinehas Katirima
10.	Hon. Jowali Kyeyago
11.	Hon. James Kiiza
12.	Hon. Zaake Kibedi
13.	Hon. Hassan Fungaroo
14.	Hon. Alex Aadroa Onzima
15.	Hon. Latif Sebaggala 
16.	Hon. Hussein Kyanjo
17.	Hon. David Ebong
18.	Hon. Iddi Lubyayi

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, is it not procedurally right for Members to pronounce themselves on these names?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the rules now say that I announce.  

COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE

1.	Hon. Nathan Byanyima  -Chairperson
2.	Hon. Grace Tubwita  -Deputy Chairperson
3.	Hon. Sarah Nyombi
4.	Hon. Johnson Bartille
5.	Hon. Amooti Otada
6.	Hon. Peter Lokii
7.	Hon. Margaret Baba Diri
8.	Hon. Mabel Bakeine
9.	Hon. Cosmas Busima
10.	Hon. Francis Mugarra
11.	Hon. James Byandala
12.	Hon. Eudia Kwizera
13.	Hon. Maj. Gen. Jim Muhwezi
14.	Hon. Peter Omolo 
15.	Hon. Amuriat Oboi 
16.	Hon. Elijah Okupa
17.	Hon. Geoffrey Ekanya 
18.	Hon. Charles Oleny 
19.	Hon. Michael Mabikke

COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT

1.	Hon. Theopista Ssentongo    - Chairperson
2.	Hon. Hood Katuramu        	- Deputy Chairperson
3.	Hon. Christine Nakwang      
4.	Hon. Okello Francis
5.	Hon. Nulu Byamukama
6.	Hon. William Nokrach
7.	Hon. Henry Balikowa 
8.	Hon. Milton Muwuma
9.	Hon. Sarah Kayagi
10.	Hon. Justine Kasule 
11.	Hon. Rhoda Acen
12.	Hon. Joseph Balikuddembe
13.	Hon. Susan Nampijja
14.	Hon. Francis Kiyonga
15.	Hon. Rebecca Lukwago
16.	Hon. Anne Auru
17.	Hon. Huda Oleru

COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

1.	Hon. William Nsubuga   - Chairperson.
2.	Hon. Wamakuyu Mudimi - Deputy Chairperson
3.	Hon. Julius Balyejjusa 
4.	Hon. James Kakooza
5.	Hon. Florence Hashaka
6.	Hon. Ibrahim Kaddunabbi  
7.	Hon. Henry Banyenzaki
8.	Hon. Guma Gumisiriza
9.	Hon. Grace Kyomugisha
10.	Hon. Tindamanyire Kabondo
11.	Hon. Ali Sekyanzi
12.	Hon. Oduman A
13.	Hon. Nathan Nandala
14.	Hon. John Ogwang
15.	Hon. Mathius Birekeraawo
16.	Hon. Piro Santos
17.	Hon. William Okecho 
18.	Hon. Rose Iriama
19.	Hon. Isaac Sejjoba

COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES

1.	Hon. James Kubeketerya   	- Chairperson
2.	Hon. Sam Lyomoki - Deputy Chairperson
3.	Hon. Dennis Obua  
4.	Hon. Janet Museveni 
5.	Hon. Rosemary Seninde  
6.	Hon. Erisa Kaahwa 
7.	Hon. Safia Nalule
8.	Hon. Stephen Wasike 
9.	Hon. Jacqueline Kyatuheire
10.	Hon. Chris Baryomunsi 
11.	Hon. Edward Kasole
12.	Hon. Gerald Menhya
13.	Hon. Sam Byanagwa 
14.	Hon. Jane Alisemera
15.	Hon. Alice Alaso
16.	Hon. Francis Epetait
17.	Hon. Christine Baro
18.	Hon. Willy Washington Anokbonggo
19.	Hon. Beatrice Barumba 
20.	Hon. Johnson Malinga

COMMITTEE OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS

1.	Hon. Loi Kiryapawo  - Chairperson
2.	Hon. Kakoba Onyango  - Deputy Chairperson
3.	Hon. Joseph Matte
4.	Hon. Edward Ndawula
5.	Hon. Stephen Kaliba
6.	Hon. Julia Bintu 
7.	Hon. Yahaya Gudoi
8.	Hon. Abdul Balangira
9.	Hon. Frank Tumwebaze
10.	Hon. Peter Mutuluuza 
11.	Hon. Joyce Kwebiha
12.	Hon. Aronda Nyakairima
13.	Hon. Sauda Mugerwa 
14.	Hon. Sam Njuba 
15.	Hon. Hussein Godi
16.	Hon. Agnes Akiror
17.	Hon. Reagan Okumu
18.	Hon. Norman Muwulize
19.	Hon. Margaret Angufiru
20.	Hon. Emma Boona

COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS

1.	Hon. Mary Okurut - Chairperson
2.	Hon. Ruth Tuma - Deputy Chairperson
3.	Hon. Muyomba Kasozi
4.	Hon. Margaret Muhanga
5.	Hon. Ashraf Olega
6.	Hon. Vincent Nyanzi
7.	Hon. Stella Nyomera 
8.	Hon. Robert Kashaija
9.	Hon. Aboud Kitatta
10.	Hon. Tom Butime
11.	Hon. James Makumbi
12.	Hon. Christopher Kibanzanga 
13.	Hon. Betty Ocan 
14.	Hon. Julius Emigu
15.	Hon. Okello-Okello
16.	Hon. Issa Kikungwe 
17.	Hon. Winfred Kiiza 
18.	Hon. Sammy Ogwel Loote
19.	Hon. Louis Opange

COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS

1.	Hon. Aston Kajara  - Chairperson 
2.	Hon. Peter Nyombi  - Deputy chairperson
3.	Hon. Alex Ndeezi
4.	Hon. Asuman Kiyingi
5.	Hon. Wilfred Niwagaba
6.	Hon. Ramadhan Kyamulesire
7.	Hon. Catherine Akumu 
8.	Hon. Sarah Mpabwa
9.	Hon. David Tinyefuza
10.	Hon. Mary Mugyenyi
11.	Hon. Odonga Otto 
12.	Hon. Suzan Nakawuki
13.	Hon. Elias Lukwago
14.	Hon. Simon Euku 

COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT

1.	Hon. George Wopuwa  	- Chairperson
2.	Hon. Janet Okorimoe 	- Deputy Chairperson
3.	Hon. Moses Musoke
4.	Hon. Anthony Yiga
5.	Hon. Terence Achia
6.	Hon. Alex Byarugaba
7.	Hon. Beatrice Byenkya
8.	Hon. Mary Tuunde
9.	Hon. Anthony Mukasa Harris
10.	Hon. Meddie Mulumba 
11.	Hon. Margaret Kisira
12.	Hon. Nyeko Ocula 
13.	Hon. John Arumadri 
14.	Hon. David Ringe
15.	Hon. Tress Bucyanayandi
16.	Hon. John Otekat
17.	Hon. Rebecca Amuge

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES

1.	Hon. Deusdedit Bikwasizehi - Chairperson
2.	Hon. Piro Santos - Deputy Chairperson
3.	Hon. Remigio Achia
4.	Hon. Margaret Nalugo
5.	Hon. Bruno Pajobo
6.	Hon. Margaret Kiboijana
7.	Hon. Juliet Sekitoleko 
8.	Hon. Stephen Kasaija
9.	Hon. Florence Nayiga
10.	Hon. Magoola Zirabamuzale
11.	Hon. Beatrice Rwakimari
12.	Hon. Haruuna Ssalabaya
13.	Hon. Fred Badda
14.	Hon. Herbert Sabila
15.	Hon. Aggrey Bagiire
16.	Hon. Beti Kamya 
17.	Hon. Kassiano Wadri
18.	Hon. Sebuliba Mutumba
19.	Hon. John Odit
20.	Hon. Moses Kabuusu

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

1.	Hon. Emmanuel Dombo  	- Chairperson
2.	Hon. Arimpa Kigyagi  		- Deputy Chairperson
3.	Hon. Grace Oburu
4.	Hon. Anifa Bangirana
5.	Hon. Peter Ochieng 
6.	Hon. Faridah Najjuma
7.	Hon. Peter Bakaluba
8.	Hon. Vicky Kyokuhairwa
9.	Hon. Everline Tete Chelangat
10.	Hon. Fred Bukeni
11.	Hon. Winfred Masiko
12.	Hon. Tomson Kyahurwenda
13.	Hon. Elijah Kyetunda
14.	Hon. Stephen Mukitale
15.	Hon. Harry Kasigwa 
16.	Hon. Beatrice Anywar
17.	Hon. Florence Ekwau
18.	Hon. Jimmy Akena
19.	Hon. Ojok B’Leo 
20.	Hon. John Arapkissa 

COMMITTEE OF TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY

1.	Hon. Pereza Ahabwe – Chairperson
2.	Hon. Munyira Wabwire – Deputy Chairperson 
3.	Hon. Sylvia Ssinabulya
4.	Hon. Theodore Ssekikubo
5.	Hon. Stephen Tashobya
6.	Hon. Felix Ogong
7.	Hon. Silver Bahane
8.	Hon. Julius Oketta
9.	Hon. John Bosco Lubyayi 
10.	Hon. Joseph Mugambe
11.	Hon. Ruth Nvumetta 
12.	Hon. Benson Obua
13.	Hon. Simon Toolit
14.	Hon. Charles Ekemu
15.	Hon. John Baptist Kawanga 
16.	Hon. Betty Amongi
17.	Hon. Angiro Gutumoi
18.	Hon. Amali Caroline
19.	Hon. Sanjay Tanna.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, if there is any Member of the back bench who is unaccounted for, I have indicated that there are a number of vacancies, please inform the Clerk where you want to go. Those areas where I have indicated, there are some vacancies. We are not considering standing committees at this moment. We will do them later. You wanted to say something, chief whip?

THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri, FDC): Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence to make some amendment or some re-designation by posting hon. Sam Njuba from Foreign Affairs Committee to serve on Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But have you fully accounted for all the Members?

MR WADRI: I have fully accounted for all the Members.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is somebody who is not accounted for. 

MR WADRI: At least not on my side, obviously.

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Kabakumba Masiko, NRM): Madam Speaker, if I heard properly, hon. Kyeyago Jowali Kagwa appears on two committees and yet we agreed with the Clerk that he should serve on the Committee of Information, Communication and Technology. So, I would like to request that he be deleted from the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall deal with the standing committees a little bit later after getting everybody on board.

CONSTITUTING THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMISSION

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have received communication from the Opposition Chief Whip and the Chief Whip of the NRM so, I would like to announce the back bench composition of the Parliamentary Commission as follows:

NRM Party:

Hon. Guma Gumisiriza 
Hon. James Kakooza 
Hon. Justine Kasule Lumumba 

Opposition:

Hon. Alice Alaso (FDC)

The rest of the Members are ex-officios. So, now the commission is fully constituted.

CAPT. (RTD) GUMA GUMISIRIZA: Madam Speaker, I am very sure that both sides are grateful. My sister hon. Alice Alaso is grateful to her party and we this side are grateful to our party for putting trust in us to elect us to serve on the administrative body called the Commission of Parliament. I, therefore, request Members that we should be given sufficient cooperation so that we can as a team champion the interests of the institution for the well being of all of us for the five years. (Laughter) I am aware of the amendment to two and a half of the rules. But, if I perform as I normally do, extremely well, being returned has never been my problem. 

But, Madam Speaker, I would want to request colleagues not to invite unnecessary animosity from the public and not to put Parliament on a collision course with other Ugandans. These statements out there in the public, “Parliament is going to increase their allowances” - last week when my elder brother and friend, hon. Tarsis Kabwegyere, was talking to district councils in Bushenyi (I read it in The Daily Monitor) he said, “Look! This Parliament of ours presented a constitutional amendment of Parliament sitting and awarding themselves money, Members of Cabinet refused it.” 

I think this is extremely regrettable and unfortunate for a senior person to go in public! (Applause) I used to dodge my lecturers during the days of NRC to come and listen to some of these senior colleagues. So, we respect them. We do not want this kind of thing really to cause us unnecessary trouble. It is not correct.    

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, I was duly elected by the people of Igara West. I exist as an individual and a citizen of Uganda, enjoying the freedom that we have in this country. Am I not free as a citizen to express my mind? Is the honourable member in order to want to engage me, a respectable citizen of this country, that I cannot comment –(Laughter)- on what may be discussed by Parliament of Uganda just as like I am here now able to say what I feel? Is it in order for the honourable member to pre-empt any criticism that the public and indeed individuals can make on what we discuss in this Parliament?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, towards the end of the Seventh Parliament, you came here and denied an allegation that you had not talked against the pensions of Members of this House. But you had been accused and heard talking about it somewhere. I have seen you in the press in Bushenyi, talking about the payment of Members of Parliament. Nobody has discussed payment in this House. We have never had a meeting of that matter –(Applause)- so, how do you go to Bushenyi to incite the council there against us? We have not said anything; nobody has asked for any pay rise; we have never discussed the subject here. He is in order.

MRS JUSTINE KASULE LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, I want to inform the honourable member and fellow Members of Parliament. I want us to agree as Parliament, let the issue of welfare of Members of Parliament be the concern of the commissioners. If the press is interested in knowing what is happening, we have somebody in charge of public relations of Parliament. 

The issue of Members’ emoluments is not determined by Parliament alone, Government is represented. Actually, the commission negotiates with Government and the government is represented by the Leader of Government Business who is the Prime Minister. We have the Ministry of Finance to represent Government. So, when I see Members of Parliament and honourable ministers coming up to talk about the welfare of Members of Parliament, yet they are beneficiaries, then – because they talk against it and when the cheque comes, they go and pick it. (Laughter)

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, I am standing on a point of procedure. According to the Order Paper, we are on item number four: constituting the Parliamentary Commission. I would like to know whether it is procedurally right for the elected commissioners to make their maiden speeches. It seems we are being derailed and that is why I am standing on a point of procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They were making their acceptance speeches.

MRS LUMUMBA: So, Madam Speaker, what I am saying is that, as Members of this august House, whoever has a complaint about welfare should contact the commission and our offices will be wide open; after all, you are the voters. Thank you so much.

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, before we move, can I say something as the only surviving former commissioner. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, Commissioner Wacha.

MR WACHA: Yes, I was a commissioner until yesterday. I want to congratulate the new members of the Parliamentary Commission. I know they are very able individuals. The work in the commission can be difficult, but I am sure if they work as a team and they should work as a team, it is going to be very easy for them to handle the matters, which come before them. Obviously, they are going to encounter a lot of negative insinuations like those, which come from hon. Kabwegyere. (Laughter)  But those are the hazards of the job; you will always have people like that. I am very sure they are going to handle the matters, which will come before them. 

There are some very urgent matters that I wish they could tackle immediately. The issue of accommodation of Members of Parliament is very urgent. Government will resist it, but I wish you could tackle it. I am sure other matters will come, which you will just handle like this. I wish you well! If you need me, I am here. Thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we were due to continue with our responses. The next one is the Minister of Public Service, the Deputy Prime Minister, in case something was raised on your Ministry. Now, I am proposing that the Ministry of Finance really should come last. Usually the Ministry of Finance comes when everybody has –(Interruption)

11.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE, FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, we are supposed to follow immediately after the Public Service Ministry and some of the questions that are being asked will be dealt with when we come to the budget speech. So, I would pray that you allow us to respond immediately after the Ministry of Public Service. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know, this was done by the Prime Minister but that is not how we normally do it. Normally, you do close the debate because there may be other financial issues from other ministries, which the ministers cannot answer and then you will not be able to come back to the Floor.

11.46
THE SECOND Deputy PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Henry Kajura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There are about ten or so matters, which were raised in the debate. I have only been allowed ten minutes. I will try to be as brief as possible in endeavouring to cover them.

Question number one; “Why are some districts unable to pay the salaries for the month of May and June 2006?” During the month of May and June, a number of districts experienced wage shortfalls for primary schools teachers, secondary teachers and tertiary institutions, primary health care, and agricultural extension workers. This was due to inadequate provision on the wage budget for the local governments. This problem has been addressed by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Public Service.  

The shortfalls have been met through the allocations within the wage bill. In order to ensure effective management of the wage bill, a payroll cleaning exercise has been undertaken by the Public Service. The exercise has been concluded in all ministries, departments and local governments and as informed earlier on, we found an overload of about 4,000 ghost workers. The recommendations arising out of this exercise when implemented will enable the Ministry of Public Service to obtain accurate payroll numbers that will facilitate Government to budget accurately for salaries thus minimising salary shortfalls.

Question number two; “Why are health centres under staffed?” The mandate to recruit health workers for health centres lies with the district service commission. The under staffing in some of the health centres is a result of the following reasons:

•	Failure by district service commissions to carry out recruitment exercises due to under funding.

•	Some of the new districts have not yet constituted district service commissions to handle the recruitments.
	 
•	There is a problem of retention of health workers in some of the hard-to-reach areas. In other words, we have had cases where people have been recruited but have not gone to offer service in certain areas. 

The Ministry of Health has, however, started supporting the districts to recruit the health workers through running of central departments and giving financial contributions to the service commissions to enable them to recruit the staff.

The Ministry of Public Service is also coming up with the strategy of motivating and retaining public officers including health workers in hard-to-live areas.

Madam, you probably know that with the teachers, we already contribute an extra 25 per cent on their salaries for those who serve in the hard-to-reach and hard-to-live places. These places are Bundibugyo, Karamoja, Kalangala, Gulu and Kitgum.  We have been trying to work out a system whereby this could be extended to the health workers so that this could be an attraction to some people to work in these areas. We are about to finalise this arrangement with the Ministry of Health.

Question three concerns information on the processing and payment of pension. The procedures of processing pension claims begins with the public officers applying to retire. Officers are advised that six months prior to retirement, they should submit their papers so that there is sufficient time; that is a period of six months within which the papers can be processed. However, many forget to do so or neglect to do so and only remember to do so when there is perhaps one month left or a few weeks left. 

The ministries and departments then originate a mission of claims accompanied by supporting career records of the public officers.  The submissions are then received by the ministry, which establishes the authenticity of the documents and claims then they are referred to the Auditor-General for eventual determination. The Auditor-General determines as to who gets paid because at times names come in and at times there are problems about who should be paid and who should not be paid.

In order to expedite the processing of claims and to strengthen checks and balances, a special verification unit was set up in the ministry in the year 2002. On average, 380 new pensioners access the payroll each month broken down as follows: This is for last year.

•	Teachers  			- 	120
•	Traditional civil servants 	- 	140
•	Defence 			-	120

Following the national census of pensioners, the pensioners’ records and the ministry operations were computerized and this has led to improvement in pension administration especially in tracking of pensioners’ records and in the management of the pension payroll. However, the budget allocation for pensions has continually been inadequate especially in the payment of gratuities. 

The former employees of the East African Airways Cooperation: There have been pension arrears. Since the financial year of 2000/01, Shs 53 billion had been paid to 9,283 former employees of the defunct East African Community.

In addition, in the financial year of 2000/01, 2001/02, a total of Shs 20 billion was released and paid to 4,020 beneficiaries as validated pensions arrears and this has enabled many people to benefit. Despite what has been done, we still have problems in meeting some of the pensions particularly arising out of the gratuities but the monthly pensions are paid regularly on the 28th of every month. What is pending is the gratuity; it has got various names. In other words, when you opt to have a lump sum and it is this lump sum that has not been paid. With the additional Shs 320 billion, we hope that we shall make some headway on this matter.

Concerning payment of compensation for the former employees of the defunct East African Community, I wish to confirm once again that the government has paid all these beneficiaries their terminal benefits except the 586 former employees of the Defunct East African Cooperation who are owed a sum of Shs 22 billion as compensation for loss of office. My ministry, in conjunction with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and that of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, is working modalities to paying the money. I wish to clarify that these employees were fully paid their provident fund benefits. 

Some other issue, which came up, was about the retrenched staff. All retrenched staff have been paid. So, nobody should be coming to the Members to say that they have not received their payment. Our records show that they have indeed been paid. 

Now the Parliamentary pension scheme, which has been discussed a few minutes ago. In this week, there is going to be the meeting chaired by His Excellency, the President to further examine this matter and all stakeholders have been invited to this meeting and we hope that it will be possible to arrive at a satisfactory arrangement, which will prove acceptable to the stakeholders.

The last question, which came up, was about training. There has been a lot of training for the local governments by the Ministry of Public Service. Inspections were conducted in Kapchorwa and Nakapiripirit, Moroto, Kotido, Pader, Kitgum, Moyo, Adjumani, Rakai, Masaka, Mbarara and Bushenyi districts and their urban authorities have equally benefited including Kampala City Council.  Similarly, inspections have been carried out in other areas and they continue to-date.  

Madam Speaker, these were the major issues that came up and I am glad that I have been able to respond to them.  If there are any other additional ones, I have a colleague who has been in the Ministry of Public Service all her life. She should be able to clarify any of the issues that I may not have covered properly. I thank you.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I am just at a loss. If I wanted to find some clarification from the ministers, at what point would I come in?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think if there are further issues you want to discuss, we will deal with them in the budget.

MR OKUPA: If it is just a clarification from the communication the minister is making, I could be having other information, which I would want to give the minister. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Ask now before we go to Defence.

MR OKUPA: I am bringing it because I saw the honourable Member for Mbarara Municipality getting up. Madam Speaker, I heard the Rt hon. Deputy Prime Minister talk about the East African Community people having all been paid. He went ahead and said, “Except the East African Community”. That was a repetition because as I know, even up to now I still have papers which I was given this week by one of those former employees of East African Railways, who he has not got his money. When you come up and say, “They have all been paid”, then I do not understand. Can I have some clarification on the East African Railways Corporation workers? I have a number of them in my constituency who have been bothering me. I still have their papers up to now.  

MR KIGYAGI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like the Minister of Public Service to really take Ugandans who give a service and to take this Parliament very seriously and take this country very seriously. Every other month, there are people who have given service and they are not paid. For a long time the Ministry of Public Service has been talking about cleaning of the payroll.  Year-in, year-out, he talks about cleaning the payroll.

I raised an issue about why people were not paid which is because the Ministry of Finance is estimating the number of workers. Can’t we get a definite date and say, “At this time, the payroll will be cleaned” so that these Ugandans could get their payment in time. What is the miracle? I thank you.

MR YIGA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. The Rt hon. Second Deputy Prime Minister has just mentioned something to do with health workers. In fact, he alleged that districts do not have district service commissions. However, some districts have got district service commissions, and it is only that they have a law that a district to recruit health workers, they must have permission from the Ministry of Health. If it is true, then what is the use of the district service commissions? 

For example, in Masaka District, we have several health centres that were built, but they do not have staff and they say, “The Ministry of Health has not given us a go-ahead to recruit” and yet the district has the capacity to recruit and pay their health workers. I want the Minister for Public Service to clarify this.

Secondly, the minister has also mentioned something to do with pensions. For example, my district, Masaka District, originally had Rakai, Kalangala, and Sembabule. But when they were given a districts status, the workers that used to work for Masaka District still come to claim pensions from Masaka.  Madam Speaker, when a new district is created, it is supposed to inherit assets and liabilities.  Why should a new district that has been created come to the mother district to claim pensions? The minister should clarify why these people still come to claim pensions? Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I hope we can reconcile what the Minister of Health said here, about the ban on recruitment being lifted. This is what he told us.

MR KAJURA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Perhaps I will deal with the last question. When these districts are divided, generally there is some understanding on how they share the pensioners. Generally, if, for example, Mr X Y Z who used to belong to Masaka now goes to a new district, that new district should take over the responsibility. It takes on the assets as well as the liabilities. 

At some stage, we thought central Government would relieve the districts of the responsibility for paying pensions, but this has not been possible. The Ministry of Finance has not found it feasible to do so. We did it once and it was never repeated.  Therefore, the local governments remain pension authorities and people who have served them must go to them in the first instances. If at some stage we have some little money, we shall give it to them to assist them. But the responsibility still remains with the districts.

The information we have is that and if, for example, there are people who are not eligible pensioners under those arrangements of Posts and Railways, they may come up and produce documents and try to say that they were indeed pensionable when they were not. Some of these had not served the necessary number of years. 

I remember I had a claimant who had served only nine years. The minimum period of service to qualify for pension was 10 years.  Therefore, some people thought that since there is now a new dispensation they could come and make a claim to be paid. But if there is a case, which is genuine, it can always be looked at and we shall welcome you if you present it on his behalf or even you bring him along. I assure you, we shall receive him.

The health workers: I really do not understand the problem because Parliament here approved an additional expenditure for a number of doctors and health workers. I cannot remember the exact figures and these are supposed to be recruited by the district service commissions. If the Minister of Health is trying to hold on, and this is not unusual among us, we would like to hold on to what we think we should not give way. This is not right.  We put a request here and you approved it. This was a clear request for the health centres in the districts. I would ask our colleagues in the Ministry of Health to release the necessary funds to the districts in order for them to do the recruitment. 

Earlier on, the problem has been that some of the districts did not even have money to put out advertisements for posts. So, one of the methods we used was to ask the Ministry of Health to jointly put advertisements for very many districts so that one advertisement would cover several districts and that was done. But there is no reason why the recruitment should not go forward since the money and posts were approved. If there is still a problem, please let us know so that we resolve it with the Ministry of Health.  

12.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE (DEFENCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I begin by thanking colleagues who raised pertinent issues during the debate of the State of the Nation Address concerning my portfolio, which is the Ministry of Defence.  During that debate, many issues were raised and I have decided to categorise them in three parts:  

1)	Karamoja disarmament exercise; 
2)	The state of affairs in Northern Uganda; 
3)	and others.  

Madam Speaker, the issues that were raised included the following:

1)	Increased wave of insecurity in Usuk and more generally in Teso. 
2)	Inadequate response by the Army commanders. 
3)	The UPDF in the field are demoralised because of failure to pay Arrow Boys. 
4)	Disarmament not pushed to its logical conclusion.
5)	Government strategy on disarmament may be wrong, therefore, needs revision.
6)	The President’s State of the Nation Address talked about commitments on disarmament to be translated into action. 
7)	Government should show that it cares for the people of Teso. 
8)	The state is a very powerful institution, therefore, it is expected to control Karamoja warriors. 
9)	Government exists to uphold the welfare, particularly of its suffering people. 
10)	Motions in the House on cattle rustling have been ineffectual. 
11)	The Army and the auxiliary forces have been accused of insensitivity and harshness. 
12)	There have also been allegations of committing of crimes by some soldiers.  

Madam Speaker, my colleague, the Minister of Defence, hon. Dr Kiyonga, and I have had consultations about the situation in Karamoja with Members of Parliament from that region. We have held so far three meetings and we intend to continue this engagement both here and in Karamoja.  

In addition, we shall also involve the honourable Members of Parliament from the districts negatively affected by the situation in Karamoja. These interactions have created two impressions on one hand: that despite its capacity, Government has either no political will or that it deliberately creates inequity in the distribution of security in this country; and that the government does not care for Teso region.  

Madam Speaker, on the other hand, other colleagues think that the Army is being harsh to the people of Karamoja and that the operations against the warriors and the illegal possession of arms should be halted. 

Our view is that, Government has demonstrated full will to deal with Karamoja in moving to solve a longstanding and traditionally based sophisticated situation in the region of this country. We believe irreversible progress has been made, and if full political will could be demonstrated by all the leaders at all levels in Karamoja, the matter would be solved even much faster.  

Honourable colleagues, you will remember that President Museveni personally launched the disarmament programme in 2001. By the end of 2003, over 10,000 guns had been recovered. When Kony insurgency in the North escalated and in addition extended into Teso region, UPDF was redeployed to tackle the LRA problem. As everybody can see, Kony has basically been defeated.  

Accordingly, on 21 September 2004, the President re-launched the disarmament programme. Significant progress has been made. For example, between January and May 2006, guns and animals were recovered and warriors handled as follows – I have a table, which indicates in detail per district the guns recovered, the animals branded and those arrested are 162, those prosecuted are 89, and I think honourable colleagues will access this document at an appropriate time. These results without any doubt show that the Army has done a good job in Karamoja and that the will of the President and the wider Government cannot be questioned by anyone in the know.  

However, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, there are people who do not want this operation to continue. For example, on Saturday hon. Ekanya informed hon. Kiyonga on phone that an announcement had been made by the press that Government had called off the disarmament programme within Teso and Karamoja. This caused a stampede in Teso region. The minister reassured hon. Ekanya that the disarmament was on and will not be stopped. Later on, on Sunday, the chief of defence forces issued a public statement reaffirming Government commitment to proceed with this work.

There were allegations made against the UPDF. I want to inform this august House that these are being investigated.  CMI had earlier on embarked on the investigations, but later on we sat and agreed to widen the committee that is carrying out these investigations, to include an officer from the office of the Prime Minister, Police, Human Rights Commission officer based in Moroto, the RDC, a kraal leader where the investigations are being carried out so that the outcome will be owned by everybody rather than employing the CMI to carryout investigations on the UPDF, the institution to which the CMI subscribes.  

Madam Speaker, the main policy governing the current phase of disarmament in Karamoja, is to encourage as much as possible voluntary disarmament. The disarmament is a joint campaign involving military, the civilian, political leaders and the entire community.  A reward in the past was given to those who disarmed voluntarily. These included issuing of iron sheets, ox-ploughs, maize grain and certificate of clearance. 

Among the principles we had was forceful disarmament, which is restored in regard to those who violate the agreement reached by Government and the community; prosecuting and jailing all those involved in cattle rustling and highway robbers; provision of water for animals, construction of security roads, region cooperation with the authorities in Kenya. 

Madam Speaker, at this juncture let me inform this august House that I tabled the problem of cattle rustling to the East African Community Council of Ministers of Defence. The outcome was that, a Defence Expert Working Group (DEWG) was set up and it was tasked to go on the ground to carryout assessment. 

As I speak now, this group has finished its work. They have submitted a report to the chief of defence forces. This report is going to be submitted to the Council of Ministers of Defence in East Africa and it is only then that I will lay it on Table because if I do it now, I will be out of procedure. It is not correct to lay a report from an expert group set up. The point I am making is that cattle rustling is now a matter of the East African Community. Uganda tabled it and it was I in that meeting.

The Karimojong leaders in agreement with Government set the following rules: 
 
•	Not to ambush any vehicle or persons on the road.
•	No crossing of district boundaries into other areas in search for pastures and water with guns or weapons.
•	Not to carryout inter-clan raids.
•	No crossing international borders in search of pasture and water.
•	Never to attack Government soldiers or workers.
•	The people who are either voluntarily disarmed or are forcefully disarmed should be assured that they would benefit from the general protection given by the Army so that no opportunist comes to raid their cattle because they are perceived unarmed.

In addition, it was agreed to create disarmament committees from the national level down to the grassroots. Meanwhile, we accept that despite the good work being done by the troops in the field, there are incidents of incursions by the Karimojong in the neighbouring districts. However, I want to assure the House that every effort possible is being made to prevent and deal with these incursions as we find a fundamental and sustainable solution to the Karamoja problem.

Madam Speaker, the second category is the state of affairs in Northern Uganda. There were statements made by hon. Okumu, a former Member of the Seventh Parliament and now a sitting Member of the Eighth Parliament. He made these statements on this Floor and they created a wrong impression about the efforts made by Government to ensure return of peace and stability in the Northern part of our country. It is, therefore, critical that we restate the facts so that the honourable members of the House do not get misled. It is, of course, a fact that our brothers and sisters in Northern Uganda have had a difficult time over the past 18 or so years having been terrorised by Kony and lived in camps for the most of this time. 

Now that Kony is basically defeated, the situation in that part of the country is improving and total resolution of the conflict is in sight. Hon. Okumu knows that His Excellency, the President has been citizen number one who has showed serious concern about the situation in Northern Uganda. Not only has the President publicly apologised for the difficult situation there but has also without rest worked to bring back peace and development in the region. The desirable situation now prevailing in Southern Sudan is in part attributable to the revolutionary and Pan African orientation of the Movement under the leadership of Chairman Museveni.

While it is quite perfect to recognise the role that the leadership in Southern Sudan is playing as hon. Okumu did in the stabilisation of Uganda, it is wrong for such recognition not to appreciate the role President Museveni has played in the stabilisation of that part of Africa. Our people in Northern Uganda for all intent and purpose are on the way home. The large camps in which they have lived for so long are being decongested into smaller camps, which are closer home. The next step, which will follow as more confidence is gained in the improving security situation, is to go home. 

In regard to general development work, I would like to remind the House of the following facts:

•	That now there are many schools and health centres constructed by Government all over Northern Uganda. Of course, due to insecurity the population has been denied use of these facilities. However, as they return home these institutions will be available after due repairs are made. 

•	The UPDF is massively deployed in the region to ensure security.

•	The districts in Northern Uganda do receive their due share of annual national budget. On top of that, special programmes over the years have been put in place in the region for development these include: Northern Uganda Rehabilitation Programme one and two; the Northern Uganda Action Fund.  

Allow me to also mention something on the revival of the peace talks with Kony. Hon. Rebecca Otengo, the woman Member of Parliament representing Lira District, was very elaborate in her submission to the House. She expressed the sentiments of the people of Lango and in particular Lira District regarding reconciliation and justice.

Madam Speaker, His Excellency the President was quite clear on the basis for the resumption of peace talks with Kony. President Salva Kiir has advised on talks and we are ready to go by his advice. If Kony is serious, we shall strike some agreement thereafter after which the matter of ICC could be handled.

Madam Speaker, this is a very interesting case Uganda is faced with today. I think the ICC is handling this as its first case. It was approached by Uganda and it accepted to carry out investigations. They indicted people. It is Uganda again which is saying, “Yes, let us give a hearing to the efforts made by our good neighbours.” Therefore, this is a situation, which Uganda is in and we are saying we want peace and not only peace but sustainable peace. 

Madam Speaker, I will not talk about the illegal basis for the firearms in the hands of Karamoja. It is general knowledge. I was just looking at the 1970 Act. 

I will mention something regarding the auxiliary forces. About the issue of payment of salaries to the Arrow Boys, I would like to assure Parliament that there is no loss of morale as it was alleged on the part of UPDF officers. This does not demoralise the UPDF. It is true that the auxiliary forces for reasons of resource constraints within Government have not had their pay regularly and I am really very sorry. I want to really feel sorry on behalf of Government for us to continue using ours sons and daughters who are working along with UPDF and they miss their salary for one, two, three months. It is unacceptable. [An.hon member: “It is ten months”] It is not ten months as is alleged by my honourable colleague. 

I am glad to inform this House, however, that just before the end of last financial year, Shs 6.5 billion was released by the Treasury for partial payment of the auxiliary forces. Some limited budget for the same purpose has been provided for in the current budget. Plans are meanwhile underway to restructure the Arrow Boys and other auxiliary forces, which will include in part demobilising some of them.

A few Members also raised the issue of defence overspending under another category. However, I want to say that the defence budget remains constraint and we appreciate other national imperatives that must take precedents. Defence as you know, comes number five after economic sectors up to education, works and health. I am sure that we shall debate further the defence budget when that time comes. 

Madam Speaker, in conclusion on this matter, I want to say that Government is under constitutional obligation to protect Uganda and all its citizens. Despite current insurgencies in the North, the territorial integrity of Uganda has been maintained. Government is determined to ensure that all the illegal arms are collected from Karamoja. Government is carrying out an integrated disarmament and development programme in Karamoja so that not only do we remove the arms, but also transform our brothers and sisters in Karamoja region. Efforts at disarmament have yielded significant positive results. 

The leadership of the President and the Movement he leads have done commendable work to ensure progressive stabilisation of the country. Those parts of Uganda that have not fully enjoyed the peace and development should now have hope as we surely move to total stabilisation of the country. We call upon all leaders to cooperate with one another and with Government. Issuance of inflammatory statements about this situation is retrogressive. Government has the duty and has shown full commitment to protect all the people of Uganda without discrimination.

Madam Speaker, I have been directed by the Rt hon. Prime Minister to give some information on an issue that was raised on the Floor regarding the escape of detainees from Makindye Barracks. I think it was raised here on the Floor by hon. Alaso and let me take this one minute to give this august House information. Thank you.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, on the 26 June 2006 at around 5.00 O’clock, seven detainees who were on remand charges escaped from Makindye Military Barracks through the western access. And since then, we carried out investigations into this incident to establish the circumstances under which these people escaped. The circumstances have been dully established. 

Madam Speaker, permit me to report that on that day the seven people that escaped are:

1)	RA/2057- Lt Gonzaga Bukenya who was charged with the offence of terrorism; 
2)	RA/15611 - veteran warrant officer II, Sam Tugume, who was charged with the offence of treachery; 
3)	RA/NYA - Pvte Yunus Mawerere who was charged with the offence of robbery; 
4)	RA/165352 - Pvte Julius Rwabwoba, who was charged with the offence of robbery;
5)	 RA/170801 pvte Fred Tigibwa Kato, who was charged with the offence of robbery; 
6)	RA/143223 - pvte Ssentongo Jabila, who was charged with the offence of treason; 
7)	RA/150290 - pvte Francis Kato, who was charged with the offence of treachery. 

The above-mentioned inmates broke out of the cell by digging a hole big enough for a medium sized person to go through and escaped. 

Madam Speaker, I conclude by saying that the allegations in the media that the escapees were PRA suspects are false and misleading. The actual fact is that, escapees are not PRA suspects as I have mentioned. Efforts to trap the suspects are underway and I want to assure this House that these people will be got. Madam Speaker, I beg to report and thank you for listening to me.

MR JOHNSON MALINGA:  Clarification

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On what? The second part was in response to the question, which hon. Alaso – maybe we take two clarifications.

MR MALINGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for this elaborate statement and answer to the questions raised.  However, I have a few issues that I would like the minister to clarify. One, despite the fact that we passed the money to pay the auxiliary forces (the Arrows Boys and the Amukas), they last saw salary just before Christmas last year and up to now they have not received a cent. Where did this money go?  

On the issue of the morale of the UPDF, just last Saturday, I was in Usuk burying an innocent boy who had been shot dead by a UPDF. On our way back, the brigade commander was standing by the roadside with a UPDF car with all tyres flat. Where is the commitment of Government, when you send a front line brigade commander to drive a DMC car? 

And on the compensation of the Arrow Boys, Madam Speaker, I do not know what the law of UPDF is.  However, what we have learnt is that, when anybody in the auxiliary forces is killed, the government of Uganda pays Shs 360,000 as compensation. Is this really enough to pay a person who has sacrificed his life for this country?

MS ALUPO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for her very elaborate statement about the security situation especially in the Teso sub- region. I was there over the weekend and the situation is not as bad as it was a week ago.  However, I am 31 years old. The disarmament programme has been going on for 31 years. I want to say two things that I am not comfortable with in the minister’s response: 

One, in the objectives she says the cattle rustlers (the Karimojong, the Turkana and the Pokots of Kenya) should not cross the international borders with their arms while they are in search of water and pasture. I want to specifically say that she should not only talk about the international boundaries because the Karimojong warriors will cross to Teso to look for pasture and water with guns. But my experience in my 31 years in this world is that, a Karimojong warrior and a gun are inseparable. Therefore, when the minister says the Karimojong warriors can come to Teso to look for water and pasture without guns, I think that is impossible.

Secondly, I want to talk about –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, just seek clarification. You are not submitting because she is answering issues you have already raised.

MS ALUPO: Madam Speaker, that is the clarification I wanted to get from the minister. Then the second clarification is about the morale of UPDF soldiers and the auxiliary forces, the Arrow Boys in Teso.  When the Arrow Boys do not have salary, they get demoralised. You cannot command a force, which is demoralised. You cannot even call them for a parade. What do you tell them when they are demoralised? Because before you say something, they will be the first to talk and they can even shoot you. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, most of my would-be questions have been asked but I just have one issue that I would like the minister to respond to. It is a known fact that Karimojong have got various ways of arming themselves. One of the ways is by light weapons crossing the borders of this country from the neighbouring country. I know that this is a major source of weapons to the Karimojong, because the borders are porous. In your strategy, Madam Minister, what are you doing to prevent re-armament of Karamoja? 

Related to this, Madam Speaker, it is also known that among the Karimojong one may have more than one gun. What I know now is that you as Government are going out there, facilitated by the UPDF to collect those guns. It is very likely that you will recover the gun that a Karimojong is carrying at any one time. What are you doing to try and recover all the other guns that may be buried somewhere in the ground so that Karamoja is disarmed once and for all?

MS REBECCA OTENGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to give information to my sister, the Minister of State for Defence. Just two days back, something very queer happened in Lira at Human Technical Vocational Training on Kampala Road just at All Nation Christian Care. I am sure you know that place. 

Some army man just went on rampage and shot dead a student and this is a place, which is training mostly these destitute children (the children from the IDP camps and other regions).  The reason they are giving is a bit discouraging.  They claim that they were looking for the army men who had taken marijuana. But this boy was shot about 14 bullets before he died in cold blood.  Unfortunately, where the order came from is a bit confusing: either from the Army, the office of the RDC or the DPC. But really, for a student to be shot on the compound of the school and the Army says they are looking for the army men who had taken marijuana, to me is a bit queer.

Madam Minister, something very funny is happening in the Northern region. The Army is supposed to access their bank account from Stanbic Bank and they come from Kitgum, Pader and other areas.  However, sometimes they take almost a week without getting the money because the bank is so congested. After getting the money, they do not get straight to the barracks. Sometimes when they are waiting for an opportunity to access the money, they stay overnight. I feel this is a security risk and maybe you could get a way of mitigating that. Thank you.

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, I thank my honourable colleagues who have raised more issues. Hon. Malinga informed me that the auxiliary forces have not received their salary although I have told you that we received Shs 6.5 billion at the end of this financial year. I can only pledge to go and cross check because what I have on my desk is that the money was released. I have to go down and find out why they have not received it. Maybe it is the procedure, which is long. The commander in charge gets the cheque and takes it to the bank. I think it could be procedural but the money was released.  

You mentioned something concerning a vehicle having a flat tyre and - I could not connect this to the morale of the soldiers. It is normal. We in the UPDF have vehicles. Madam Speaker, recently I just received a consignment of trucks. I know there are inadequacies. This country is a country of inadequacies and you cannot expect UPDF to have 100 per cent in Uganda. However, the point I am making is that, we are really trying. We have tried to procure transport and other facilitation to the UPDF. You honourable members have been acknowledging this. 

Madam Speaker, on the issue of compensation, he said that compensation is not enough. But I think we need to make a law here regarding that and I am sure that law will help in compensating for the death of his own or relative in service. 

Hon. Alupo talked about the guidelines, which I read about crossing the border either international or internal when you are armed. These are set up guidelines. You still have that belief hon. Alupo that a Karimojong and a gun are inseparable? For how long shall we go with this? This is what we want to turn? These cultures must be analysed and changed. Prof. Nsibambi in his book, he was handling the land question, he told us that we have to analyse culture and cultures that cause conflict should be more analysed so that we can think of changing such type of cultures. This is on page 245. Yes, that book was edited by Kumar.

Madam Speaker, as I said, these are agreed principles, which must help our brothers and sisters from Karamoja to change. They must live like anybody else in Uganda.

On the issue of rearming and the source of the arms, there are other regional efforts that I have not mentioned, Madam Speaker, to make sure that the issue of gun trafficking is handled. We have regional efforts and regional fora. We have been holding meetings with DRC Congo and Uganda, Burundi and Rwanda on that side. I have just opened a workshop this morning. There are other regional fora that deal with trafficking of guns that will help us. I cannot pledge here that Uganda is going to handle that for it is beyond Uganda’s control because it involves more than one country.

The problem of burying guns; some people will die and will leave those guns buried. If we intensify the disarmament and implement the laws we have put in place, people will die and leave their guns where they buried them. There will not be any opportunity for them to use them for it is prohibited to move with the gun in public.

I conclude by saying that let us work collectively to make sure that we dig into the network of these people. If we get to know where they have buried the guns, we shall unearth them. If we do not get them, let them rust in the soil where they are buried.

Hon. Otengo, I received the information about that incident and good enough I am travelling to Lira on the 14th to attend those functions there. I pledge to dig into this but as usual whenever such an incident happens, UPDF swifts into action. We carry out investigations. If it needs court-martialing somebody, somebody will surely fall victim. We have experienced nasty incidences where people just go berserk and somebody shoots his wife and all that. However, we normally go into action and make sure that we get these people.  

About the bank being congested, I do not know what I can do as a Minister of State for Defence but with improved security, I know more micro-finance institutions will go up those ends and we could think of using more than one bank. I pledge to avail myself more for further interaction but with that, Madam Speaker, I beg to stop here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know that the issues of defence are complex. We are soon getting into the general debate on the budget. We have formed our committees and we shall continue canvassing these issues for we cannot answer all of them today.

12.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE, LABOUR (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker and honourable members, a number of issues were raised concerning the Ministry of Labour, Gender and Social Development. I intend to answer one part, but there is a part about the youth and the children, which will be responded to by my colleague hon. Kinobe. 

Allow me to begin with the concern of hon. Balyejjusa, MP for People With Disabilities, Eastern region.  His concern was that PWDs are not employed by Government and private sector institutions. In his view, he asserted that there was need to establish a legal framework to ensure that PWDs are employed by both the government and the private sector. 

While I agree with the honourable member that it is incumbent upon the state to take affirmative action to ensure that people with disabilities and other marginalised groups are not segregated against in employment and all other spheres of life.  I want to categorically deny the charge that Government or even the private sector does not employ people with disabilities.  Whereas it is true that there are still some problems of negative attitudes and poor structures at the work places - structures which are not disability friendly, the government has done all in its powers to take affirmative action in favour of people with disabilities and indeed in favour of other marginalised groups. 

In the 60s Government employed what they called, sheltered workshops, where it trained people with disabilities to get employment.  As time went on, people with disabilities were deliberately assisted to access formal education and attain qualifications to be able to compete favourably on the job market.  That was not enough. But with the force of the NRM Government, both the policy and the legal framework were put in place to guard against discrimination of people with disabilities and especially regarding employment.  Honourable members will know that for the framework, we have the following laws:

First and foremost, in the Constitution of Uganda, Articles 21, 32 and 35 specifically target getting rid of discrimination and unfair treatment of people with disabilities and other marginalised groups.

Secondly, in the last Parliament, the Persons With Disabilities Act, 2006, was passed.  In that Act, the whole Chapter 3, starting from Section 12 onwards, is dedicated to ensure that people with disabilities are enabled to harness their full potential.  

Then we have the Employment Act, 2006, which also emphasises the need to ensure that people with disabilities are not discriminated against.  All these laws, Madam Speaker and honourable members, have provisions that prohibit the discrimination against people with disabilities. And they do put in place measures to ensure that people with disabilities realise their full mental and physical potential.  

Madam Speaker, my ministry in collaboration with the Federation of Uganda Employers, started a programme of sensitising and capacity building of employers through recommended practices for the management of disability at the work place.  We went further to encourage employers.  

Now the National Council of Disability in collaboration with the Federation of Uganda Employers have established yearly rewards to any industry or firm that excels in employing persons with disabilities.  We give them rewards and we encourage them. We want them to make it a point to employ people with disabilities as a form of affirmative action to ensure that their full potential is harnessed.

As honourable members may know, employment by both Government and the private sector is on the basis of the required qualifications and experience, but of course we take equality and freedom from discrimination to be the cardinal points when any person or Government is employing the work force.

As for the policy, Madam Speaker, we formulated the national policy on disability, which was launched only yesterday the 10 July 2006.  Again on policy we are finalising the employment policy and we shall soon debate it in Cabinet and bring it here for the honourable members approval. 

 In this employment policy, we have what we call, “The Equal Opportunities Bill” or the “The Equal Opportunities Act.”  Actually a Bill has already been drafted, and the Ministry of Finance is waiting for its approval, and once it is approved, it will go through the due process and it will go along way in ensuring that people with disabilities and other marginalised groups are enabled to harness their full potential.  

This commission by our Constitution is supposed to be in place.  Actually there is provision here that makes it mandatory to have this commission in place before September this year. And what I can do is to pledge that we shall abide by the provision of the Constitution.  Madam Speaker, all these are measures to ensure that people with disabilities and other marginalised groups are enabled and facilitated to harness their full potential.

Other endeavours that Government has gone into are to establish vocational rehabilitation centres, which provide employable skills to persons with disabilities.  People with disabilities are receiving training in a number of fields, for example, in tailoring, carpentry and joinery, leatherwork, handicraft, computer studies and agriculture.   When they get these skills, they can gainfully get employed either by Government or by the private sector or by work on their own.  So, that is a very good intervention on the part of the government.  

You may also know that we have a number of vocational training centres for people with disabilities, which are operating very well.  We have Kireka Industrial Rehabilitation Centre, Lweza Vocational Rehabilitation Centre in Wakiso District, Ruti Vocational Rehabilitation Centre in Mbarara, Mpumude Vocational Rehabilitation Centre in Jinja, Ochoko Vocation Rehabilitation Centre in Arua and quite a number of others.  These centres are supposed to orient and train people with disabilities so that they can get employment.  

Madam Speaker, an honourable member was concerned about the plight of employees and the working conditions.  His assertion was that some employers are mistreating employees.  Yes, I agree, that is true given the fact that the demand for jobs is not matched with the supply.  We have an oversupply, we have rampant unemployment; it is true that some employers are taking advantage of the unfortunate situation.  

But there is hope; there is light at the end of the tunnel.  We have enacted a set of brand new laws: the Employment Act, 2006, Persons with Disabilities Act, 2006, the Labour Unions Act, 2006, Occupational Safety and Health Act, 2006, the Labour Disputes Arbitration and Settlement Act, 2006, the Minimum Wages Board and Wages Council, 2000.  When we are able to implement all these laws, that unfortunate trend of employers taking advantage of the bad situation of employment to harass employees will cease. Because these laws contain adequate provisions to safeguard employees - actually these laws also safeguard employers to make sure that there is equilibrium.  

So, honourable members, that one will soon be a thing of the past.  There has also been a problem with capacity to supervise and to ensure enforcement of the existing laws.  But I am very sure that Government is now putting emphasis on the terms and conditions of workers and will do away with that unfortunate occurrence.  

Honourable Grace Oburu observed that labour laws are not being implemented.  She mentioned a number of things, that employers do not give letters of appointment; there is no minimum wage or the minimum wage is not enforced, and so forth.  Yes, I agree with him but the problem we had as I earlier stated –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is a “she.”

MR RUKUTANA: I agree with her – I am sorry, I am very gender sensitive.  We had a problem of absolute laws.  Until the enactment of these new laws I have talked about, the old laws were really miserable, especially regarding enforcement and penalties.  You can imagine a penalty for a very grave offence was Ugshs 2000.  So, it was found that trying to prosecute and bring culprits to book when you know they are going to be fined only Ugshs 2000 was as good as not doing it at all.  But today we have new laws, which are going to alleviate this problem.  These new laws also put in place a mechanism to supervise and inspect working places to ensure that there is compliance with the law.  

In the few days that I have been in this ministry I have found that both employers and employees are ignorant of the employment laws.  One of my biggest assignments is going to be sensitisation and education of both the employers and the employees on their rights and liabilities.  If we do that and people know the “dos” and “don’ts” and employees know their rights, all these evils will be rooted out.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please try to conclude.  

MR RUKUTANA: Her concern was also that there is no pension for workers.  Yes, but as you know we are formulating a pension reform.  Of course you know workers’ pension is the social security fund.  As you all know, we are streamlining that fund and very soon workers both in the private sector and in Government will get their pensions, as they ought to.  I think that is all I have to respond to.  My colleague will respond to issues touching the children and the youth.  I thank you, honourable members. 

1.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR YOUTH (Maj. (Rtd) James Kinobe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  This being my maiden speech, allow me to congratulate all the members of Parliament and you in particular for being re-elected to that Chair and the Speaker.  I thank the President for enabling me to return to the Eighth Parliament, which I had missed.  

Madam Speaker, honourable members raised issues that concern my department, and I take this opportunity to respond to some of them.  The first one was the strategy by the ministry to mobilise the youth to participate and benefit from the bonna bagaggawale - prosperity for all, including hon. Kassiano Wadri’s constituency.  

The overall mandate of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is definitely community mobilisation.  But one of our major focus areas is mobilisation of the young people, and in so doing we enable them to build capacity or skills and enable them to form groups or clubs or associations that will enable them to access funds for their development.  

In the ministry we have just worked out a policy document - a paper, which is going to revive the community mobilisation function, and the paper is right now before Cabinet.  This is a comprehensive strategy called “The Community Mobilisation and Empowerment Strategy,” which will be the tool used by the ministry to reach out to all sections of the people, and not only the youth.  

Hon. Nalubega wanted to know whether the minister has programmes that target the youth, who are school dropouts. The following are some of the programmes and interventions that benefit the youth, especially those who drop out of school for one reason or another:  

The first one is the Functional Adult Literacy Programme, this programme targets all those who are illiterate or semi-illiterate to acquire functional literacy. They get the capacity to read and write and also get the skills to sustain themselves in their day-to-day life.  There are vocational training institutions that mobilise these youth through community polytechnics.  In the Northern Region- in the conflict areas, we have youth training centres that impart vocational schools and help the youth returnees to get integrated in the community. 

There is another programme called the Programme for Youth and Children (PCY), it was formerly funded by the Germany Government under GTZ but has now been passed over to Government and it is fully funded.  It is a programme, which gives artisan skills, tools and equipment to those who have gone through the training. Some of you might have seen a mobile van, which moves around with educative programmes for the youth. It falls under that programme of PCY. 

There is another programme through the Adolescence Reproduction Health, which gives younger people skills, knowledge and behaviour change packages that are aimed at safeguarding them from reproductive health problems, which include early pregnancy, HIV/ Aids and others.  

Madam Speaker, I want to thank Government because it has also seen that many of its PLE graduates could not proceed with education and a new policy has been adopted, the Universal Secondary Education.  This programme will enable those who were going to dropout due to lack of school fees access secondary education. 

There is a new programme also which is called YEET (Youth Economic Empowerment for Transformation), which is in advanced stages, and it will help us to mobilise younger people and enable them to access micro-credit enterprise and business development. 

There was an honourable member who wanted to know the fate of YES (Youth Enterprise Scheme) this programme was developed to benefit young people with skills but lacking financial capital. The Minister of State for Entandikwa was supervising it politically.  However, the portfolio was transferred to the Ministry of Finance. 

As I speak now we are just working out modalities to find out whether we can establish linkages between the department of Youth and that department of Entandikwa or Micro Finance.  Otherwise, currently there are no direct linkages at all according to the documents I have seen in the ministry.

There was concern about child trafficking and sell of girls in Katakwi.  The matter was first raised in the Women’s Forum and carried in the newspapers and finally in this House.  The ministry is investigating the matter and a comprehensive report on the findings and solutions will be tabled in this House.  However, we have already tipped the civil security authorities to follow-up the reports as they appeared in the newspapers. I believe they are already doing their work to handle the criminal part of it.

Finally, there was the issue of 100 acres of land donated to the youth and Ugshs 5.2 billion, which was promised by hon. Salim Saleh.  I want to point out, first of all, that this matter would not have been in my portfolio, but being the beneficiary constituency- and I was present at the function- I want to give information to the members as to what really happened.  

Honourable Salim Saleh as a historical friend to Luwero Triangle donated 100 acres out of his own private land to establish a national youth centre.  Under the national youth strategy, we are trying to come up with a one-stop centre, a national youth centre, which can be used as a recreation ground, camping, and for leadership training. 

We had sent out our appeals to many well-wishers, among whom was hon. Salim Saleh who donated this land to the national youth centre, which will be accessed by all youths and not only those from Luwero.  Therefore, I want to use this opportunity to thank him for being very generous to the young people of this country.

Now on the provision of Ugshs 5.2 billion, we all know that hon. Salim Saleh is the Minister of State for Micro Finance. On that day, he used the occasion to launch the initiative to reach out to the people and announced a provision of Ugshs 5.2 billion within the budget to be accessed by the people of Bulemezi, in Luweero and Nakaseke.  But, the money is not only for the youth; it is a provision to be accessed by all persons who qualify to access it and not only the youth.  

Honourable Baliddawa wanted to know the policy, the criteria and the procedure of accessing that money. I believe that part will be handled by hon. Salim Saleh either here or when he presents his policy statement to the committee. Definitely the details will emerge on how to access it because this is going to rollout throughout the country, which will not stop only in Bulemezi but extend to all other Ugandans.

Madam speaker, those are the issues, which were raised by honourable members. I thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, maybe, on behalf of all other Ugandans can I ask the Minister of Finance to produce a schedule for which each district is going to get Ugshs 5.2 like Bulemezi?  I want to know, Kotido, how much, Kamuli, how much - produce that when you are answering. 

Honourable members, I think we should break for lunch –(Interjection)- Minister of Presidency, are you ready?  Won't you be here in the afternoon? How big is your paper –(Interruption)?

1.19
THE MINISTER OF PRESIDENCY (Dr Beatrice Wabudeya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  During the debate colleagues raised a number of issues, which concern the Presidency and they include issues on unfulfilled pledges, State House scholarships, the role of RDCs, and an allegation that Government will not give jobs to members of the opposition.  

Another issue was on the assets of the Movement Secretariat and also Members wanted to have information on the Upland Rice Scheme of His Excellency the Vice President.  While I will attempt to answer the rest, I request that the Minister of State, Office of the Vice President, hon. Baba, be given an opportunity to inform us about the Upland Rice Scheme.

Madam Speaker, it was alleged that a resolution has been passed by the government that no members of the Opposition should be given jobs in Government. I want to say here categorically that is not true.  It is absolutely not true. The Government of Uganda takes decisions in Cabinet. As far as I know our Cabinet has never made such a decision. neither has the National Executive Committee of the NRM made such a decision.  So, colleagues if there are individual insinuations, we should not count them on our Government. 

A question was raised on the role of RDCs and their perceived interference in land matters. I would like to use this opportunity to clarify to the House that under Article 203(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, the functions of RDCs are clearly spelt out. I wish to quote Article 203(3), the functions of a Resident District Commissioner:
“(a) 	to monitor the implementation of central and local Government services in the district;
b) 	to act as chairperson of the district security committee of the district; and
c) 	to carry out such other functions as may be assigned by the President or prescribed by Parliament by law.”

In carrying out their other duties, His Excellency the President directed that resident district commissioners should protect peasants against landlords who had started evicting them with no regard to the existing law. 

We have a big problem over land matters, the Minister of Lands is here, he should add on or testify. But in order for us to have peasants protected, the resident district commissioners have been asked to carry out that function. And I think that is the problem, which colleagues perceive as interference of resident district commissioners in land matters.

Madam Speaker, it is true that we have a number of presidential pledges, which have not been fulfilled. But I also want to say that these pledges have been sorted out and as much as possible have been transmitted to the relevant ministries for implementation. 

We have pledges in the area of education, roads, electricity, health centres and water. This question could be best handled when we are dealing with the various ministerial budget policy statements. Because this will give members an opportunity to follow up particular pledges and then we could know where the problem is.

The question on State House scholarships has been a common question on the Floor of the House ever since I came to this House. And I wish to clarify that State House does not offer scholarships as such, but rather His Excellency the President extends schools fees assistance to orphans of fallen comrades and to needy children from all over the country.

I would like to equate this to a situation of Members of Parliament, because many of us are contributing to education of our constituents in one way or the other. We are being approached from time to time to pay school fees and to top up examination fees. Likewise, His Excellency the President also meets requests for him to extend assistance. And in doing so, he uses his welfare funds and it is his prerogative to extend assistance to deserving beneficiaries who accost him during his interactions with the public. 

For example, the President offered to pay school fees at University level for 26 needy students; two from each constituency in Gulu, Pader and Kitgum. And these were included on the list in 2002. There is another group of 25 University students from UNLF II West Nile, which was taken on by the President. From the Lango Region, the President offered to pay fees for 45 children from Lira and Apac last year. Under this same welfare fund, the President has also offered another group of 36 University students from the districts of Teso and 18 from Karamoja will be taken on with effect from August this year.

Honourable members, the call for this assumed scholarship –(Interruption) 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Minister for giving me way. When you talk about His Excellency the President paying out school fees for various categories of children out of the welfare fund, I presume this is not money from his personal pockets, but from the consolidated fund. 

And if there is no discrimination, I would like to seek clarification as to why one of our own and our colleague in this Parliament who hitherto was a beneficiary of the President’s scholarship, but when he chose to contest under FDC, was immediately deleted from this arrangement? This is honourable Ahbar Godi, Member of Parliament, Arua Municipality. I seek some clarification.

MRS WABUDEYA: Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order members. Let the minister answer.

MRS WABUDEYA: Honourable colleagues, this question almost answers itself. I do not think any of us here would offer school fees to a Member of Parliament. It was before - yes, and I am very sure that this honourable colleague if he is here, will testify that he has greatly benefited from this assistance. And should he continue to pursue further education, he can be seen as one who is able to pay for himself -(Applause)

Honourable colleagues, I tried –(Interjection)- if you can allow me to finish this. I tried to equate this assistance to our own situation. So, when my friend Kassiano says that this money is from the consolidated fund, even our money we earn here comes from the same, but the way we use it is not dictated by anybody else. You choose whom to help within your area of operation. (Applause)

 I wish therefore honourable members to say that the call for these assumed scholarships to move to the Ministry of Education does not arise because this is not an established scholarship scheme. If it were, it would have a criterion for selection and an opportunity for competition. So, I hope that this explanation will put to rest this common question on the Floor of the House.

Madam Speaker, there was another question on the assets of the Movement Secretariat. In light of Article 17(2) of the Constitution, I would like to quote:  “It is a duty of all able-bodied citizens to undergo military training for the defence of this Constitution and the protection of the territorial integrity of Uganda whenever called upon to do so; and the State shall ensure that the facilities are available for such training.”  

In light of this provision, Madam Speaker, as the Movement Secretariat was planning to wind up, Cabinet took a decision to preserve the National Leadership Institute – Kyankwanzi. In doing so, Cabinet decided that we put that institute under temporary care of the Ministry of Defence until further notice.  Now that Government has been formed, Cabinet will take a decision on where the home of this National Leadership Institute will be and Parliament will be informed accordingly.

On the assets and properties, I wish to inform the House that an inventory of all the assets and properties of the movement secretariat was compiled and handed over to the head of Public Service.  But as is a normal practice, currently we have sent a joint team of auditors and administration staff to carry out a verification exercise of the assets and reconciliation of the records.  After which we shall know what asset is to go where and we can always inform you at the end of that exercise.  

As far as the vehicles are concerned, under the instructions of the IGG, vehicles were inspected, valued and boarded off.  The offices in Development House have been taken over by the Office of the President and currently the Minister of Economic Monitoring and that Without Portfolio are housed there.

Madam Speaker, that brings me to the end of issues, I was to answer, but I request you to allow the Minister of State in the Office of the Vice President to inform us about their plan on the rice scheme.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I think he will do that after the break.  I suspend the House until a quarter to three so that Members can have lunch and then come back.  

(The House was suspended at 1.33 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.02 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I would like to inform you that we have students from Kirinya Parents Boarding Primary School, Kyadondo East, please stand up.  You are very welcome! (Applause)

3.04
CONSTITUTION OF STANDING COMMITTEES OF PARLIAMENT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I have been advised that the consultations are over and the composition of committees has been completed satisfactorily.  Now, let me ask the clerk to read out the names of the various Members of the committees.

STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS

1.	Hon. Nandala Mafabi (Chairperson) (FDC)
2.	Hon. Sebuliba Mutumba (Deputy chairperson) (DP)
3.	Hon. Achia Terence Naco  (NRM)
4.	Hon. Tom Kazibwe (NRM)
5.	Hon. Frank Tumwebaze  (NRM)
6.	Hon. Peter Mutuluuza (NRM)
7.	Hon. Winfred Masiko (NRM)
8.	Hon. Badhul Katongole ( NRM)
9.	Hon.Kyaka Kyotuhairwe (NRM)
10.	Hon. Saleh Kamba  (NRM)
11.	Hon. Margaret Mugisa(NRM)
12.	Hon. Florence Kabahweza  (NRM)
13.	Hon. William Nsubuga (NRM)
14.	Hon. Margaret Kiboijana (NRM) 
15.	Hon. Gen. Aronda Nyakairima (UPDF)
16.	Hon. Bartille Toskin (NRM)
17.	Hon. Simon Euku (UPC)
18.	Hon. Reagan Okumu  (FDC)
19.	Hon. Okulo Epak (Independent)
20.	Hon. Isaac Sejjoba (Independent)

STANDING COMMITTEE ON BUDGET

1.	Hon. William Oketcho (Independent)
2.	Hon. Henry Banyenzaki (NRM)
3.	Hon. Samuel Byanagwa (NRM)
4.	Hon. Wamakuyu Mudimi (NRM)
5.	Hon. Mugeni Steven (NRM)
6.	Hon. Tuma Ruth ( NRM)
7.	Hon. Jowali Kyeyago (NRM)
8.	Hon. Steven Kasaija (NRM)
9.	Hon. Henry Balikowa (NRM)
10.	Hon. Nathan Byanyima (NRM)
11.	Hon. Elijah Kyetunda (NRM)
12.	Hon. Christine Tubbo (NRM)
13.	Hon. Mary Nalugo (NRM)
14.	Hon. James Kiiza (NRM)
15.	Hon. Lt. Grace Kyomugisha (UPDF)
16.	Hon. Christine Bako (FDC)
17.	Hon. Albert Oduman (FDC)
18.	Hon. John Ogwang (UPC)
19.	Hon. Christopher Kibanzanga (FDC)
20.	Hon. Ojok B’Leo (Independent)

STANDING COMMITTEE ON THE NATIONAL ECONOMY

1.	Hon. Kaddunabi Ibrahim – Chairperson  (NRM)
2.	Hon. Remigio Achia – Deputy chairperson (NRM)
3.	Hon. Julius Balyejjusa – PWD (NRM)
4.	Hon. Gaudioso Tindamanyire (NRM)
5.	Hon. Erinah Wangwa Rutangye  (NRM)
6.	Hon. David Bahati  (NRM)
7.	Hon. Kigyagi Arimpa  (NRM)
8.	Hon. Guma Gumisiriza  (NRM)
9.	Hon. Fred Mbagadhi  (NRM)
10.	Hon. Emmanuel Dombo (NRM)
11.	Hon. Stephen Mukitale  (NRM)
12.	Hon. Ndawula Kaweesi  (NRM)
13.	Hon. Okot Ogong Felix  (NRM)
14.	Hon. Lt. Gen. David Tinyenfuza  (UPDF)
15.	Hon. John Arumadri  (FDC)
16.	Hon. Francis Epetait  (FDC)
17.	Hon. Hussein Kyanjo  (JEEMA)
18.	Hon. Beti Kamya  (FDC)
19.	Hon. Oleny Chris  (Independent)
20.	Hon. Moses Kabuusu  (Independent)

STANDING COMMITTEE ON EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES

1.	Hon. Jalia Bintu (NRM)
2.	Hon. Alex Ndeezi  PWD (NRM) 
3.	Hon. Safia Nalule  (NRM)
4.	Hon. Sylvia Ssinabulya (NRM)
5.	Hon. Margaret Baba Diri (NRM)
6.	Hon. Denis Obua (NRM)
7.	Hon. Mary Tuunde (NRM)
8.	Hon. Rose Najemba (NRM)
9.	Hon. Bakaluba Mukasa (NRM)
10.	Hon. Barnabas Tingasiimire (NRM)
11.	Hon. Capt. Sarah Mpambwa(NRM)
12.	Hon. Stella Namoe (NRM)
13.	Hon. Aboud Kitatta (NRM)
14.	Hon. Rose Iriama (Independent)
15.	Hon. Julius Emigu (FDC)
16.	Hon. Nabilah Sempala (FDC)
17.	Hon. Susan Nampijja (CP)
18.	Hon. Fungaroo Kaps (FDC)
19.	Hon. Maj. Erasmus Magulumaali (Independent)
20.	Hon. Norman Muwulize (Independent)

STANDING COMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT ASSURANCES

1.	Hon. Issa Kikungwe – Chairperson (DP)
2.	Hon. Michael Ocula –Deputy chairperson ( FDC)
3.	Hon. Bangirana Nakendo ( NRM)
4.	Hon. Kakoba Onyango ( NRM)
5.	Hon. James Kubeketerya ( NRM)
6.	Hon. Bwerere Kasole Edward ( NRM)
7.	Hon. Margaret Kisira (NRM)
8.	Hon. Eudia Kwizera ( NRM)
9.	Hon. Paula Turyahikayo ( NRM)
10.	Hon. Mugyenyi Mary (NRM)
11.	Hon. Tete Chelangat ( NRM)
12.	Hon. Maj. Gen. Julius Oketta (UPDF)
13.	Hon. Moses Mukose Mutabali (NRM)
14.	Hon. Alupo Jessica (NRM)
15.	Hon. Ali Sekyanzi( NRM)
16.	Hon. Fred Badda (NRM)
17.	Hon. Peter Omolo ( FDC)
18.	Hon. Jimmy Akena (UPC)
19.	Hon. Betty Aol (FDC)
20.	Hon Idd Lubyayi ( Independent )

COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS AND STATUTORY AUTHORITIES

1.	Hon. John Odit  (Chairperson) (UPC)
2.	Hon. Johnson Malinga (Deputy Chairperson –Independent)
3.	Hon. Bruno Pajobo (NRM)
4.	Hon. Ken Bukeni Gyabi (NRM)
5.	Hon. Bagiire Henry (NRM)
6.	Hon. Sarah Nyombi (NRM)
7.	Hon. Stephen Tasobya (NRM)
8.	Hon. Rose Munyira ( NRM) 
9.	Hon. James Kakooza -NRM 
10.	Hon. Nathan Igeme Nabeta (NRM) 
11.	Hon. Meddie Mulumba (NRM)
12.	Hon. Haruuna Ssalabaya (NRM)
13.	Hon. Perez Ahabwe (NRM)
14.	Hon. Sauda Mugerwa (NRM) 
15.	Hon. Erisa Kaahwa Amooti (NRM)
16.	Hon. Col (Rtd) Tom Butime (NRM)
17.	Hon. Elijah Okupa (FDC)
18.	Hon. Simon Toolit (FDC)
19.	Hon. Ahbar Hussein Godi  (FDC)
20.	Hon. Tress Bucyanayandi (Independent)

COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS:

1.	Hon. Ekanya Geoffrey- Chairperson (FDC)
2.	Hon. Ringe Chan- Deputy Chairperson (UPC)
3.	Hon. George Wopuwa ( NRM) 
4.	Hon. Emma Bonna (NRM)
5.	Hon. Milton Muwuma (NRM)
6.	Hon. Anthony Yiga (NRM)
7.	Hon. Patrick Ochieng (NRM)
8.	Hon. Peter Abraham Lokii (NRM) 
9.	Hon. Alex Byarugaba (NRM) 
10.	Hon. Beatrice Rwakimari (NRM)
11.	Hon. Jacqueline Atuhairwe (NRM) 
12.	Hon. Silver Bahane (NRM) 
13.	Hon. Mabel Bakeine (NRM) 
14.	Hon. Ashraf Olega (NRM)
15.	Hon. Muggara Kabagambe (NRM)
16.	Hon. Steven Kaliba (NRM) 
17.	Hon. Charles Ekemu (NRM) 
18.	Hon. Erias Lukwago (NRM)
19.	Hon. Ogwel- Loote (Independent)
20.	Hon. John Otekat   (Independent)

COMMITTEE ON HIV/AIDS AND RELATED MATTERS

1.	Hon. Dr Elioda Tumwesigye - Chairperson  (NRM)
2.	Hon. Jane Alisemera -Deputy Chairperson (NRM)
3.	Hon. Gerald Simon Menhya (NRM)
4.	Hon. Anifa Kawooya (NRM)
5.	Hon. Rosemary Seninde (NRM)
6.	Hon. Faridah Najjuma (NRM)
7.	Hon. Justine Kasule (NRM)
8.	Hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi (NRM) 
9.	Hon. Hood Katuramu – PWD  (NRM)
10.	Hon. Sarah Kayagi (NRM)
11.	Hon. Janet Museveni  (NRM)
12.	Hon. Muyomba Kasozi (NRM)
13.	Hon. Beatrice Benkya (NRM) 
14.	Hon. Brig. Dr James Makumbi UPDF (NRM)
15.	Hon. Alice Alaso  (FDC) 
16.	Hon. Willy Anokbonggo (UPC)
17.	Hon. Wilkfred Kajeke (FDC)
18.	Hon. Agnes Akiror (FDC)
19.	Hon. Rebecca Amuge  (Independent)
20.	Hon. Yekko Arapkissa  (Independent)  

STANDING COMMITTEE ON APPOINTMENTS

1.	The Rt. Hon. Speaker
2.	Hon. Teopista Sentongo (NRM)
3.	Hon. Grace Oburu (NRM)
4.	Hon. Loy Kiryapawo (NRM)
5.	Hon. Okorimoe Akech (NRM)
6.	Hon. Lt. Gen. Elly Tumwine (UPDF) (NRM)
7.	Hon. Akumu Mavenjina  (NRM)
8.	Hon. Joseph Matte  (NRM) 
9.	Hon. Yahaya Gudoi (NRM)
10.	Hon. Kashaija Robert  (NRM)
11.	Hon. Kyahurwenda Tomson (NRM)
12.	Hon. Sekitoleko Kabonesa  (NRM)
13.	Hon. Ogenga Latigo (FDC)
14.	Hon. Kiiza Winfred  (FDC)
15.	Hon. John Ogwang  (UPC)
16.	Hon. Joseph Balikuddembe  (DP) 
17.	Hon. Okello-Okello  (UPC)
18.	Hon. Piro Santos  (Independent)
19.	Hon. Barumba Beatrice  (Independent)
20.	Hon. Margaret Angufiru  (Independent)

COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE

1.	Hon. Asuman Kiyingi- Chairperson  (NRM)
2.	Hon. Magoola Zirabamuzale – Deputy Chairperson (NRM)
3.	Hon. Aston Kajara (NRM)
4.	Hon. Zaake Kibeedi  (NRM)
5.	Hon. Mary Karooro Okurut (NRM)
6.	Hon. Theodore Sekikuubo (NRM)
7.	Hon. Lt Col Kyamulesire (UPDF) (NRM)
8.	Hon. Wilfred Niwagaba (NRM)
9.	Hon. Rose Namayanja (NRM)
10.	Hon. Phenahas Katirima (NRM)
11.	Hon. Mary Nalubega (NRM)
12.	Hon. Jim Muhwezi (NRM)
13.	Hon. Lastus Serunjogi (NRM) 
14.	Hon. Odonga Otto (NRM)
15.	Hon. Alex Ocheng  (NRM) 
16.	Hon. Sam Njuba  (NRM) 
17.	Hon. Benson Obua Ogwel  (NRM)
18.	Hon. John Kawanga  (NRM)
19.	Hon. David Ebong  (NRM) 
20.	Hon. Peter Nyombi  (NRM) 

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

1.	Hon. Joseph Mugambe – Chairperson (NRM)
2.	Hon. Katende Sematiko- Deputy Chairperson (NRM)
3.	Hon. William Nokrach  (NRM)
4.	Hon. Sabila Herbert  (NRM)
5.	Hon. Edward Baliddawa (NRM) 
6.	Hon. Dr Sam Lyomoki- WORKERS  (NRM)  
7.	Hon. Abraham Byandala  (NRM) 
8.	Hon. Grace Tubwita  (NRM) 
9.	Hon. Deusdedit Bikwasizehi  (NRM)
10.	Hon. Charles Ngabirano (NRM) 
11.	Hon. Ruth Kavuma Nvumentta  (NRM)
12.	Hon. John Lubyayi  (NRM) 
13.	Hon. Busima Mafabi  (NRM)
14.	Hon. Theodore Sekikuubo  (NRM) 
15.	Hon. Amuriat Oboi  (FDC)
16.	Hon. Simon Oyet  (FDC) 
17.	Hon. Mohamed Kawuma  (DP)
18.	Hon. Moses Apiliga  (UPC)
19.	Hon. Angiro Gutomoi  (Independent)
20.	Hon. Rebecca Lukwago  (Independent)

STANDING COMMITTEE ON BUSINESS

1.	Hon. Ssekandi Edward- (Chairperson)
2.	Hon. Kadaga Rebecca –Deputy Chairperson 
3.	Prof. Apolo Nsibambi- Leader of Gov’t Business 
4.	Prof. Ogenga Latigo – Leader of Opposition
5.	Hon. Kabakumba Masiko – Gov’t Chief Whip 
6.	Hon. Kassiano Wadri – Opposition Chief Whip
7.	Hon. Okello-Okello – UPC Whip 
8.	Hon. Latif Sebaggala – DP Whip 
9.	Hon. Tana Sanjay - Independent
10.	Hon. Ben Wacha- Independent
11.	Hon. Nandala-Mafabi- Ex official
12.	Hon. William Oketcho – Ex official
13.	Hon. Ibrahim Kaddunabi- Ex official
14.	Hon. Jalia Bintu - Ex official
15.	Hon. Issa Kikungwe - Ex official
16.	Hon. John Odit - Ex official
17.	Hon. Geoffrey Ekanya - Ex official
18.	Hon. Dr Elioda Tumwesigye - Ex official
19.	Hon. Asuman Kiyingi - Ex official
20.	Hon. Joseph Mugambe - Ex official
21.	Hon. Edward Baliddawa - Ex official
22.	Hon. Rose Namayanja - Ex official
23.	Hon. Nathan Byanyima - Ex official
24.	Hon. Teopista Ssentongo - Ex official
25.	Hon. William Nsubuga - Ex official
26.	Hon. James Kubeketerya - Ex official
27.	Hon. Loy Kiryapawo - Ex official
28.	Hon. Mary Karooro Okurut - Ex official
29.	Hon. Aston Kajara - Ex official
30.	Hon. George Wopuwa - Ex official
31.	Hon. Deusdedit Bikwasizehi - Ex official
32.	Hon. Emmanuel Dombo - Ex official
33.	Hon Perez Ahabwe - Ex official   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, that completes the Constitution of the Standing and Sessional Committees. As we are going to the budget, our practice is that the Standing Committees hold commencing work, unless it is very urgent, until the Sessional Committees have completed their work on the budget. They should not sit concurrently to enable members to concentrate. Thank you very much.

MR KIKUNGWE:  Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification. Hon. Dr Elioda has been named as the Chairperson of HIV Committee but his name and his organisation have been implicated in the Global Fund saga. May I know - because other people who have been involved in the same have been put aside pending investigations as the case maybe, is this a special case?  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will ask the Chief Whip, I do not know the criteria for their selections.

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I have been hearing about that rumour in the corridors of Parliament. We did our research and found out that Dr Elioda as a person was never implicated anywhere in this Global Fund.  If they are talking – you talked about the organisation, some organisation but even then the person of Dr Elioda was not implicated according to the information we have.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have any contrary information?

MR KIKUNGWE: Madam Speaker, that is good information given, but it is not satisfactory.  I will request for leave from this House and at an appropriate time we revisit this matter when evidence is ready to be laid on Table. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you cannot hold his appointment. When you are ready, you come back with your evidence saying Dr Elioda of Sheema did “A, B, C” but for now he is chairing that committee.

RESPONSE BY MINISTERS TO ISSUES RAISED DURING THE DEBATE ON THE STATE OF THE NATION ADDRESS DELIVERED BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When we broke off we were due to hear part II of the Vice Presidents Office, namely, the Minister in charge of the Vice President’s Office. But I do not see him here, Mr Baba. Okay, if Mr Baba is not here maybe he will give us - Dr Wabudeya are you saying anything for him?

DR WABUDEYA: He has delayed somewhere, but he could come in at an appropriate time and give his statement

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Madam Speaker, I would like to seek a few clarifications from the Minister for the Presidency.  The issue of state house scholarships has been on the Floor of this House for quite along time.  I recall during the Sixth Parliament that the then Minister for the Presidency, hon. Ruhakana Rugunda, was forced to table the list of the students being sponsored in this House. When that list came there was no regional balance therein. At that time there was a budget line of Ugshs 3 billion every year for this scholarship.  However today I have heard from the honourable minister that the President is now using the welfare budget.  

Madam Speaker, I worked in Government for a long time.  School fees do not qualify to the welfare. The minister tactfully mentioned the number of students being sponsored in the greater North, from Arua to Karamoja. She was carefully enough not to mention other districts.

Madam Speaker, I feel that this matter should be handled properly and disposed off. State House scholarship is different from the money we pay for needy students from our pockets. They all originate from the Consolidated Fund but I pay from my pocket not from any other vote. 

Madam Speaker, there used to be a body in the Ministry of Education called the Central Scholarship Committee. The Sixth Parliament urged State House to return this budget line to that committee so that an autonomous committee could look at the entire country fairly. As of now only those that the President can interact with qualify. I find it very difficult to interact with the President, given the surroundings of the presidency.  

I would therefore urge State House to seriously consider returning this money to the Ministry of Education for the benefit of all Ugandans. I would also like to request that at an appropriate time, the list of those students be availed here. This is because during the Sixth Parliament when the list came it was discovered that a Member of Parliament had two children on the list. We are saying that member of this House should be terminated because they are now earning money.  

Madam Speaker, not very long ago a former Vice President was assisted with Ugshs 2.5 billion for school fees. I really do not think someone who had been the second highest in this country for nine years should qualify yet I have so many students who cannot pay their way.  

Madam Speaker, in 2001, one of our youths in Uganda House strayed to the Movement and worked very hard, campaigning for the presidency. He was given a scholarship to go and study law at Makerere. One or two years later, this youth found out that this thing called the Movement was not the right place for him. He came back to Uganda House and immediately the scholarship was withdrawn –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okello, I think that the matters you are raising would be better debated in the Sessional Committee on Presidential Affairs and the Sessional Committee on Education. They are so detailed that we cannot resolve them here.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I agree with you, Madam Speaker. The matter raised here was that the MP was rich but the other youth was not rich and that his scholarship was withdrawn simply because he went back to his party. I was just trying to put the record right.

MR ANGIRO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to allay the fears of hon. Okello-Okello. Be assured that the State House scholarships, which used to be handled by His Excellency, the President during that time was because of the Movement System. Now that we are going to a multi-party system, please, be calm. Nothing will happen to that money. Thank you very much.

DR WABUDEYA: Madam Speaker, I want to thank hon. Okello-Okello for the issues he has raised.  I was a member of the Sixth Parliament and I do not remember having heard a list containing two children of a Member of Parliament. I need to be helped by him to understand. I did say here clearly that the money His Excellency the President uses is his welfare fund and that as a President of this country he is entitled to some privileges just like Parliament has privileges. One of these privileges is the welfare fund, and how he uses it is his prerogative.   

Madam Speaker, I explained that these are not scholarships.  If they were scholarships, I would have brought you the criteria for selection and invited you to compete for them. Having said that, I want to reaffirm- because I had the privilege to work in the Ministry of Education as Minister of State for Higher Education. Central Scholarship Committee still exists in the Ministry of Education and they handle scholarships. Those are the scholarships, which from time to time are advertised in the newspapers for every Ugandan to compete for.

My good friend hon. Okello-Okello said that I tactfully mentioned districts in some parts of the country. Yes, I did, but I had said in my opening statement that among the children who were being helped were children of fallen comrades. These ones do not come necessarily from the North but are from Luwero Triangle.  

Madam Speaker, bringing here a list is not a problem. However, if we keep on bringing such lists the President will be accosted by people asking why so and so is being helped and not them. As you said, this list can be presented but this is a matter that can be handled neatly by the Committee on Presidential Affairs. 

My knowledge of this youth at Uganda House is that- if I can know the name of this youth at Uganda House who was partly sponsored and has now been abandoned; I would be able to find out his course and answer appropriately.  

Madam Speaker, I want the House to know that we do not have a State House scholarship fund and this is a message I want to pass across. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Baba, can you please conclude the report from the Office of the President?

3.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE (VICE PRESIDENT’S OFFICE) (Mr James Baba): You know when you are new you do not know many things. However, the people of Koboko are very appreciative that I was given this position being new in Parliament and I believe I will learn as I get along.

Madam Speaker, I am here to respond to issues raised about His Excellency, the Vice President’s rice initiative. On his appointment, His Excellency, the Vice President was assigned the responsibility of finding some practical down-to-earth ways and means of transforming the Ugandan society from peasantry to modernity in any way he could. This was the task His Excellency the President assigned him. 

His Excellency the Vice President reflected very deeply on how he could go about this honorous assignment and his first reaction was to address the issues of poor rural and urban Ugandans that is how to bring incomes to them in the quickest way possible. It was therefore necessary for him to figure out how we could move from a subsistence economy to commercial enterprises.  

He began immediately by sensitising the population on the importance of increasing household incomes. To do this, he set up a 25-member committee to brainstorm quickly on the way forward. This committee eventually identified a number of income-generating activities that could be produced and marketed and more importantly that would enable the rural poor earn and save income as well as attain a reasonable standard of living. 

The committee selected and zeroed on what we call today upland rice. There are two varieties of upland rice that is superica2 and naric3. Madam Speaker, by way of background these two types of rice were actually devolved by the Japanese. They took their Asian rice and married it to our African rice. The Japanese rice is high yielding but you have to grow it under irrigation and adequate water conditions. 

Our rice grows tall, yields very little and when there is a lot of wind it just falls down. In the end the peasants do not earn much. Furthermore, it is only grown in the swamps. This new variety of rice can be grown under normal rain conditions without encroaching on the swamps and can be harvested in the shortest time possible. Therefore, His Excellency, the Vice President as a way of improving household incomes, chose upland rice.  

At the beginning 11 districts were identified under the pilot phase. These were Apac, Kaberamaido, Kayunga, Kiboga, Masaka, Mubende, Mpigi, Nakasongola, Rakai, Sembabule and Wakiso districts. These districts were selected because they could be easily supervised and secondly arising out of the supervision, it would be easy to ensure that the project was successful.  

Superica2 and Naric3 were selected because of their high yielding capacities. Research had shown that one acre of land requires approximately 30 kilogram’s of rice seeds.  From one acre, yields of between 1.5 to 2.5 tonnes have been realised. In hectare terms 3.5 to five tonnes are common. These were found to be very good indicators that the project would be successful.

In addition, the rice would mature in 90 to 100 days and be ready for harvesting.  This variety was also environmentally friendly because one no longer needed to dig in the swamps and there was no longer a risk of bilharzia to farmers as when they were cultivating in swampy areas.  

With support from Japan International Corporation Agency (JICA) and Agricultural Productivity Enhancement Project (APEP) of USAID and UNDP, each of the 11 districts selected was given four tonnes of Naric3 seeds. Another 30 kilograms of Superica2 rice was given to 166 lead farmers who were identified in each of the 11 districts. All this was still under a pilot trial phase. 

For proper implementation the farmers, through their District Commercial Upland Rice Growers Association received thorough training in the technology of upland rice growing and post-harvest management through the support of the Agricultural Productivity Enhancement Project (APEP).  

Madam Speaker, these figures I have mentioned of yields per hectare and per tonne and the maturity in 90 to 100 days were all researched by both Namulonge Research Centre where the rice varieties were tested as well as the Agricultural Productivity Enhancement Project (APEP) of UNDP.  

The project started earnest in 2004 with 4000 farmers in 11 districts. In 2005, it was extended to 32 districts throughout the country. These included: Mpigi, Masaka, Sembabule, Rakai, Nakasongola, Kiboga, Mubende, Lira, Apac, Wakiso, Kayunga, Kaberamaido, Arua, Rukungiri, Kanungu, Kyenjojo, Kalangala, Bugiri, Tororo, Mayuge, Pader, Mukono, Luwero, Nakaseke, Iganga, Busia, Jinja, Bundibugyo, Kamwenge, Mbarara, Mityana and Masindi. In total they were 32 districts as of 2005. 

This time additional support was received from DANIDA, JICA, SSAKAW 2000, which is a Japanese NGO as well as the Italian Embassy in Kampala. What where the results in the first phase?  A peasant farmer –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I recall members asking why it was the Vice President and not the Ministry of Agriculture handling an agricultural project? 

MR BABA: The Vice President was assigned to fight poverty and you have to have a mechanism to fight it. The Vice President had leverage to choose what ways to fight poverty. He was not encroaching on agriculture nor was he using the Ministry of Agriculture budget or resources from Government. This was His Excellency’s own initiative. 

I will come to that answer eventually and I hope the House can rest and support the Vice President concerning the way forward. Thank you. I wanted to inform the honourable members about the results.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable minister. The question was clear. Why is he handling this project and not the Ministry of Agriculture? That was the question and you have answered it.

MR BABA: Okay, now can I move on to specific proposals?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not necessary.

MR BABA: Thank you very much; I will respect your views. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. 

3.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIMARY HEALTHCARE (Dr Emmanuel Otaala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. A number of issues were raised regarding my ministry. I want to say that even in advanced countries issues relating to health are taken very seriously. I have no doubt that the honourable members of this August House are concerned about the health of the people of this country.  

Madam Speaker, I want to go right off to the first question which was raised by quite a number of people and that is regarding malaria. Indeed malaria is the number one killer or cause of mortality in this country. 

The question was what is my ministry doing in terms of curbing malaria as it is killing our people? I want to inform this August House that my ministry has a National Malaria Control Programme and this programme consists of the following aspects:

•	We have the prevention measures and here we mainly focus on education and social mobilization of communities to fight malaria. 

•	We are targeting indoor residual spraying. I expounded on this matter last week, Madam Speaker. We have already started in highland areas where the majority of the people do not have adequate immunity and so experience malaria in epidemic proportions. We have started with Kabale and we are going to Kapchorwa and Mbale. Subsequently, we are going to scale up to cover the whole country. 

•	There is also the aspect of early treatment of malaria. What we have done towards this cause is to train what we call village health teams and we have given them homer-packs. That is, we have drugs already packed so that within the first 24 hours of a resident within the community developing fever the village health team can access the sick person and administer the treatment. 

•	Concerning early treatment, we have now introduced a more effective drug as our first line drug of malaria and that is Cortem. All of you have heard about it and we are going to organize more seminars to enlighten you about it.

•	There is also the intermittent presumptive treatment of our mothers. All pregnant mothers are given Fansidar at three and six months of pregnancy. 

You will allow me, Madam Speaker, to inform the honourable members that pregnancy in itself lowers the body immunity and so mothers become very venerable to severe forms of malaria. We are giving them intermittent presumptive treatment whether they are sick or not to prevent them from getting malaria. The onus is now on all the honourable members to help us by encouraging pregnant mothers to go for antenatal care. 
 
•	Furthermore, we have introduced the credit line scheme to ensure that we do not lack drugs in hospitals and health facilities. We realized long ago that most of our health facilities run out of drugs including anti-malarial drugs. As a ministry we introduced the credit line scheme. Now instead of sending all the money to the districts, the ministry retains part of the money and pays it direct into the accounts of each of the health facilities in this country. 

Those health facilities are free to apply for drugs from the National Medical Stores. The National Medical Stores simply debits their accounts and we as a ministry pay the money to National Medical Stores. This is a pool system. What I mean here is that it is demand driven. Health facilities must show that they need this drug and we always encourage them to apply for them two months before their stock gets depleted.  

I am sorry to say that some of our health facilities wait up to the last moment when the drugs have run out before they begin the process of making requisitions. This is not good and I call upon all honourable members that as you go back to your constituencies, make prompt calls to these health facilities to see that they have these drugs in store. 

•	Also, what we are doing towards fighting malaria is weekly surveillance. All the health facilities in this country have to report to us on the number of cases of malaria they are witnessing. Madam Speaker, that is what we are doing with regard to malaria.

The other issue was, how far we have gone with respect to DDT? Madam speaker and honourable members, I expounded on this matter last week but for the record allow me once again to say that we are in the process of getting all the stakeholders aboard to agree that DDT is the right chemical to use for indoor spraying. Right now we are using Icon, which is three times as expensive yet the World Health Organisation following the Stockholm Convention for the control of vectors allowed DDT. 

What we are doing right now is to get all the stakeholders aboard. We are consulting with them and  we are soon presenting the environmental assessment report to NEMA. We are also getting WHO to come aboard and give us the go ahead to procure DDT and use it centrally. The important point that I want to stress here is that the requirement according to the Stockholm Convention is that DDT must be used in a very controlled manner. 

Thus we are preparing a team in the Ministry of Health so that when finally WHO has procured for us the DDT, we can control its use and the handling of the containers from which the DDT chemical will be got to avoid spillage and contamination into our gardens.

There was an allegation that Icon had killed two students from Rushoroza Seminary. Madam Speaker, I clarified this and I am not going to waste more time on that.

There was a concern that maternal and infant mortality rates are very high in this country and the question was what we are doing about it as a ministry. I have almost covered part of that. We are handling the issue by addressing the number one killer, which is malaria. 

Secondly, concerning maternal mortality, I want to say that the concept of the health sub-district that was perceived way back in 1998 was meant purposely to address the persistently high maternal mortality rates in this country. Our purpose was to ensure that the Health Centre IVs are able to offer emergency obstetric care, that is, Health Centre IVs should be able to carry out emergency caesarean sections, emergency transfusion and give emergency intravenous fluids. 

It is absurd to note, Madam Speaker that since 1998 we have 151 health centres already built, designated with theatres and well equipped with doctors houses. However, in some of these places the doctors rarely stay there. This calls for more vigilance in terms of supervision. 

We have our team from the ministry that goes down to supervise but I am now calling upon the honourable members to become more vigilant as they go back to their constituencies. Visit these Health Centre IVs to ensure that the doctors are actually on the ground. That way we shall be working together as partners –(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, honourable colleague. Concerning that particular point there is a member who pointed out that there is a conflict of interest in those referral hospitals. Government doctors are taking advantage of the medicine given by Government such that when a peasant goes for treatment the doctor prescribes and directs that peasant to go to his private clinic. What mechanism is in place to curb this because the medicine going to these referral hospitals is not being utilized properly? I would love to hear that.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am seeking further clarification. I have listened to the honourable minister and he seems to be saying that the structures are in place and that it is absurd that there are no doctors. Doesn’t the honourable minister think that it is about time the ministry emphasized and looked into the issues why there is limited usage of those facilities? 

This is because when issues of maternal mortality are presented they look so ordinary, but if you look at the figures that Ministry of Health avails this country- for instance I am told that about 505 mothers out of every 100,000 die every year. If you customize that figure what you end up with is about 16 mothers crushing in a kamunye everyday in this country. If that happened I believe Ministry of Health would be more concerned, and it would be in the headlines every morning, in the evening and the following day. However the way it is being presented is as if it is a very simple issue. 

Would the Ministry of Health therefore consider looking into matters that have aided failure of utilisation of those facilities? Yes, it could be that there are no doctors, but it could also be that the structures are uninhabitable due to lack of privacy. 

By the time we debate the policy statement on health we would like to see a specific effort by Ministry of Health to cut down on the maternal mortality rate. Otherwise we cannot afford to sit here and think it is convenient just to mention in passing that women die and then we have built 151 health centres and just stop there.

MS RWAKIMARI: Further clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let him finish. I hope you are winding up.

DR OTAALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As I was saying, our purpose for initiating the Health Centre IVs at every constituency or county was actually to ensure that we reduce on the persistently high maternal mortality, which for the past decade has remained at over 500 per every 100,000. I am saying that the doctors are there all right but they do not stay there most of the time. We call upon you as political leaders to liase with us so that we can strengthen the issue of supervision. 

I have constituted another team to feed us as the top management of the ministry with a report on how far the health centre goals are going in terms of addressing the persistently high maternal mortality rate. I have constituted a team consisting of Dr Amoni who is in charge of integrated curative services, Dr Eng. Tumwesigye of health infrastructure, Dr Mulindwa of planning, Mr Oteba the chief pharmacist and Mr Arinaitwe the person concerned with personnel. 

These people will give us feed back every two weeks regarding the functionality of the health centres throughout the country. We are addressing curative services and health infrastructure. In some places you hear that money for completing the theatre has been diverted. That is why I am calling on you honourable members to help us.  Why should money that is meant to finish a theatre and get it ready be diverted?

Honourable members, we are addressing the issue of maternal mortality. However, let us also consider the issue of Family Planning. Madam Speaker, you will realize that some of the honourable members here have children above our national target. Our target is that every mother must have on average 6.8 children -(Laughter)- These mothers need time to recover after delivering. If you do not allow them to recover, or if they are delivering very frequently you expose them to the risk of bleeding and death from postpartum haemorrhage. In fact, the majority of these mothers die from nothing but bleeding.

We want you to continue mobilising people to go for antenatal services. We are calling upon you to encourage intermittent presumptive treatment of malaria. Next time you go to your constituency ask the clinicians in the health centres about this. We are also strengthening adolescent health services because most of these mothers who are delivering are actually paediatric or young mothers and because their pelvises are not yet wide enough they die during labour. Can you tell them to wait for the right time? 

We are recruiting and deploying well-trained health workers at all levels. This matter was even hinted on this morning. I want to say that the District Service Commissions are supposed to recruit health workers. The ban was lifted long ago and there is no reason why they should not recruit.  Last year we came in to help them advertise and recruit.  We shall continue with that whenever we see that they are stuck. Madam Speaker, I think I might take more than ten minutes. I kindly beg you for more time because the issues that were raised here are very pertinent.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  How much longer do you require?

DR OTAALA: I require 25 minutes, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, please summarise. (Laughter)

DR OTAALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. An issue was raised here that we keep on sending people abroad for treatment instead of equipping Mulago. I want to inform this House that we are already addressing this matter seriously. We have written a paper regarding all the equipment we need in Mulago and the Ministry of Health together with the Ministry of Finance and the European Union are going to handle this matter.  

We have already noticed that whereas we have so many preventable diseases in this country, we also have an upsurge of diseases of lifestyle. The other day this concern was raised when the hon. Justice Oder passed away. I want to say that we members of this august house have no greater fate if we do not improve on our lifestyles. We are going to realize that most of us will be dying of coronary heart diseases, hypertensive heart diseases and kidney diseases if we do not do more exercises.  

Madam Speaker, let me hope that when they go home this evening honourable members are not going to order for one kilogram of pork and ten beers. Those are the things that pre-dispose us to these new diseases. I call upon all of us to have good table manners so that we can be safe from this upsurge. 

I also call upon the people planning our new chambers to have an annex for a gym for the parliamentarians so that after the debates they can go and do some exercises. This is because we are living a sedentary lifestyle that pre-disposes us to all these diseases. We need to address these issues. 

Madam Speaker, there was a matter raised on the status of anti-retroviral drugs. I want to inform this House that we have enough stock of anti-retroviral drugs to last us the next three months. We have even gone ahead to make emergency procurement because in the ministry we normally stock for six months and when we have a stock to last six months, then we are comfortable and know how to handle any situation. 

You know that the Global Fund suspended grants and the money was taken to the Ministry of Finance. That is what brought about this issue.  Right now –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, that was answered by your senior minister in full. For what has been answered, just say my senior minister answered it. 

DR OTAALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me proceed on to the next issue. Another issue that was raised was that there are inadequate condoms in this country. I want to inform this House that yesterday I was in Pader District together with the Leader of the Opposition, the Woman Member of Parliament, hon. Akello and hon. Odonga Otto. I want to inform this House that in that district we found that there were no condoms at the lower level facilities yet at that time there was a huge stock at the district headquarters.  

This calls for mobilization. Politicians when you go back, please go to the health facilities because we are operating a full system as I have already said. The lower level units must order for more drugs according to what they demand.  

Right now we have 120 million condoms in the country.  According to our estimates this is enough to last the next two years assuming that Ugandans have what we call adequate sex, which is three times a week –(Laughter)- and assuming the couples are faithful. If that is the case then 120 million condoms according to our estimates are enough to last the next two years.

Madam Speaker, there was concern that children are dying in the IDP camps. The HIV/AIDS prevalence rate in the North is 20-30 percent. We are addressing the issue –(Interruptions)- Madam Speaker, we are already addressing the cause of death in the North. Finding the problem is halfway the cure and we have already identified the problems as:  Cholera and Measles

There were about eight deaths in Kitgum and there were a number of cases in Pader but no deaths and the situation is under control.

Concerning measles, we have so far witnessed over 400 suspected cases of which 120 have been confirmed by laboratory. Yesterday, I was in Pader to launch a mass measles campaign and I must say I was particularly happy to go there with my honourable colleague, the Leader of Opposition and two other honourable Members of Parliament. That is the way to go because health does not know political inclination. We must confront the health of our people together as a team. 

We have already launched the mass measles campaign starting with the nine districts of Northern Uganda and spreading all over the country. Right now 24 districts all over the country have reported cases of measles. The issue here is that in 2003 we had a mass measles campaign and reduced the incidence of measles to almost zero. That means that between 2003 and now there was a laxity in routine measles immunizations. 

I am again relying on the honourable members to go back home and encourage health workers to routinely go out for measles immunization outreaches according to our policies. I am happy a number of places are already doing this but you need to give them encouragement.  

Secondly, routine immunization must be done for all eight immunizable diseases so that children who go to health facilities do not miss out. They may go suffering from malaria but health workers are always encouraged to check whether those children are up to date with their immunization status. 

Madam Speaker, I am happy to report that for the past nine years we have not witnessed a single case of polio in this country and Uganda is now about to certified polio free. I wish to thank members of the Seventh Parliament who participated in the mass polio and measles campaign. I encourage you to continue working together with us.

Concerning the issue of high prevalence of HIV/AIDS, I want to state categorically that this is not true, Madam Speaker. The HIV prevalence rates are as follows: The Central region has a prevalence rate of 8.5 percent, Northern has 8.2 percent and Karamoja region 2.3 percent which is actually the lowest. There is nowhere in Uganda where the prevalence rate is 20-30 percent. 

We have realized that Kampala is actually the greatest affected and this is because it was found that those with money are more vulnerable. When people have money they go into buying sex and that is very serious. We need to address that matter seriously. Kampala is worst hit and so it should not be implied that the Northern region is worst affected.

Madam Speaker, there was also an issue raised that we need to have a policy on assisting private investors in the health sector. I want to inform the House that we are already doing this. We are providing standards for private investors and paying taxes on donations to some of these private investors. The Health Sector Strategic Plan Two recognizes private investors as partners in the provision of health care to the people of this country. 

We are providing subventions and drugs to NGO hospitals to support them and the staff there. Right now there is a discrepancy between what health workers in Government hospitals and those in private hospitals get. We are trying to streamline that so that we do not continue with this drift from the private hospitals to the government ones.

Madam Speaker, there was an issue concerning health facilities along the highway. Some were saying that we need to give them special consideration and that we need to have more health facilities to cater for emergencies along the highway. 

I want to cite one example of Kawolo hospital. We have given them special consideration, additional funding, emergency equipment and a special ambulance. We not only gave them a double cabin ambulance like the ones we gave health sub-districts but a real ambulance. We also have additional staff in that place.

There was an issue raised by the honourable member for West Budama North. I agree entirely that we do not have enough health centre tools. What we are doing right now as a Government is to widen the tax base so that we can allocate more resources to the health sector. 

Madam Speaker, let me inform the House that right now our allocation is $ 1.68 per capita for each Ugandan yet if we are to follow the Abuja Convention the declaration recommended at least $ 4. Therefore as a Government we are committed to widening the tax base in this country. 

Honourable members, since you are the ones who allocate resources, I am sure you are going to help us towards this. The honourable member for Kamwenge said that there were no testing kits for HIV/AIDS. I want to inform her that the testing kits are there in the National Medical Stores. It is the system that the health workers from the area order for them first.

Madam Speaker, there was an issue that there is segregation in this country in the allocation of health facilities and in health care generally. This was raised by hon. Bako Christine, Woman MP for Arua. We are not aware of that as a ministry. I want to say that for the President’s family, it is not segregation as such but I think we need to take good care of the President’s family. It is not segregation. The Health Sector Strategic Plan II, which we are now implementing, addresses most issues of equity and social justice. In due course, most of you are going to get copies of this Health Sector Strategic Plan II so that you acquaint yourselves with it.  

There was the issue that Government is not doing enough to address the health status of the rural poor. Madam Speaker, I want to say that we are addressing this and our target is to cover the whole country with health facilities within a five-kilometer reach. We are doing this.

Madam Speaker, there was also an issue regarding social health insurance. It was raised by hon. Lyomoki. He complained that we are not doing enough consultation. I want to inform this House that we are doing extensive consultations and everybody will be brought on board. Before we bring the Bill here we are organising workshops for all the parliamentarians and all the stakeholders we have been involving, for example people from NOTU, KOFUTU and other agencies. 

Just a week ago we had a seminar and some of these people representing the workers were there. I remember Mr Apollo Nyangasi, the Director for Planning and Development in KOFUTU, was there with me. Mr Emmanuel Bahingana, the one in charge of research, was also there. So it is not proper to say that we are not consulting on the issue of social health insurance.

It was also said that with social health insurance it would seem like we are deducting the workers’ salaries yet the health workers are not getting enough pay. I want to say that so far, out of pocket expenditure, according to our research, constitutes about 54 percent and this goes to the health care sector. So what we are going to deduct for the social health insurance will be much less than 54 percent of the workers’ salaries. In due course we are going to scale up the social health insurance. We are starting with the formal sector, those who are employed. We are going to scale this up to cover the whole country. It is not like we are segregating.

Madam Speaker, I think these are the main issues that were raised. I have already given a brief on the status of Measles, which we have already addressed and we are continuing to address. Since this book is too big, I could not make copies for each of the Members but I am going to lay it on the Table so that it can perhaps be put in the library for the access of everybody. I thank you very much honourable members for listening to me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable minister, before we let you go, I want to invite you to go to my wonderful health centre in Kidera, which has got a very beautiful theatre but it cannot be used; there are no pathways. I want you to visit it. I also want you to sample the health centre in Kiyunga, in Luuka County, and tell me whether it is conducive for maternal health care purposes.

4.15
MRS BEATRICE RWAKIMARI (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Minister for his presentation and reiterate what my colleague, hon. Alaso, mentioned about maternal mortality rates. 

I want to urge the House to start looking at the issue of maternal mortality as a development issue. We cannot continue to talk about the development of this country when our women continue to die because of delivery related issues. When I hear the Minister talking about increasing the procurement of condoms, I get surprised. Why don’t we also increase the budget for reproductive health? 

When you go to these maternity centres in the villages, there are just simple things lacking, small things like Ergometrine the medicine which stops women from bleeding. It is very cheap. (Applause) Other basic obstetric essentials are also lacking. I would like to call upon the Minister of Health to request our development partners, who seem to be interested in actually providing these condoms, to start looking at issues of the maternal mortality rate.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, the Minister mentioned that most of the doctors desert the health centre IVs. Have you found out why these centres are deserted? Most of the doctors run away because there are no basic facilities like water, electricity, to mention just a few.  

MS ALISEMERA BABIIHA: The information I would like to give is about the doctors who are posted to upcountry areas. I will give you an example of the districts we visited, Mbale and Sironko. In Sironko we found only one doctor. That was in the whole district. Most of those people had been given leave to come for training. A doctor or nurse is posted there just to be put on payroll. After two years they are brought back for training, and they are on Government sponsorship. Most of them are not there because the areas are bad, but they have come back for training at Makerere University. Mbale Regional Hospital was also totally bad.

MS RWAKIMARI: Thank you my colleague. Finally, I just want to call upon the honourable minister, on that particular note, to look for solutions or address the issue of the doctors running away from these health centre IVs.  

If all we talked about is women dying, even if we have drugs in the hospital and there are doctors to attend to our patients, I think we shall not be doing a lot of work. Therefore, please honourable minister, address the issues, which chase away these doctors from the health centre IVs and then we shall have the issue of maternal mortality rate and other health issues addressed. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.20
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Recently it was reported that Tororo County has one of the highest maternal mortality rates in this country. My Bishop, James Odongo, has written several letters to the Ministry of Health requesting support for him to expand the theatre and also complete the surgical theatre ward. He has been moving around among Christians in the villages, collecting Shs 100 and he has failed to raise enough money.  

I would like to get assurance from the Minister that in this financial year’s budget the Minister of Health has taken the cry of a man of God and supported the Bishop with resources to expand the theatre and complete the surgical theatre ward. Please, hon. Minister of Health, the Bishop has been collecting Shs 100. He told me he went to Bududa in Bugisu and a man with a necktie came up and only donated Shs 200. I would like to hear from the Minister whether this is provided for in the budget so that I communicate to him. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The budget is coming next week.  Honourable minister, you can answer that during the debate of the budget. That is when we shall be talking about money, but you have taken note of the matters.

4.21
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Madam Speaker, I have something of an emergency nature.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Emergency in health?

MR BYARUGABA: Yes, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why didn’t you come and let me know in the morning?

MR BYARUGABA: I could not get you, Madam Speaker. I am very sorry. I am new. The issue of concern is the Malaria outbreak in Isingiro South. I was in the constituency over the weekend and we are losing very many people to Malaria. In one village we buried about six people and I was scared stiff. I had to come running to inform the ministry headquarters. I went to the ministry personally. I even drove to National Medical Stores. They have been very co-operative but then of course they told me the stores are closed for stocktaking. 

I had to mention this so that something could be done for the sake of Isingiro South people. There is a serious Malaria outbreak. It is a highland area, just like Kabale, and people are dying in droves. For goodness sake, that is all I wanted to bring to the attention of the Minister and the country as a whole.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable minister, please handle Isingiro urgently. You do not have to answer the others now but handle the Malaria situation immediately.

4.23
THE MINISTER OF RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I start off with the comments that were made by the leader of the Opposition in his major contribution to the debate.  

On page 6 the hon. Leader of the Opposition was worried that in the war affected areas money was being returned at the end of each financial year. In fact he says, “We, therefore, regret the fact that for years Government did not re-allocate funds budgeted for the conflict areas to meet their real priorities, and that people continued to suffer needlessly when funds meant for them were returned to the Treasury at the end of each Financial Year.”  

I made an effort to establish whether this was a fact. Something happened in the past but not in the recent years.  

Secondly, we have the usual problem of the financial management regulations and the way we demand the budget be implemented. In the ministry where I was last, we used to advise district governments to make sure that they commit money that was not yet committed before the end of the financial year. I had participated in doing this for many of the districts in the North, so I do not think this was really a major worry.

The next thing was on the question of resettlement of the people from IDP camps. He said, “… we unreservedly support the return of people to their homes, and acknowledge all the support given them to do so. We, however, advocate for constructive engagement between the government and the people and their leaders to avoid politicization of the process and creation of suspicion that undermine harmony and cohesion. We offer to be effective and equal partners in this process.”  This is a much more welcome statement than many that one hears of. 

This whole question of resettlement is a question that involves everybody and must involve everybody. We have been meeting our donor partners. We have had a meeting of the joint monitoring committee. We have had a meeting with nine representatives of districts. We are looking at every possibility for making sure that the resettlement scheme is successful. 

Here I would like to add to what hon. Nankabirwa has already said. Everything is being done to make sure that those who are approaching home are still catered for as much as possible, as they were catered for in the camp. I walked out of this House in order to meet the World Food Programme person in this country to make sure that by the time I come here to talk to this House I am firm on the ground. 

There is every effort being made jointly with donors and ourselves to make sure that this succeeds. It is part of my programme to meet the Members of Parliament very soon for an extensive discussion on this matter. We will go into the districts and meet the councillors, religious leaders, traditional leaders and all those who are involved to make sure that this programme works effectively.  

Madam Speaker, the Woman Member for Moyo pointed out that in this resettlement, Moyo should be considered and included because they have Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs). Yes, this is considered; in fact we are also considering the case of Adjumani and Masindi. We are making sure that all those places where IDP camps exist are all incorporated in the programme.  

The honourable lady member from Kitgum said Government should invite all stakeholders to this resettlement venture. She said that the beneficiaries should be involved on the modalities of how it is going to be done. This is only to add to what I have already said. The people in the camps themselves are going to participate more than they have ever done. We are thinking of sitting together with their chosen leaders to make sure that we know where they came from, so that when they are approaching their regional home inevitably they will not stop on some other people’s land. Secondly, so that it is known that they are on the way home, so that there are no conflicts over the issue of land and settlement.  

The hon. Woman Member of Parliament for Kamwenge said the Ministers of Disaster Preparedness and Agriculture should find a solution to the drought that is causing a decline in the agricultural sector. This is a very pertinent observation. We are already aware that Karamoja sub-region is undergoing failure of crops. 

Again, this is an issue, which we have just been discussing. There is apparently a two-year cycle where crops fail. We are looking into this very seriously so that we prepare for eventualities by October and later, especially after the harvests have actually been established. A mission to do this is already being planned. How we address drought is a much more fundamental question not only in Karamoja but it also looks like this is spreading to many parts as the dryness becomes a global phenomenon. I hope we will come to a point when all the potential drought affected areas can be seen on the map and programmes, jointly with the local governments, can be undertaken to make sure drought is not as devastating as it has tended to be in the past. 

Madam Speaker, I did not have much more to add, particularly when hon. Ruth Nankabirwa made extensive remarks that affect the security as well as the settlement of IDPs. I beg to conclude my remarks by saying I will welcome the co-operation of everybody for this programme to succeed. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe you take one clarification.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I want to thank the honourable minister. He has just told us he was talking to World Food Programme. Last week we were in Soroti, my district, and we obtained the information that the UN co-ordinating agency in the region is in the process of moving out from the Teso sub-region. They no longer consider it an emergency area. 

This is very worrying for us especially when we moved to a sub-county called Katine. In Katine there were some two schools where World Food Programme has been giving porridge in the school-feeding programme. Now the rest of the school children in the neighbourhood had relocated to those two schools just so that they get a meal. 

As you know, last year’s harvest was very bad in the Teso region and this year drought has hit. I am just wondering what the Minister has planned to address that looming disaster. Definitely, there is going to be a bigger problem in the Teso region. We are saying people are going back home but as they go back home they no longer have the emergency threshold so there will definitely be no food for them. Besides that, there is going to be a very poor harvest both for the last season and then for this final season. 

Finally, I understood from the State of the Nation Address that reconstruction of Northern Uganda is one of the three key priority areas. I am just looking at the money that has been allocated. I heard that it is Shs 18 billion for the 15 or 16 districts. As a result, each district is going to have about Shs 1 billion or slightly less than that. Would the honourable minister like to help us so that our expectations are not really big because the money is just about one billion shillings per district? As I launch out to sensitize my people, I am going to tell them about recovery and how everything is going to be, but what will Shs 1 billion really do? We would like to know so that we are partners in sensitizing the people in Northern Uganda.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, some of these things you want would better be dealt with in the committees. When you are sitting, tell the Minister to sit there for five days and harass him everyday on things like the budget. Maybe the question on the food you might tell us.

MS OCAN: Madam Speaker, I would like to get clarification on this World Food Programme. I just came back from Gulu today. We also still have a lot of disasters taking place in the IDP camps. Just last week we lost very many huts in Lalogi. These people actually lose their foodstuff and they lose a lot, yet World Food Programme is reducing the kilos they get every time. They are in need. I do not know what the World Food Programme thinks. Is it because of no foodstuff in their store or what? Otherwise, the burning of the huts in the IDP camps is a problem.  

Secondly, I also got agitated on this return or can we say decongestion. I am wondering whether the storage of these iron sheets in the office of the RDC means that it is now the RDC to implement that programme. How about if something goes wrong, do you think the council can actually bring down the RDC? Can they say “Please, can you account for this?” Is this not going to bring a big conflict? 

We have disaster management committees at district level. We have the CAO, who is actually in charge of this disaster. He is supposed to be the chairman of disaster management committee. Are we not going to bring a lot of conflict? For us in Gulu it is even worse. The two actually contested together and I am sure they have not yet been brought properly on the round table to resolve a lot of issues. Do we mean well for the Acholi people or do we want them just to continue pulling ropes all the time? Thank you very much.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, let me start with the last one, whether the RDC handling a programme will create more conflict in districts than if the matter or the programme was handled by the district leader. I have already met nine leaders from nine districts in the North. One of the things we talked about was that the RDC, the chairman, the CAO, the LC III and the councillors all have different roles in this effort, just as religious leaders and traditional leaders have different roles to play in this programme. So, the issue is not that there has to be conflict. If there is any basis for conflict, we are addressing it.  

In the case of Gulu, I had a meeting with both Mao and Ochora. I frankly told them that they must work together because they are working for the same people. Here is Ochora who was yesterday a chairman of the district and Mao is the chairman now, both of them are in the same area working for the same people so they must not fight over who is doing what. They must work together to make sure that they deliver. If the two cannot work together as personalities, one of them is transferable. The other one is chosen by the people. The issue is that I am going to make sure as much as possible that there is harmony between the two. 

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you honourable minister.  Madam Speaker, I was in Gulu over the weekend and I met for a long time with the RDC, Col Walter Ochora. The information he gave me was that at the last meeting they had in Hotel African, they had extensive dialogue with Chairman Mao. So, the initial conflict that seemed to exist amongst the two is being resolved. I think it should not be a matter of concern.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have asked some questions, let him answer.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, it is just to re-align this argument. The matter that hon. Aol has raised is a policy matter. We are just asking Government to stick to its policy. You recall in the Seventh Parliament we had a select committee and one of the key issues that we were arguing for as a recommendation was that a disaster policy be passed. Indeed, Government came to this House and presented to us a Disaster Policy on how to manage disasters in this country. Duties were assigned in that Disaster Policy and the chairperson of the Disaster Management Committee in the district, according to the policy, is the Chief Administrative Officer. It is not the Chairman LC V and it is not the RDC. 

As a body that conducts oversight, we are simply asking Government, why have you shifted from your own policy, from what you stipulated there, to a point where you are now assigning responsibility in an ad hoc manner and yet you have a policy? That is the crucial matter. It is well beyond the concerns of Mao the chairman and Walter Ochora the RDC. They cut across the board.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think you are pre-empting the Minister. Let him complete his answers. If he has missed out something then we shall point it out. I will not allow you to present.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There are two documents here which hon. Alaso can read through. One is called the “National Policy for Internally Displaced Persons”; the other one is “OCHA Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement”. There is another one on the resettlement programme and recovery. So, the issue is for us not to be pessimistic. The issue is to see how best we can solve a situation. 

Secondly, emergencies have to be addressed as emergencies. When we are talking of bringing people together to address a situation, we are not taking time. We have to bury the hatchet, so to speak. I have already talked to the Chairman LC V Lira who seems to have a problem with the CAO. I think there is also ground for coming together because I said he can also refer to the RDC. In case the RDC has a problem, hon. Wabudeya can handle. Let us minimize conflicts. Let us focus on major issues of emergency.

Next point, Madam Speaker, hon. Alaso was saying that the situation in Teso is no longer regarded as an emergency or the actions that require emergency are not being taken. I think we have to have a clear definition of emergency. She has referred to a school; I want to know the name of that school and I want to know what is happening there. 

There are people in Teso sub-region, in Soroti, in Katakwi and so on, who are supposed to be on the spot answering questions and addressing problems as they arise. The discussion I had with the World Food Programme just a while ago was to make sure that the office in the districts co-operate very closely with our officials. 

The reason the chairman of the District Disaster Management Committee (DDMC) is the CAO is because the CAO also handles the funds of the district. He assists in setting up priorities of the district. If in Soroti, or in any district, there is an emergency and the DDMC chairperson, the CAO, has not addressed it in relation to all the offices involved including the ministry, then there is a problem of communication. On top of the issues of communication, we are trying to address the problem where it is. 

It is true that Teso is not as tense. The Teso sub-region is not as it has been before. When emergency reduces, obviously it is a relief because then you can address some of the problems. I am sure when fully particularized, the problem that hon. Alaso has talked about will be handled. 

There was the question of Shs 18 billion being the only money that is being given to these districts. Where would that come from? We are going to vote money for each district. It is not Shs 18 billion. This Shs 18 billion specifically refers to a programme that is not alone. It is not alone. You have NUSAF, and this Shs 18 billion does not include the NUSAF budget, it does not include the districts budgets, it does not even include what we get from donors. So, the issue is not that the whole region is going to depend on Shs 18 billion. This is not true! This is not a picture that we must create. The picture is much brighter than that. 

Lastly, I would like to tell this House that the ministry at the moment is entitled “relief and disaster preparedness”. I am hoping that with everybody’s co-operation with the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness, having solved the issue of relief and with progress on refugees returning to Sudan, Rwanda and the neighbouring countries, probably there will be less emphasis on refugees. So, disaster preparedness will be a major focus rather than relief when we have stopped the relief needs of this country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let me comfort the Members that in addition to the general debate which is continuing, you will have an opportunity in the sessional committees. If you have an interest, you can excuse yourself from your own committee and go to the other one and irrigate them with your information, except that you do not vote there, and then you can go back to your committee. So you will be able to move.

4.49
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mr Daudi Migereko): Madam Speaker, we shall overcome the situation fairly soon. A number of questions were raised by honourable members with regard to the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. Before I answer them individually, I would like to take this opportunity to thank honourable members for their genuine concern and support for the sector expressed during this debate on His Excellency the President’s State of the Nation Address. In view of the critical time we are operating in, I look forward to the continued support and understanding of Members as we tackle the challenges of power shortage and now oil discovery.

It is now my honour and pleasure to respond to issues that were raised by Members of Parliament. I will start with issues raised by the hon. Leader of the Opposition, hon. Prof. Ogenga Latigo. He raised an issue regarding the blame apportioned to Parliament in regard to the progression of Bujagali or slowing down the progression of Bujagali. 

Madam Speaker, the Sixth Parliament raised a number of issues concerning the development of the Bujagali hydropower project. The issues that were raised were discussed over a period exceeding six months in this House. The issues were raised in the Committee of National Economy, the Committee of Natural Resources and the plenary. It should be noted that all the issues, which were raised, were resolved and Parliament passed a resolution to give a go ahead to the Bujagali hydropower project.

However, after that resolution of Parliament, a few Members of Parliament sent an e-mail to the World Bank in Washington calling upon the Bank not to fund the project until certain issues were resolved to their satisfaction. Consequently, the Bank would not proceed with the project financing. 

In the meantime, most energy companies worldwide including AES Nile Power - and not ENRON as had been pointed out - ran into financial difficulty. The blame for the delay on the concerned Members of Parliament can, therefore, not be misplaced. Unfortunately, the bulk of them were FDC Members. What is however important at this stage –(Interruption)

MR KASSIANO WADRI: Madam Speaker, I have stood here with a lot of hesitation to challenge a person like hon. Daudi Migereko who is a long time friend and a very senior Member of this House. I feel that we need to set the record right. The issue he has brought up is about certain Members of Parliament who sent e-mail messages to Washington, the World Bank, during the Sixth Parliament. 

At that time there was no FDC, there was no NRM, there was no UPC, there was no DP, no JEEMA and no Independents. Everybody was here on his own individual merit under the Movement System. Is the honourable member in order to insinuate wrong motives on those of us who mean well for this country, by the names of FDC? He said that in the Sixth Parliament we sent e-mail messages to the World Bank in Washington to stop financing of Bujagali Falls; is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you know hon. Migereko speaks Lusoga -(Laughter)- I believe what he meant was that some of them eventually became FDC. (Laughter) I think that is what he meant. (Laughter)

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, thank you for reading my mind correctly. (Laughter) I, however, wanted to point out that what is important at this stage is to ensure that we avoid mistakes committed in the past so that we can resolve the current power shortage expeditiously and sustainably. I can count on the support of my brother and good friend.  

Madam Speaker, there was the issue that Bujagali is not strategic due to low outflow of water from Lake Victoria and there is therefore an inherent risk of putting too many eggs in one basket. We would like to point out that the low outflows of water from Lake Victoria due to the current drought can affect all dams on River Nile, whether the power station is at Karuma, Bujagali, Kalangala or anywhere along the River Nile.  

Secondly, infrastructural issues were considered in studies, which were done to determine the viability of the Bujagali project. In any case, the 44 months, which have been highlighted, are adequate given the planning that has so far been done. However, any distraction from implementing the plan, particularly at this stage, will only act to compound the situation. We should try to be as supportive as we can of this project. 

As for the concerns of seemingly putting all eggs in one basket, it should be noted that both Bujagali in the East and Karuma in the North are to be developed in the short and medium term. As a matter of fact, we are seriously now focusing on processing the two projects simultaneously. It is also true that other options including demand-side management and development of small renewable energy projects are also being pursued at this time.  

Madam Speaker, hon. Nampijja called to question Government policy, pointing out that it is not clear. I would like to point out that the Energy Policy for Uganda has a very clear goal, which is to meet the energy needs of the Ugandan population for social and economic development in an environmentally sustainable manner. In addition, it has the following broad policy objectives:  

1.	To establish the availability, potential and demand of the various energy resources in the country.  
2.	To increase access to modern, affordable and reliable energy services as a contribution to poverty eradication.  
3.	To improve energy governance and administration. 
4.	To stimulate economic development in the country. 
5.	To manage energy related environmental impact.  

The Energy Policy puts in place the strategies to implement it as per the implementation schedule therein, which is subject to availability of resources. Where the Energy Policy is not clear, we would like to suggest that such areas be singled out for clarification and/or consideration on the part of the Ministry.  

Madam Speaker, hon. Nampijja further raised the issue of Government not paying sufficient attention to environmental issues as we pursue energy projects. It ought to be appreciated that Government has put in place focused institutions, including NEMA, to deal with environmental issues in the country. 

With particular reference to energy, I wish to make it clear that investment guidelines are in place and they require strict observance of environmental impact assessment requirements. Parliament should particularly note that in the case of Bujagali and Karuma, the environment impact assessment studies that have been carried out have been rated by multilateral funding agencies. Also, internally within the country there has been scrutiny and debate over these studies.  

Hon. Jimmy Akena raised the issue regarding the capacity of the Owen Falls, which was generating 60 megawatts as at the time UPC left power in 1985, however, with an installed capacity of 150 megawatts. What ought to be clarified is the difference between installed capacity and available generating capacity. The 60 megawatts was available generating capacity although the installed capacity as at that time was 150 megawatts. Presently, the installed capacity that we have at the Owen Falls, both Kiira and Nalubale, is 380 megawatts. Obviously from what Government has come out with, the installed capacity will very soon be more than double.  

“Why has the government not embarked on the development of the 450 megawatts Ayago power plant as had been planned by UPC Government?” Madam Speaker, all the sites in Uganda have been investigated and taken into consideration for development. However, studies so far carried out, including the East African Power Master Plan, which was publicized only recently, have ranked Bujagali followed by Karuma as the least costly options. As such Government has given the two projects first priority in the short and medium term. Presently, funds are being sought for the development of other sites including Ayago North and Ayago South and also Kalangala and Murchison Falls.  

Madam Speaker, there was an issue raised by hon. Tindamanyire concerning small hydro not being given sufficient attention by Government. I would like to assure honourable members that Government is giving serious consideration to small hydropower stations mainly because of their inherent advantages. 

It should, however, be noted that small hydropower stations on their own cannot meet all our power needs. Nevertheless, we appreciate the fact that there are key complementary features in the short and medium term. That is why Government is progressing on the development of mini-hydros such as Nyagak, Wakisi, Buseruka, Bugoye, Kikagati and others as we shall reveal in our policy statement of this year. I believe members have already received copies of our policy statement.  

A number of hon. Members of Parliament raised issues in regard to rural electrification particularly as far as it impacts on their constituencies. A number of colleagues have raised concern over the slow pace or lack of activity in regard to power extension in their areas. 

It shall be recalled that Government has been taking this matter seriously since 2001. The rural electrification rate has increased from one percent in 2001 to about five percent to-date. Honourable members should be assured that Government will continue implementing rural electrification schemes, though this has been currently constrained by the fact that most of the resources have got to be applied to generation. However, we shall endeavour to expedite these schemes particularly focusing on district headquarters like Kyenjonjo, Pader, Kanungu, Kibaale, Moroto and others which you will find in our policy statement. 

Our focus will also centre on the productive areas in the country such as fish landing sites and mineral producing areas, on top of agro processing centres. Given the fact that many of you come from areas that are rich in minerals, next to fishing landing sites or have agro-processing centres, I want to assure you that soon we shall be reaching you.

Hon. Okecho wondered why much as they have read statements in the papers, Government has not come out with a statement on our oil discovery. It is a fact that we are all anxious about the oil exploration progress findings so far made. As you may all be aware, right from the time the NRM Government came to power in 1986 it put its mind into the oil programme. These efforts are now yielding good results to the extent that three wells that have been drilled in Kaisotonya area in Hoima District have been found to be discovery wells. 

Testing of oils in the wells is ongoing. A statement will be issued by Government when these tests are complete. I know you have been reading several articles in the papers but kindly bear with us. As you know the NRM style of doing things, we always want to come out in a very concrete way in regard to what we have and what plans we have for the given resource.  

Madam Speaker, there was a question raised by hon. Kyanjo and hon. Nampijja in regard to the unbundling of the former Uganda Electricity Board. The unbundling of state-owned Uganda Electricity Board into three successor companies was in line with Government’s policy concerning private sector led growth and free market economy. 

There was, therefore, need to change the law in order to remove the monopoly which was in place at that time in the power sector. This was done to create competition, especially in the generation and to some extent in the distribution businesses of the power industry, thereby leaving the non-competitive transmission business in the hands of Government. To-date this has yielded results as evidenced by the number of investors that are showing interest in our energy sector.

Madam Speaker, the hon. Member for Mbale Municipality, hon. Kajeke, raised an issue regarding what punishment has been given to those who refused to sign the Karuma Power Purchase Agreement. I would like to set the record straight and point out that nobody in Government has deliberately decided not to sign the Karuma Power Purchase Agreement. You recall that on a number of occasions, Ministers of Energy came to this Floor to explain the order in which the signing of PPS was being pursued. At that time, it had been agreed that development of hydropower resources should be undertaken in a sequential manner. We have learnt with time that this kind of approach could only be injurious to our interests. 

The Government has, therefore, decided that we pursue the development of hydropower resources in the country in a simultaneous manner in order for us to be in a position to address the current power shortage and the ever growing demand for it. It is, however, also true that the financing structure for Karuma was at that time not clear. 

As I speak, we are working with our partners, the Norwegians who will take up 30 percent stake and Government will take up 70 percent stake in the Karuma Hydropower Project, and very soon we shall be notifying you of the signing of the Power Purchase Agreement for Karuma as soon as negotiations are concluded.

Madam Speaker, there was the issue of load shedding and how it has affected Parliament as risen by my brother hon. Kajeke. In the past there used to be class (A) loads, such as Entebbe International Airport, Mulago Hospital Complex, Makerere University, the cement factories and a few other places that were not subject to load shedding. 

Under the current power supply situation however, even some of the class (A) loads are being affected by the load shedding. However, as the situation improves we shall consider other important institutions, including Parliament, for security of supply. We appeal to honourable members to bear with us as we put in place remedial arrangements as spelt out in our policy statement and as clearly spelt out in the budget statement that was issued by the Minister of Finance.

Madam Speaker, the hon. Grace Oburu of Tororo raised the issue regarding phosphates production from Tororo. The NRM Government, as you are all aware, is committed to the exploitation of the Sukuru phosphate deposits. In that regard, the area has already been licensed to potential developers. This particular developer, Nile Force, has carried out pre-feasibility studies, which have led to a necessity of carrying out other studies in order to produce a bankable feasibility study. The bankable feasibility study is needed in order to enable the developer access the required finances for progressing the project with the view of starting initial production by mid 2007.  

Honourable members, you are all invited to note these developments and when you get time, feel free to come and interact with us in the Ministry so that we can be in a position to provide more information about this project and others.

The hon. Member for Mbale raised the issue of energy saving stoves. The smoke-free energy saving stoves programmes has thrived in areas where we, as individual Members of Parliament, had taken interest to ensure that this programme reaches our constituencies. For example, areas of Mbale, Bushenyi and Kabale have benefited from this sustainable programme. We would like to underline the call for hon. Members of Parliament to take advantage of this initiative so that all our constituents can benefit from this programme.  

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for having permitted me to make those clarifications and to thank the Members for having listened to me so attentively. I thank you.

5.16
MRS JANE ALISEMERA, (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I need clarification. Every year we are told that electricity is coming to Bundibugyo. Even when the President visits Bundibugyo he picked the Minister of Energy who is my brother and asked him, “Batalingaya, how far have you gone with electricity?” He says the bids are opened; that this one would be together with the one of Pader and the poles were on the way, that by August we would be having electricity in Bundibugyo. We waited for August and it came and went. 

When the President visited again, they asked him, “Where is the electricity?” They said, “In March actually, Bundibugyo will be lit”. So I need clarification from the Minister of Energy, can we see those poles, which are supposedly procured for Bundibugyo? Every year they are on the way coming; what should we do about the poles? Because every time the President visits he makes him promise something, which is not there. So it has become a problem. 

Could we know exactly whether Bundibugyo will get electricity or not? Let us know whether the bids were opened or not. If the poles are on the way, we should also be informed because even at one time we were told that the turbines were purchased. So can we know these things? Thank you.

5.18
MR JOHN ODIT (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Madam Speaker, I want to thank the Minister for giving us words of encouragement in this sector, but I have two points, which I want him to clarify on.  

First is the issue of Karuma, which has reached the stage of the power purchase agreement. We have been reading from papers that the Minister of State, hon. Simon D’Ujanga, recently again encouraged some Russians who visited this country to go to Karuma and yet Norwegians have already gone very far. So I want the Minister to clarify on this and the feelings of these other investors when they hear that others are also being encouraged to do the same.

Second is the question of this regular load shedding: even amidst the two dams that we already have on Nalubale, which are former Owen Falls Dam, and Kiira Dam, we have more serious load shedding than before! We have been told scientifically that when Kiira Dam was officially commissioned, Uganda released four to five times the amount of water, which used to otherwise pass through the Owen Falls, and as a result, it probably affected the level of the lake. 

We are being accused of having contributed about 24 percent of the reduction in the level of the water; and so some quarters, especially those who share the resources of Lake Victoria, have prevailed on us to go back to the agreed curve. That means we should reduce the amount of water, which is flowing through the two dams in order to restore the level of the waters of Lake Victoria; and that is the reason why we are now experiencing more load shedding than previously. I want to know whether this is the case or not. Thank you.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want the Minister to clarify to us what Uganda’s production potential is in the long-term and short-term because when he was clarifying on a colleague’s question of why the policy is unclear, he does not indicate the potential of our capacity as Uganda and the potential of production, distribution and supply of energy. So if for example in 40 months Karuma and Bujagali are fully installed, what will be our capacity?

Two, I also wanted to know our current capacity of electricity generation and how much of this capacity we export to other countries. And there has been talk of an increment in electricity tariffs; is that still a position of the ministry to increase electricity tariffs? Even with this kind of supply of electricity, are you still thinking of increasing the electricity tariffs?  

About the new districts, we have so many new districts that have come in areas that do not have electricity. So I want to know, what is your policy or what emergency programme have you put in place to connect electricity to the new districts that have just been approved and have started operating?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But I think he answered that in his statement. He explained to us what you are going to do with the districts. Let us have just a few clarifications, please, the rest we will handle in the general debate of the Budget and the committees.

5.23
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Alisemera for the clarification she has sought concerning power extension to Bundibugyo over which we have made several assurances in the past that Bundibugyo would be connected to the national grid. The Ministry entered into negotiations and reached an understanding to extend power to Bundibugyo, Kyenjojo, Pader, and some other places. This programme was delayed mainly because we were using resources, which are not ours and a set of conditions, which we had to meet were put in place. 

There was the issue of the pygmies in Bundibugyo area. The financiers developed a view at one stage that this electricity would endanger the lives of the pygmies –(Laughter)- and they wanted clear assurances that as we extended power to Bundibugyo the lives of the pygmies would not be endangered because by nature they enjoy climbing trees and they would climb electric poles –(Interjections)- it is a fact –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, Members!  This matter of Bundibugyo is really important. Please, let us listen to this issue.

MR MIGEREKO: On our part, we had never anticipated that this would be a major issue, so an environmental impact assessment study had to be carried out and mitigation measures put in place before the donors could go ahead with the project. 

Similarly, when we had problems in the Pader area - and the hon. Leader of the Opposition has been of great assistance here, the donor said that they could not proceed with this project until they were assured that there was sufficient security in the Pader area. Fortunately, the leaders of the area have been very co-operative and I think the studies, which were supposed to be undertaken to ensure that as the security is extended to Pader the lives of the people who are working on the project are not endangered, have been completed.  

Honestly, our track record with regard to these matters is very clear. Once a commitment has been made it is the culture of the NRM to make sure that we meet that commitment –(Interjections)- it is a fact. It is only unfortunate that because of these unforeseen developments, there has been a delay. But I would like to assure my sister that we are still on course and we shall try to make sure that we solve this problem of power extension to Bundibugyo. 

It is also true that work regarding the development of a mini-hydro project in Bundibugyo is on going. So it is not true that we are promising hot air –(Interruption)

MR WOPUWA: Madam Speaker, I have a small clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On Bundibugyo?

MR WOPUWA: On the same thing he is talking about, Madam Speaker. I just want to seek clarification from the Minister. In Bubulo East we do not have pygmies, but since 1996, whenever the President comes he says that electricity is going to come and unfortunately, hon. Migereko has been the Minister in charge of Energy for all this time, but what is our problem? There are no endangered pygmies there. (Laughter)

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, the issue of power extension –(Interruption)

MR BYANAGWA: I want to give the Minister some information. He is saying that the reason for not extending power to Bundibugyo is because of the presence of pygmies. I find that rather un-researched information because Kabale has pygmies but there is power, and we have never seen pygmies climbing – I mean, we should be serious.

MS ALISEMERA: I have been irked because pygmies are human beings; there are 73 people in Bundibugyo District who are pygmies and in Kisoro, there are even more pygmies than in Bundibugyo; there are also pygmies in Rwanda, but why is it that there is electricity there? This Government cannot use the word “pygmies” to try and deny the people of Bundibugyo electricity. Pygmies are human beings too. The Adventist Church has even given them a school with a very good programme. I wonder if the government is implying that pygmies are denying the people of Bundibugyo electricity; should they be wiped out first before the people of Bundibugyo can get electricity? I am really irked and I am sorry for that. 

MR MIGEREKO: The issue of the pygmies was raised by the funding agencies. If you are lending me your money and you raise certain conditions, just because I need your money - honestly the issues you raise are not my fault, I was just looking for support. But an environmental impact assessment study has been carried out and the required mitigations have been pointed to and we are addressing the mitigations and the project is as of now not under threat.  

On the issue of Bubulo, we are operating under a given resource envelope; we would like to make sure that power reaches every part of the country but it depends on the amount of resources that are at our disposal at any one given time. My brother hon. Wopuwa knows very well that we have extended power to the vermiculite mines, which are very near the area that is of concern to him. 

We are now also moving to Busumbu where the phosphates are because as I have pointed out, we are targeting major mineral areas - major areas of agro-processing. Surely if Bubulo is within the neighbourhood of these big mining areas, you can rest assured that power would get there. It is not an issue of this reason or that. The major issue is the resource envelope and when you are faced with financial pressures, you must identify your priorities and start with those areas where you will be in position to reap returns that will enable you to progress on the work you are doing.  

Madam Speaker, there was the issue raised by hon. Odit with regard to Karuma. I have pointed out that Karuma – the Uganda Government and the Norwegians are being equity partners. NORPAK has a license for the development of Karuma Hydropower Project. It is true the Russians were out there, just like they visited Bujagali, Kalangala and they were also meant to visit Ayago north and south. The publicity that was given to the Russians over their visit to Karuma was a bit misleading because I also read the article in the papers. 

The Russians are an EPC company; they are looking for contract business. In case the shareholders come up with their money and the various implementation agreements are signed, they may ask if there is business to construct Karuma hydropower scheme; this is what they are after. They have learnt that there is good business in Uganda and they are looking for business opportunities. To me, that should not cause concern because for a long time we have been looking for investors in the country. We have been looking for people to do business in Uganda; it shows that many people out there are following what is happening in this country. 

There was the issue of the amount of water being dispatched from the Nile or Lake Victoria as a result of constructing Nalubale and Kiira Power Stations. This debate has been on for a very long time. Madam Speaker, I know you directed that the Committee of Parliament on Natural Resources take special interest in this problem and avail a report to this House. 

I would like to suggest that we await for that report and have it formally tabled, because whenever that matter comes up, many technical and none technical issues also come up with it. It was decided that we let this committee present a report to us, but I also want to point out that Kenya has been experiencing load shading, Rwanda has been faced with the same problem and so is Tanzania. If you take the trouble to read papers on a daily basis, you will realize that this subject is being discussed virtually every other day in the East African region. 

This problem is not only a problem that is affecting Uganda; there was drought in the region and all water sources were affected hence affecting the capacity of the countries within the region to generate hydropower. But as I pointed out, there will be a report here presented in the House and this matter will be dealt with comprehensively. 

Madam Speaker, hon. Amongi wanted to know our actual hydropower potential. Presently the estimated hydropower potential of the country based on available technology is 2,300 mega watts. Depending on development technological developments and the technology we are to adopt that figure could change. I want to point that out because tomorrow you could come across a different figure and you say that, “The Minister is not well informed.” 

As for Karuma, the estimated capacity is 200 mega watts. For Bujagali, it is 250 mega watts. Are we presently exporting power to Kenya? The answer is no, because we cannot export when we are in dire need. If you are hungry you cannot say that, “Because she looks hungrier, let her feed first”, no. I think it is not natural. So, currently we are not exporting any power to any country.

Then you asked if we are in position to produce more power for the country? Obviously we shall, given the news we are getting from our oil fields; that will also be another source for power generation in the country. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, thank you honourable minister. Now, let us hear from the Minister of Internal Affairs.

5.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE, INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, how long do you think you are going to take?

MR KASAIJA: It should be about 10 to 15 minutes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Wonderful.

MR KASAIJA: Since I am rising for the first time to say something in this House, allow me to make this remark. I last stood on this spot in 1980 –(Interjection)- not as a DP Member, but as a prospective Movementist, but I am very delighted that the House now is more focused and united, compared to what we had then. So, I am very delighted to be part of this House although the recess was rather long. Therefore, I wish to congratulate all of you honourable members for having been some of the few privileged Ugandans to come to this Eighth Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, I also want to congratulate you upon having been re-elected as a Deputy Speaker.

Back to the Ministry of Internal Affairs, out of the debate I picked about four areas, which I thought warrant a comment. 

First is the deployment of officers of the Joint Anti-Terrorism Task Force, abbreviated as (JAT) at the High Court. 

Secondly is the said plan on the land on which the police training school and Nsambya Police Barracks are located, then the policing plan for the resettlement of IDPs in Northern and Eastern Uganda, and the deployment of immigration officers on Lake Albert.

Madam Speaker, on the question of deployment of officers at the Joint Anti-Terrorism Task Force at the High Court, the story is as follows: this deployment was in response to intelligence reports that the High Court was going to be stormed and suspects in the treason trial of Rtd Col Kiiza Besigye and 22 others would be taken away. The JAT is a joint military and police unit charged with fighting terrorism. On that day, it was deployed soon after the big events in Kampala, when tension was still high and the treason trial of Rtd Col Kiiza Besigye and 22 others was ongoing in court. 

Honourable members, listen to this very carefully. The deployment was with good intentions, that is, to secure the court premises, counter the plans of the possible assassins and protect those high profile VIPs that were in court on that day. Unfortunately, there was no time to alert the Principal Judge and the High Court Registrar because court hearing was ongoing and the NRM Government could not take any chances, and it never takes chances when it comes to the security of persons and property in this country. Therefore, rather than using statements like, “Mamba Boys went and raped the courts,” we should thank them for having taken appropriate and immediate action on something that could have happened -(Interjection)- Madam Speaker, may I continue? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Have you finished that point?

MR KASAIJA: He wants to clarify? Okay, clarify.

MR KASSIANO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the honourable minister albeit reluctantly to have accepted me to seek this clarification. I do very well remember the day when the Joint Anti-Terrorism Group surrounded the court ostensibly for protection. That was the day when Rtd Col Dr Kiiza Besigye together with 22 others were to face treason charges before court. Since then they have continued to appear before the same court and the same members of the diplomatic corps who have shown interest in this case have continued to appear in court when the 22 together with Rtd Dr Kiiza Besigye are produced. 

So, may I know why that protection was so short-lived that it can no longer continue to be provided since the same people continue to attend? Are they now more secure than they were at that time? I wish to be clarified.

MR KASAIJA: Thank you honourable colleague. We have received further intelligence reports that now we are safe –(Laughter)- I do not want to reveal a secondary source here, maybe I will do that at an appropriate time, but those that threatened our security then, some have been put out of action and others may be before courts. I think I should rest my case there.

Let me go to the second point, which is the planned sale of land on which the police training school and Nsambya Police Barracks are now located. Since 1997 there has been an effort to find a lasting solution to the accommodation problems in the Uganda Police Force. The ongoing discussion by the Police management in respect to the Police land on which Kibuli Police Training School and Nsambya Police Barracks are located is that there is lack of a proposal by the former Vice-President following an official visit to Malaysia in 2002. 

In 2002 the then Vice-President representing His Excellency the President at Lig-Quawii Smart Partnership International Dialogue in Malaysia, accompanied by top officials of the NSSF and while in Malaysia, interacted with a Malaysian construction company and their discussion brought about a proposal to do away with slums by building houses for thousands of people and to address accommodation consequences within the Uganda Police Force.  

It is against that background that the Chairman, NSSF Board of Directors commenced a discussion with the Uganda Police Force management, focusing on building modern police barrack, on the condition of swapping property at agreed locations with the Police land at Kibuli Police Training School and Nsambya Police Barracks. Subsequently, other developers that included the National Housing Corporation, Kampala International University, the American Lip-stream, Dynamic Shells South Africa, among others also presented proposals on the same plan of providing alternative accommodation for the Uganda Police Force in exchange for the Police property at Police Training School, Kibuli and Nsambya Police Barracks.

The primary task of the Police management was to first determine the value of the Police property at the agreed locations. It also set up a task force to examine all the options available and recommend a more suitable way of acquiring suitable decent housing for the Uganda Police Force. The report of this committee is still awaited by the Police management. Currently, no transaction has taken place except the continued study of the above-mentioned proposals. 

Item three: the Police plan or policing the resettlement of IDPs in Northern and Eastern Uganda. Honourable members, following the President’s directive to resettle IDPs in their villages in Lango and Teso sub-regions, meetings and consultations with various stakeholders as well as development partners and humanitarian agencies have been held, co-ordinated by the Office of the Prime Minister. 

Indeed we had one meeting last Friday. It was observed that successful implementation of His Excellency the President’s directive will heavily depend on the existence of security for persons and property in those regions. People were forced into IDPs as a result of cattle rustling and LRA incursions in the North and Northeast. Life is gradually getting back to normal in many of those areas, but there are still isolated incidents on a small scale.  

The Government has found it necessary for the Police to increase its capacity and co-ordination in respect to IDP’s resettlement in Lango and Teso sub-regions, intensifying the fight against cattle rustling through the Anti-stock Safety Unit along the Teso-Lango borders of Karamoja and decongesting and resettling of IDPs in the Acholi sub-region.

The following are the priorities in this exercise: 

1)	To provide security for the resettlement of IDPs in Lango and Teso sub-regions.  
2)	To take over the Anti-stock Safety Unit at the border of Karamoja and Lango-Teso sub-regions.  
3)	Police reinforcement of the UPDF programme of IDP decongestion and resettlement in the Acholi sub-region.  

Our duties in this exercise include the following: 

•	We need to establish widespread community policing, sensitise the people at all levels including camps and villages intended for the resettlement exercise.  
•	We need to get security intelligence, which we want to do in support of ISO.  
•	We must patrol, escort and respond to crime incidences. 
•	We must also carry out investigations of those crimes that will be committed in the course of the settlement exercise.  
•	We must also operationalise the Anti-stock Safety Unit to combat cattle rustling.  

The areas that have to be covered are as follows: in the Teso-Lango IDP resettlement area, we need 29 locations. In Oyam District there are four sub-counties; in Lira District, 11; Kaberamaido, two; Amuria, eight, Katakwi, four; that is for the Police.  

For the Anti-stock Safety Unit, we are going to handle 12 locations: Kumi District, two; Katakwi District, four; Amuria, two; and Lira, four. For the Acholi sub-region IDP area, there will be 60 locations. In Gulu there are 24, Pader 18 and Kitgum 18. 

The plan of implementation: 

On personnel deployment, in the Lango and Teso IDP resettlement area, we intend to use the locally available manpower to be reinforced by 600 personnel. We will also use the Anti-stock Safety Unit and in the smallest unit we shall need 30 personnel but in some cases we may need 200 people.  

In Acholi sub-region, each sub-county will have at least 30 personnel. The reason for this is that we must not only make the unit strong enough to protect the people, but also make it strong enough to protect itself in case of attack. 

In regard to the human resources required, we have a big critical manpower gap. We need a total of about 5,000 personnel in order to carry out this task of which 2,000 is going to be for the Anti-stock Safety Unit. I am glad to report that out of this, 1,660 are already in the training and are only waiting for deployment. The balance of 3,000 is for IDPs in Acholi, Teso and Lango. These are yet to be recruited, they will co-ordinate this exercise. We thought we should give you all this information honourable members. 

The Deputy Inspector-General of Police will co-ordinate the exercise assisted by the Commissioner of Police and the three Regional Police Commanders of Gulu, Soroti and Moroto. 

The challenges:

1)	We need 5,000 personnel in form of special police constables, and each one is supposed to get Shs 100,000, which works out to Shs 6 billion per year.
2)	The training and recruitment expenses, which we have talked about above; we need transport in form of vehicles, motorcycles, bicycles etc. We need radios and village telephones for police posts, we need to feed our people, to give them medicine when they are in operations, we need office and residential accommodation, we need administrative and coordination personnel. The estimated cost is as follows:
(a)	For the Lango and Teso region we need Shs 1.3 billion; 
(b)	For the Anti-stock Safety Unit, we need Shs 8 billion; 
(c)	For the Acholi sub-region we need Shs 5 billion, which totals to about Shs 14.4 billion.  

Therefore, Madam Speaker, funding is of paramount importance if we have to implement this plan. There is also need for multi-agency action with other institutions including those under the Justice, Law and Order Sector. All I need to ask this House for is their support. 

The Police must be supported when our estimates do come before this House because if one incident does take place while this resettlement and decongestion exercise is going on in the villages, especially considering that this is a population that has been traumatised and has a lot of fear from the experience that they have gone through over the last 18 years, this exercise can become a flop. So I am appealing to you that when time comes to debate our policy statement, we shall receive all the assistance that we deserve for us to be able to police those areas effectively.

The last item is the deployment of immigration officers on Lake Albert, following reports of uncontrolled movements of immigrants and refugees across Lake Albert. The Ministry directed the Immigration Department to man the entry points identified by the concerned district security committees, and this took place when the Minister of State visited them about one and half years ago. 

The following entry points were identified: Buhuka, Biso, Kahoro, Songa landing sites in Hoima districts, Ndaiga landing sites in Hoima District, Butiaba, Bugungu, Wanseko in Masindi District and Ntoroko in Bundibugyo District. The following is the deployment so far, done:

Two immigration officers have been sent to Ntoroko, three immigration officers in Hoima supported by one immigration assistant. There are also two immigration officers in Masindi. 

It is worth noting, however, that this deployment is not yet effective mainly because of lack of manpower at some of those points. The lack of office and residential accommodation also mitigates our efforts. Madam Speaker and dear colleagues, we also lack a motorboat for effective control of movement across the lake. However, on the point of manpower, we want to report that this ministry is in the process of recruiting the required staff. 

The Department of Immigration has been restructured, now it is called a directorate and we are in the process of asking the Minister of Public Service to advertise the relevant jobs and we think once that exercise is completed then we should effectively man the immigration points along Lake Albert.  

Madam Speaker, that brings me to the end and I wish to take this opportunity once again to thank you and to tell you that the job we are facing in the Ministry of Internal Affairs is very momentous but our biggest constraint is the question of money. The Police are being accused of not doing their duty but we forget one thing that they too have a problem; they are not properly facilitated. I thank you very much for listening.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have some difficulty in that any moment now power is going off and I had not anticipated using fuel this evening because tomorrow we are on day load shedding and all the work will have to be done on the generator. So, I will ask hon. Kasaija to come very early tomorrow, in case there are one or two other clarifications, before we proceed. So I would like to adjourn the House to 2.30 tomorrow afternoon.

(The House rose at 6.02 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 12 July 2006 at 2.30 p.m.)




