Tuesday, 15 July 2003

Parliament met at 2.34 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I start with the bad news; our colleague, hon. Edward Kasule, has lost a mother, Dementria Namiro, whose burial is taking place at this time along Mityana Road at Bulenga. Let us stand for a minute’s silence. 

(The Members stood and observed a minute’s silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the strangers’ gallery, there is a group of students from the United States of America. They came from two schools in the City of Seattle, Washington namely, Mount Si High School and Forest Ridge School of Sacred Heart. Their mission was to monitor a project in Mukono District. You are most welcome to the Parliament of Uganda. (Applause).

Honourable members, you are aware that the 1995 Constitution vested considerable powers and functions in this House, the Parliament of Uganda.  This same Constitution provides that all powers belong to the people who have to exercise their sovereignty in accordance with the supreme law of Uganda, the Constitution.  

Since the Parliament of Uganda is the trustee of the people’s power, it is necessary that we do this with utmost good faith for and on behalf of the people. Currently, the country is undergoing a serious debate on the 1995 Constitution, with some Ugandans assessing its performance so far while others are seeking to amend some of its provisions.  

Among the powers that were vested in Parliament is the power to amend the Constitution. There is no amendment that can be affected to the Constitution without Parliament playing a key role because of its importance as the supreme law of the land. It is important that as we are involved in the process of protecting or amending the Constitution, we must handle the process selflessly.  

Honourable members, you may recall that the Seventh Parliament as an institution declined to express its collective views to the Constitutional Review Commission. This position was on the principle that since Parliament would eventually handle the report, and if necessary, play its role in amending the Constitution, it was necessary for it to be free from views expressed by other persons so as to handle the matter objectively. This has been the position of the House and we have not expressed any view or views to the Constitutional Review Commission. 

What our role will be in the process of the post Constitutional Review Commission exercise is akin to a surgeon or a physician who is supposed to operate or treat a patient. In a doctor-patient relationship, it is essential for the doctor to be trusted to give hope to the patient. The doctor’s interest is none other than the recovery of the person under his or her care. This is the kind of attitude this Parliament is trying to maintain.  Whatever we shall do to the Constitution will only be to improve it, not to weaken it.  

Honourable members, to my surprise, on Sunday, 13 July 2003, the Sunday Monitor ran a lead story, “MPs plot to give Museveni three more years”. The sub-headline was, “Parliament too to get three years.” The lizard on the front-page had the words, “A case of scratch my back and I scratch yours.” 

The report, on the face value, imputes selfish motives on the Institution of Parliament. The report gave an impression that Parliament was about to use its privileged position to amend some provisions of the Constitution to suit your individual interests, honourable members.  

On my part, I am neither aware of the cause or justification of this allegation, nor have I had any meeting in respect of this matter. Parliament does not plot, but can only exercise its powers transparently and in good faith. An amendment to the Constitution should only be on principle. You should not waver from principle simply because you feel threatened.  

Honourable members, I assure you all that as trustees of the people’s power, Parliament would only amend the Constitution in good faith, without ulterior motives and only for the enhancement of the good governance and protection of human rights. See Article 79(3) of the Constitution.

Honourable members, the thing that the people of Uganda should note is that the exercise of reviewing the Constitution is not something without rules. As of now, the rules are known and they will not change during the exercise. Any amendment of the Constitution shall be in accordance with Chapter 18 of the Constitution. And to amend, even the provision in this chapter, it has to be within the provisions of the present Constitution. 

Even if some MPs were plotting, which to my knowledge is not true, the plot will have to be transparent, without additions or subtractions to Chapter 18 of the Constitution. Members of Parliament are aware of these rules and they should not be flouted.

Briefly, the procedure will be as follows: Parliament will handle amendments of the articles of the Constitution mentioned in Article 259. Parliament will do this with all registered voters, who will signify their approval of the amendment agreed to by Parliament through a referendum. 

This means, the first step will have to be taken by Parliament through passing a bill and effecting the amendment by at least two-thirds of all voting members. The voting will be by secret ballot. The voting at the second and third reading will be separated by 15 days.  

Honourable members, I want to give examples of this provision. If we have to change the sovereignty of the people and the supremacy of the Constitution, we will need to have a referendum. The change of articles 69 and 74 will require endorsement by a referendum.  

Honourable members, Parliament will handle amendments affecting articles of the Constitution mentioned in Article 260 with two-thirds of all members, and two-thirds of district local councils, whose role will be to ratify what has been passed by Parliament, again by two-thirds of all voting members. Voting will be by secret ballot at both the second and third reading. The voting in Parliament for second and third reading will be separated by 15 days. 

That category includes Article 55(2). If we have to, say, introduce regions and federal states, this is the article that will require ratification by two-thirds of the councils as I have stated.

Amendments affecting other provisions of the Constitution not mentioned in Article 259 and 260 will be effected by Parliament alone, passing the Constitutional (Amendment) Bill by two-thirds majority of all voting members. Members will vote by secret ballot at both the second and third reading. With these articles, the voting for the second and third reading could be done on the same day. 

Honourable members, above is the procedure we shall use when the time comes for Parliament to handle the amendment of the Constitution of Uganda.

Finally, it is important to remember at all times that as each of you may express his or her own views to the media, an effort should be made to separate them from the positions of the institution. The two are different, and the people we represent need not be confused by individual expressions of each one of us. I trust that we shall all live up to our oath to support and uphold the Constitution. 

Honourable members, I thought this was the appropriate time to clear this position, so that the country knows how we are going to tackle the issue of amending the Constitution. (Applause).

MR BEN WACHA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this statement and for clarifying on this matter.  

Mr Speaker, when I saw the heading of the article in question, I was highly perturbed. I had a feeling that maybe a group of Members of Parliament were meeting behind our backs and plotting a matter, which is of great concern to this nation.  

When I read the article itself, I noticed two things: One, I noticed that it was a misrepresentation. Two, I noticed that it could be the work of just a few people who were imagining that they could effect the change that was stated in that article. 

I found out that it was a misrepresentation of what took place in the meeting of a committee, of which I am a member, that is, the Legal and Parliamentary Committee. The matter of three years extension came before the committee, not as a substantive matter but as a point of clarification. Somebody was seeking clarification from the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs who was appearing before us.  

It was hon. Sarah Kiyingi who asked, as a matter of clarification, whether the rumour she was hearing was true, that there was a move towards a three years extension of the Presidency. The hon. Minister clearly stated that there was no such thing, because as far as she was concerned, she was going to handle the issue of constitutional amendments within the prescribed period of time.

Now, Mr Speaker, let me state this; we are going through a very delicate period. I think it is incumbent up on us, as Members of Parliament, and also for the press, as our partners in this democratisation process, to try as much as possible to state and write what is actually taking place. Otherwise, we stand the risk of misinforming the public and putting blame where it should not be. 

In this instance, this particular article has put blame on the institution of Parliament as a whole, for a matter, which to me could only be the imagination of one or two Members of Parliament.

Secondly, Sir, I think it could be a good idea if you, as the head of this institution, interfaced once in a while with members of the press to clarify on certain issues, which could be misrepresented in the press. I think it is becoming more and more necessary that the Speaker holds press conferences, interfaces with the press and clarifies on matters, which are affecting the institution of Parliament or Members of Parliament.

Lastly, the issue of the third term is a very, very important matter. I find it unfortunate that the President of the Republic of Uganda says it is a small matter. It is not a small matter. We cannot wish it away. 

Statements have been made to the effect that there is an attempt to give the President an open-ended Presidency. This affects the constitutional path that we charted for ourselves in the Constituent Assembly. It would be my wish that the President should come out and state, one way or the other, whether what we are hearing is true and whether he is interested in another term of office. It cannot be otherwise. The President cannot keep the country guessing. It is important that we should know, and we demand to know. 

Mr Speaker, I wish again to thank you very much for clarifying on this matter. I hope that some suggestions I have made will be taken carefully.  Thank you.

CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a bad voice and I hope you will excuse me.  

Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for reminding us and other Ugandans of the supremacy of the Constitution of this country, and the powers it gives to our people in Article 1. It is very, very important that you have made that detailed explanation. I am sure those near and far will understand.  

As you and hon. Wacha have said, we are in a very important period as the Seventh Parliament discusses the politics of our country. To that extent, it is very necessary and imperative that we exercise all caution as Members of Parliament. I think that we are an important institution, therefore our deliberations, especially in respect of the current political debate, are extremely vital. They will determine the direction of our country. 

It is, therefore, necessary for all of us to note that there are forces, both within this House and also outside this House, whose job it is to put the image of this Parliament in public disrepute. We know some of them. Therefore, Mr Speaker, it was necessary for you, as the head of this vital institution, the Legislature of the country, to make a statement of the content you have made, so that the country and other citizens can really understand. 

We know there are people who are advocating for constitutional amendment rightly or wrongly, but it will be discussed at an appropriate time. But I do not accept this kind of manipulation in order to get the entire membership of Parliament, as if we are imbecile fellows! I cannot be counted among those imbecile people. To get a national Constitution and just throw it in the dustbin, just like that! 

Let it be known to all Ugandans and non Ugandans that some of us who are here - I am sure we shall be here up to 2006 - shall not accept to handle this national document, the supreme law of this country, in the manner that we hear in the corridors. 

Some of us suspect that this is a deliberate move to tarnish the image of this Parliament before other Ugandans and the rest of the international community. People have been rumouring this in the corridors. It is therefore good that you have brought it up openly, Mr Speaker, and we can really take a position. 

It is very necessary that some of us will not accept where a minority - (Interjection)- Someone is asking, who are you? We are there. I am here.   Don’t you see me? I will not, together with some other serious Ugandans who think that this country is more important than just an individual or two individuals. Thank you.

MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice to your communication and I thank you for clearing the air on this very important issue. 

On that fateful day, when this newspaper article came out, I was contacted by several members of the community, partly because of the allegation that this statement was made in the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee. As my colleague has said, indeed hon. Sarah Kiyingi said that she had heard a rumour. But we did not imagine that this rumour would be given life by the press.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to highlight a few issues, which are very fundamental especially as far as the institution of Parliament is concerned. The first important issue is that when you look at Article 79(3), you see that Parliament is enjoined to protect the Constitution. Before each of us took a seat in this House, we swore an oath as Members of Parliament and also an oath of allegiance. In both oaths, we were pledging that we would protect the Constitution. 

By stating in the papers that we were ready to give three years in order to get three years, it was alleging that we were about to fundamentally breach the faith the people put in us and the oaths that we swore before we became Members of Parliament. Mr Speaker, this is very grave and our trust must be mended at all costs. We must come out very clearly to dispute this with all the contempt that it deserves.

The second point I would like to make is about the Parliamentary Press Association. A few weeks ago, I had the privilege of being invited by this association to address them in Mukono when they had a workshop. We had a very good exchange of our experiences. We communicated and talked about the problems that they have within the House and how we could make it better. I left the workshop with the belief that we were going to have a better working partnership. 

I would like to state this; members of the Parliamentary Press Association must strictly adhere to their professional ethics if they are going to be taken seriously within and outside the House. If you overhear two Members of Parliament speaking, it does not serve this Parliament or the press well to go ahead and give life to this kind of rumour. 

Mr Speaker, your office is open for the press to verify whatever they may have heard. The office of the Commissioners is also open, and that of the chairpersons and any other person in this Parliament. I therefore find it very difficult to understand why someone could go out of his or her way to make such a report, and even make it a headline, without verifying with this institution of Parliament and with you in particular as the head of the institution.

Finally, Mr Speaker, I would like also to support the recommendation made. As we see, several entities are interfacing with the press periodically. We see the Government doing it every week. We see other entities also doing it. I think the biggest problem we have is communication. We need to continuously interface with the press so that we can dispel the speculation and the rumours that may be in the corridors. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MS WINNIE BYANYIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I too thank you for clearing the air about this statement that came out in the press. When the statement came out, I was disturbed. I felt that history was about to repeat itself, and I was worried for this country.  

Mr Speaker, even for a serious member of this House to ask about this rumour, and then to get some other members of the House owning up that they actually had this kind of thinking and were moving around trying to mobilize for this kind of action, should cause us to worry.  

It was on 15 April 1966 when this House was turned into a place where a coup was made; a constitution was overturned, and exactly what was being mooted happened here. The Parliament gave the Prime Minister five more years, and he gave the Parliament five more years.  

On that day, when all the Members of Parliament were flown from their constituencies and brought here, just two Members of Parliament walked out in protest, a member from Gulu and a member from Ankole Northeast. The rest, more than 100, stayed here and were part of that plot to give the Prime Minister five years and for him to give them five years.  

The following year, the same Parliament turned itself into a constituent assembly and went ahead to debate and put in place more or less that same Constitution. The result was violence and upheaval.  We all know the consequences of that action. We still live under those consequences. We have never returned to the same economic strength. We never returned to the same strong political position, even moral position, as an African country.

I treat these rumours very seriously, and I really humbly ask colleagues in this House from the Movement side not to misuse their big numbers in this House. I ask them not be deceived that they can get away with immorality and with misusing the trust the people have put in us. In fact, many of the people who participated in that conspiracy were swept by the violence that followed. They died miserable lives in exile; the violence did not spare them.

I also want to add my voice to that of hon. Ben Wacha that the President has thrown this country into unprecedented uncertainty. There is so much political uncertainty. It is threatening the confidence of investors, frustrating our international partners, frustrating many of us who want to see a predictable path towards a new democratic dispensation.  

Mr Speaker, we would like, for example, to have a clear statement from the Government committing itself to publish, publicly, the report of the Constitutional Review Commission. Give us that assurance that that report will be made public, so that we all know what came out from the consultations.  

Mr Speaker, this Parliament is a subset of the Movement System or Movement Organization as the Constitutional Court has declared it. This Parliament, therefore, should not sit alone and determine the rules of the game for another system, because it will be a case – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Byanyima, as I have said, there will be no change of the rules. The rules, which we have in this Constitution, are the rules we are going to use. It is this Parliament that will handle any amendment it will deem fit.  We will not postpone our responsibility. 

I have said you should not waver from the principles. If you think the principle forces you to amend, then amend. If the principle does not allow you to amend, do not amend. But do not expect any other body to amend the Constitution rather than this one. (Applause)

MS BYANYIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I agree with you. The point I was coming to is that if we are going to define a new political order, we who sit here and define that new political order are part of the Movement, by virtue of being in this institution. If we do not seek to reach a consensus with those outside the Movement on those rules, we are unlikely to create a level playing field for them. It is not in the interest of the Movement to create a ground that suits those who are not there to give their views. 

Mr Speaker, I feel strongly that it is important that the Government, as soon as possible, enters a negotiation with political parties and with those who are not in the system, but who will be competing with this system in a future political order. Such a negotiation will ensure that whatever comes before this House has the input of the competitors of the Movement. I advise the Government to take this seriously and define the rules together with those it intends to compete with.

Mr Speaker, I conclude by adding my voice to all the others, that Parliament should never be a party to a conspiracy of this kind. We should never abuse the trust the people put in us. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR PATRICK MWONDHA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to sincerely thank you for the emphatic statement that you have communicated from the Chair. It gives direction as to what we should expect and what should be done.  

At the beginning of this Parliament, I did say that the Seventh Parliament of Uganda is very crucial to the national life of this country. This Parliament is now clearly a watershed from one set-up to another set-up, and people in the country are holding their breath.  Every little thing they hear from this Parliament makes them nervous, especially when nobody is giving leadership to the country on important matters of state.  Therefore, we members of this House must take our role very seriously. 

It will even be expensive to think aloud; we must take our role very seriously. It is not loose talk. We cannot manage state affairs by loose talk. The population has heard about our history, part of it has been mentioned by hon. Byanyima. But if she had gone a bit further, she would have also told us how many extensions were made by the NRC. At one moment, Toyota Stouts were parked outside Parliament and the NRC was busy extending their term. So, the population has precedents and you do not want to injure their feelings at this moment.  

As the Speaker has rightly said, when the report of the Constitutional Review Commission eventually comes, we shall be the people to decide. If we start panicking now, then we are throwing the whole country into panic. I hope our partners, members of the press, will also take these messages very seriously. (Interruption)  

MR WILFRED KAJEKE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the honourable member for giving way. When I read the article in question, a name of a Member of Parliament was prominent, hon. James Kakooza. He was actually named as the coordinator of that project. Can he say something? (Laughter)  

MR MWONDHA: Thank you for the information, and since hon. James Kakooza is here, I am sure he will represent himself and his constituency effectively on this matter. 

I was requesting our partners, members of the press, to also take the moment we are living in a bit more seriously. The nation is living through a moment of great uncertainty. We do not want to add on to that burden by reckless reporting. Thank you.

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  On behalf of the people I represent in Lubaga South, let me begin by conveying my satisfaction for the wonderful remarks you have made as our leader here. They are responsible remarks, remarks that Members of Parliament must seriously heed.  

Uganda has gone through very difficult moments in the past. Many of these difficulties we have gone through as a nation have been associated to the Constitution. Constitutional abuse is the cornerstone of Uganda’s problems So, when we hear statements as those reported in the Monitor newspaper, we get very worried.  

I would like to strongly disassociate myself from those irresponsible remarks that were quoted, and I condemn them in the strongest terms possible. You should come up in the forefront, honourable members. Do not simply keep quiet in circumstances of that kind. Come forward and strongly nullify those remarks.  

Mr Speaker, having gone the distance as many nations you praise today, we would not like to see that kind of experience. We have suffered enough. Our people have died enough. Whatever development we make should be to improve our democratic governance. (Interruption) 

CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA: Thank you Mr Speaker, and I thank hon. Lukyamuzi for giving way. I would request hon. Lukyamuzi to stand by his own words, and he should not run away in case of any problems (Laughter) 

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank Capt. Byaruhanga for having sparked me up to say something about the experience, which took place in Natete. (Laughter) As a matter of fact, in regard to the subject of importance we are all discussing today, I had to say something about the “yam experience”. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, as we struggle to take heed of the contents of the Constitution, there are several challenges we should look at. The first challenge is directed to us, Members of Parliament. Mr Speaker, you have ably articulated the grounds we are going to use in amending the Constitution, which greatly impact on ordinary Members of Parliament.  

The other challenge you have not mentioned, which you should have mentioned, and I am sure you have got it in mind, is the challenge that must be thrown on to the frontbench and the entire Executive. They are supposed to constitutionally behave in the same way we are supposed to. They should not see themselves as omnipotent people who have nothing to do with the sociological constitutional behaviours. (Laughter) 

Mr Speaker, with regard to what you have articulated, I am seeking clarification from the frontbench as to whether any Member of Parliament in Uganda today cannot invite fellow Members of Parliament on certain occasions to articulate various issues like federalism. We are not all experts; there are people who are more privileged in various disciplines. 

The “yam experience” in Natete was as follows: I was summoned by the DPC, Katwe Police Station, and a special branch head at Natete, in the presence of the OC of Natete, an hour before the public meeting was to take place. They said I had put up announcements inviting Members of Parliament from the northern part of Uganda to talk about the war in the North, and they said that this would incite violence.  

They ordered me to put off the rally, unless I was going to talk about road construction, HIV/AIDS, UPE and the environment. They said, “If you are not going to talk about those, you better put off the rally”. I refused to give them the response that I was going to put it off. I did this because I respected the rights of hon. Reagan Okumu and hon. Jacob Oulanyah whom I had invited to come and articulate the problem related to the North. (Interruption)

MR KADDUNABBI: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure. You have just made a statement, and I thought that members who are standing up are all contributing to your communication. Hon. Lukyamuzi is making a personal statement, which should have come separately on the Order Paper. I beg your indulgence, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Well, the debate should arise from what I have communicated. So, it is irrelevant to the Communication from the Chair. Do you have any other issue?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, thank you for your wise ruling. I was comparatively replying to what hon. Byaruhanga had put before me.  

In conclusion of my remarks on what you have stated, as we pursue the crusade to amend our Constitution, we should be sincere to one another.  There is no reason, for example, why the Member of Parliament from Lubaga South cannot occasionally invite a Member of Parliament from Mbarara, Masindi or Gulu to articulate various issues as they may circumstantially come up. And in doing so, we are assisting our respective peoples to understand the constitutional aspects of our society. 

Mr Speaker, the challenge is, it was wrong for anybody to have stopped me from inviting those people to my area. When I saw the soldiers confronting me, I thought the programme had come -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: What happened to the people you had invited from the North? (Laughter) 

MR LUKYAMUZI: Since they did not know the secrecy from the police, they had no cause to run away.

DR NABWISO: I am asking the honourable member to clarify whether he will also give us techniques of diving into yam gardens. (Laughter)

MS WINNIE BYANYIMA: Mr Speaker, as hon. Lukyamuzi is narrating that unfortunate incident that I found had just taken place, I would like to bring something to your attention and to the honourable members attention. 

Last weekend while I was visiting my own constituency, I organised a rally. But before the rally was to take place, the office of the DISO made inquiries and wanted to know whether I had sought permission to hold the rally. I wondered whether there was a new law for Winnie Byanyima alone, or a law was made in my absence that required us to get official permission before we hold rallies in our constituencies!  

I am raising this because it is related to the kind of treatment that hon. Lukyamuzi got in his constituency. Thank you.

MR LUKYAMUZI: That is wonderful information, hon. Byanyima. As I end, Mr Speaker, I would like to warn the Executive that there are three scenarios of controversy now in front of us. There is a scenario related to multiparty, the scenario on federalism and the scenario on third term. 

We will be interacting with one another as brothers. And I beg the Executive not to interfere whenever we invite various Members of Parliament to interact and improve the state of affairs in regard to constitutionalism in our beautiful country.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I got encouraged when I read your communication from the Chair. My colleague also reliably informs me that the Chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and hon. Ben Wacha have already addressed the House on the issues that transpired in the committee when I met them. 

My role, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, is to assure the House that I have not heard, or actually even seen, people trying to discuss an extension of the life of the Presidency. But I want to draw the attention of members to the fact that some of us, Members of Parliament, had gone out to appeal to the public that it is easy to change the term of the President, just like that.  

I want to draw the members’ attention to Article 105 (1), which is undoubtedly entrenched in 259. I think the Members of Parliament should be concerned about the implementation process of the Constitution, from what you have heard from our people.  

One of the issues that I have heard from my constituency, which prompted me to look at this Constitution, was the constant recommendation that Members of Parliament and the President should be elected on the same day. That is common; I think you have also heard it. That prompted me to imagine how we could do it. 

Our terms are not equal; they are five years, okay, but we did not start at the same time. So, what do you do? Do you bring the term of Parliament backwards to meet with the term of the President, or you push the term of the President to Parliament’s? I am just explaining. So, it is a simple question, whichever way you want it. 

Suppose you view the President as an individual? Then it is easier to move the President’s term to Parliament, so that we have it on the same day. There is no way you can do that, even if you are extending for one day. You have to hold on for the referendum to change the position of five years to the date when the President was appointed.

These are some of the things whose implementation I would encourage members to look into. When we finally come here to amend the Constitution, I agree with the Speaker that there is no other methodology other than the methodology that is here.

Another issue, which I invite Members of Parliament to look into and probably try to assist Government about, is; how will we consult the districts mentioned in those Articles? The Constitution is very clear that even after Parliament has decided, we have to consult the districts. Yesterday, I was looking at this Constitution and the way it was written, we have to take a decision. Do we consult the districts first and we come back to the House, or we consult the House and then go to the districts? These are things that we have to look at.  

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I want to assure you that when I heard of this debate, I had to consult the Chairperson of the Constitutional Review Commission. He did assure me that by the 31st of August, he should be able to give me a draft report. They, however, had a problem. People gave their memoranda in their local dialects, so it was given to the Department of Linguistics at Makerere University. But the capacity of that department to translate all the memoranda is the problem. However, they are trying their best and I am living by their word.

Once I receive the report, the Government must debate this report and turn it into a bill. This is because the Constitution says that the Constitution will be amended using a bill. So, a bill will come here and be read the First Time. After the First Reading, it will be sent to the committee. I will go to my committee. The committee will debate the bill, and we will then come here for the Second and Third Reading.  

When I talked to the Speaker, he drew my attention to the fact that there is no way you could send a bill for assent unless all the issues have been addressed. The Constitution is specific about a referendum. We must hold the referendum before we close the bill. So, the results must be with us before we take a decision. The Constitution talks about Parliament and the district councils, therefore, we must have the results of Parliament and the district councils before we take a final decision for the bill to be ready for assent.

Those are assurances, Mr Speaker. I want to assure you that as Minister for Constitutional Affairs, I am waiting for the report. Once I get the report, I will present the bill. The bill will be discussed as normal, and it is only after that that we can move. (Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for giving me the opportunity to seek one more clarification from you. This is in regard to the report of the Constitutional Review Commission. Will Members or Parliament receive the original copy of this report, which will be submitted to you, Madam Minister?

MRS MUKWAYA: Mr Speaker, according to the Constitution, what I am supposed to submit to Parliament is a bill. The Constitution is very clear; it is the bill. I am part of the Government, but my requirement is to submit a bill to Parliament. But if in the wisdom of the Government copies of this report are made, so be it. As for me, I am required to present a bill.

Finally, Mr Speaker, I want to assure members that should you decide to extend – but according to the Speaker I cannot repeat that. There is no extension from Government. Anybody who dreams of extending that time has to hold a referendum as I have explained. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: On this issue of a report from the Constitutional Review Commission, I do not see any problem with it because I imagine it will be a public document. Parliament has been voting money for this commission. So, it will just say, “Well, we funded something, where are the results?”

We will have to use the report when we are studying the bill. So, this is not something that should worry you. It will be a public document. You will be entitled to it. As people who voted money for this commission, you can ask for the results of the inquiry.

THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to speak on this subject and particularly for having issued this clarification, which we are debating.

Let me start with the point raised by hon. Winnie Byanyima, the importance of us negotiating even beyond Parliament. Those of us who support the Movement Political System do engage with those who do not support the Movement Political System, for the common good of this country. I will ask my brother, hon. Odur, to excuse me; we just had a private discussion last week and Mr Odur said, in part, “as we transform to the –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I have been saddened by the mention of the Movement Political System by the Minister without Portfolio, who is also the National Political Commissar. In a scenario where the Constitutional Court has already nullified the Movement System and said that it is a political party, is it in order for us to continue listening to him? He is preaching things, which have been nullified by a constitutional court! (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I really do not know. I cannot interpret what the Constitutional Court said. However, as far as we are concerned, are we not running under the Movement Political System as per the Constitution, Article 69? People had a referendum and voted for a political system. If you have to change it, you have to hold a referendum. Has it been changed? 

I do not know how you read the judgment, but I think the judgment was differentiating between the Movement under the Act and the Movement under the Constitution. They never dealt with the Movement in the Constitution. They dealt with the Movement as in the Act, and they said so. It is different.

DR KIYONGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that clear ruling. I think it will help us here as a serious institution, when we are discussing matters that are serious like this, not to sidetrack. We will just go to the points and address them effectively. 

I was saying that last week hon. Odur, in a private conversation with me, expressed his concern. He said that as we transform to pluralism, isn’t there a risk that some parts of the country could be further marginalized by whoever would emerge after the competition? I agreed with him. I said, “Hon. Odur, you are right.” Therefore, it is our duty in the Seventh Parliament to ensure that as we look at the Constitution again, and as we transit, we should reduce the risks. 

Hon. Byanyima and hon. Members of Parliament, I want to assure you again - because I made this statement before - that the Executive has decided that we must engage with the people of the opposition. And as I did mention to Parliament, we are already doing some quiet consultations so that these negotiations can become overt and active. We are doing this, not as a favour to anyone, but to ensure that the common good for this country is at all times kept in full view. So, I want to repeat that these negotiations are going to go on.  

My second point relates to the historical role of the Seventh Parliament. I could not agree more with hon. James Mwandha, Patrick Mwondha and other members who said that we have a historical role. It is during our tenure that we are going to move from the Movement Political System to pluralism, and that movement has advantages and risks built in it. So, if we make a mistake, history will judge us harshly. 

I think it is not fair on our part to say that the NRC was selfish. It is true they did extend their term for some time. However, it also went on record that the NRC debated here, and as an institution excluded themselves from discussing the new Constitution. If they were selfish, they could have insisted and said, “no, it is us who are going to deal with this Constitution”. They excluded themselves and a different body handled the Constitution.

Mr Speaker, about the guidance you have given, if all of us were always looking at our Constitution, we would even call it obvious. As hon. Mukwaya has also clarified, there are many interests in the country and many intentions by different groups and different people, but the zero point is the law. The point is, what the law is saying, what the Constitution is saying.

My honourable friend, Ben Wacha, I do not agree with you when you say that it is very critical that the person of President Museveni says, now and here, whether or not he is interested in extending his presidency. Suppose he said he is interested, does that change the rules? Suppose he said he was not interested, does that change the rules? I think the critical thing is, there is a debate, there is a constitution, and we are a Parliament. We have authority vested in us –(Interruption)  

MR WACHA: I thank the National Political Commissar for giving way. The point some of us are trying to make is that the debate, which is now going on in respect of third term, fifth term or whatever term, is an unnecessary debate. Constitutionally, the provision is there that any President should always stay in power for two terms

MS BYANYIMA: I am seeking clarification. Mr Speaker, some time back when I was officially absent from the House, I read in the newspapers that our Vice President and colleague had resigned. Shortly after that, I learnt that my sister and colleague, hon. Matembe; another senior minister, hon. Namusoke Kiyingi; and the Prime Minister, hon. Eriya Kategaya, had been asked to vacate their offices. 

This made me speculate, like other people, that my sister, hon. Kazibwe, did not jump but was pushed. Also, that the three other ministers were also pushed because they had been speaking against the third term. This caused me to wonder what the Chief Executive’s view is on the third term, and I could not help but conclude that he is pro-third term, since those who are anti-third term were pushed. 

These actions have left many people, and I believe that the honourable sister -(Dr Kazibwe thereupon entered the chamber)- (Laughter)- because I have known my sister from Kigulu for many years –(Interruption)

MRS MWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member to speculate in this august House? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: No, I do not think she is speculating. That is her conclusion after assessment of the situation.

MS BYANYIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. As I was saying, as someone who has known my sister for very many years, since we attended a distinguished secondary school called Mount St. Mary’s Namagunga together, I got the feeling that perhaps the Chief Executive had read that she is so upright and is not likely to support certain things that were being proposed. (Laughter).

THE SPEAKER: The problem is, I do not know whether this clarification is being sought from the Minister who was holding the Floor or some other person who was not in the House. However, it is high time we concluded this. I allowed you to debate because I thought it was a very important and urgent matter. But let us wind up this debate.

DR KIYONGA: Mr Speaker, I think hon. Wacha has helped me, and more or less answered himself, that really the matter is that of the law. What does the law say? We must act in accordance with the law.  

Finally, Mr Speaker, the recommendation that Parliament, guided by you as our leader, should also get into the practice of often giving some clarifications on certain matters in the press, will assist to forestall some of the speculations that we see in the papers. 

The story in the Monitor - I am surprised that members are not equally concerned - said we had passed a resolution to the effect that we should call for mercenaries. Since we are failing to fight Kony, it said, could we hire mercenaries? I had to meet many people in my office who came to ask what was wrong with Parliament and how could Parliament, at this hour, be asking for mercenaries. 

As you know, we had not passed a resolution to that effect. But what is true is that some members did suggest that, and because the people trust us and think we are serious, they did not think that anyone of us could stand up and say we should hire mercenaries. 

We need to extend this principle, and that is what the Speaker is saying. For us to maintain the integrity of this House, the way we conduct ourselves as Members of Parliament both in the House and outside, is important. We need to keep the integrity of the House in mind. 

We should not speak lightly. Because we are Members of Parliament, we should speak seriously and be ready to defend whatever we say either here or outside the House. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MRS SANTA OKOT (Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on an issue, which is very urgent, and I seek clarification from the Minister of Education and possibly the Minister of Security. This is the issue of a school called Matembe Institute of Technology, which is in Luwero District. (Interjection)- (Mr Sitenda Sebalu rose_) Mr Speaker, allow me to give the information to the House and I will get the clarification from the Ministry. 

The people I represent, of Pader District, have requested me to get this clarification because one gentleman, whose name is Kakooza Mutale, went to Acholi sub-region and collected a number of children from the disturbed areas. He took them to this school, which is called Matembe Institute of Technology, but which we do not know. I was told the school is about 45 miles from the main road. 

When he took these children from Acholi sub-region, he took them with the information that he is going to give them free education. He also said they would be given scholarships to study there, from senior 1 - not even senior 1, they call it year 1 - up to year 6. I do not know why it is termed “year 1 to year 6”. 

When the children reached the school, they were actually not taken there to get education, as they were told earlier. Before you join from the district, you have to pay Shs 40,000, which I believe many parents might have sold property to get. 

These children were taken to this school. When they reached there, they were taken to farms everyday to grow crops from 5.00 a.m. till late. They wake up early and are taken to these gardens, only to be brought back at around 10.00 p.m. They are then given small pieces of potatoes and some kind of porridge, which is not made out of pure maize flour. So, when some of these children realized that they were in trouble, they fled.

After the digging in the garden, they are taken for drills. They were telling us words, which we could not understand in English, like “Kipindi kya maduni”. That is the language they were using, and we did not know whether it was English or Kiswahili but it was a drill, more or less military training -(Interruption)

MR SITENDA SEBALU: Thank you, honourable member, for giving me a chance. Mr Speaker, I had a chance to visit Matembe School. Matembe stands for Civic Education Development Organization, which is legally registered in Uganda as an NGO. When the time of co-operatives came, I had a chance to visit Matembe, and I was also privileged then to find the Minister for the Presidency, hon. Kirunda Kivejinja. 

The Matembe School is on three square miles, and it has 150 computers donated by DEHEZI International. There is a mixed farm of Moringa trees, upland rice, Matooke and the like. Today, when I read in the newspaper that there was a problem with 11 children, I got concerned and called hon. Odonga Otto in my office and we did –(Interruption)

MR KIBAALE WAMBI: Mr Speaker, is it in order for us to encourage child labour, by discussing a Matembe School, which according to hon. Sebalu is a school for child labour? Is it in order?

THE SPEAKER: I am not in position to give a ruling on that. This involves facts, which I have to ascertain before I say, “there is child labour at the school”. But what I think the hon. Member for Pader wants to know are details about this. I do not know whether the Minister of Education is in position to answer, so that you get to know. If she is not, then we should get a date when she will give us a comprehensive report.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Mr Speaker, the Member of Parliament who was holding the Floor, and who brought up this topic, had not yet concluded. We need to get the gist of the matter on the Floor. She had not been given a chance to -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Sebuliba, the member was trying to find out the details about Matembe School and what is happening. This is the kind of information that may come out. In fact, when we get a report, this is what we are going to deal with. Do you not think that the Minister will be in a position to tell us whether she knows the existence of this school? So, I rule that the Minister should tell us the official position.

MS SANTA OKOT: Mr Speaker, I request that I finish the explanation and then the Minister comes in. I do not know whether I am wrong.

THE SPEAKER: No.

MRS SANTA OKOT: The information I wanted to give - and that is why I am also asking the Minister of Security to take note - is that some children are still in this school. The issue came out that 11 children ran away from that school and then they came to Kampala Bus Park. When they reached the bus park, one honourable member was called by a businessman and these children were forwarded to Central Police Station for custody. Then we were later on summoned to go and talk to the children, by the DPC. 

When we reached there, the children told us the stories. They told us that about 160 children are still remaining in the school and that some of them do escape at night to try to find their way back home. This is why I am raising the issue of security, because as they escape, anything can happen to these children on the way.

Mr Speaker, I remember one time when the President was still in Gulu, he invited the Acholi Members of Parliament. He proposed that he wanted to put up a school around Luwero to take care of these students who are abducted and then return. But before that took off, a message came from the chairman of Luwero District, Mr Nadduli. He stated clearly that the people of Luwero should get to understand that the President is going to bring children from LRA to grow up in Luwero. 

When we got this information, we wrote back to the President that if this school was to help these children, it could be built by the Belgians in Acholi land. So, we were amazed and frightened when the children were picked by Kakooza Mutale and not from other districts. He goes to pick children who are really desperate, now they are flying from the frying pan to the fire. (Interruption)

MR SITENDA SEBALU: Mr Speaker, is the MP holding the Floor in order to insinuate and deceive this House that the children at Matembe are only from the North? The children are from Kireka, Bweyogerere, from my constituency, from Teso. Is she in order to deceive this House?

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable members, if you ask the Chair to rule on a set of facts for which he has no information, what ruling can I really make? Because you are saying this, he is saying the other; are you saying I should rule in your favour? I cannot rule on a set of facts whose details I really do not know. 

MRS SANTA OKOT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  This is not a joking matter; it is a matter that involves the children of this country. 

The children told us that the number of children from Acholi sub region who have remained there is about 160. I request the Minister of Education to explain to us if they have ever had or registered such a school. Is it a primary school? Is it a senior secondary school? What is the modality? So that we understand, because we have –(Interruption)

MS BYANYIMA WINNIE: And also, why have they given it the name of our Woman MP? We want to know.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have raised a very, very serious matter. Don’t you think what we should do is to ask the Minister of Education to study this issue and give us a report within two or three days? Don’t you think this will be more useful, other than provoking a debate from people who do not know what happened? I think we should do that, so that the Minister undertakes to report. Can we hear from the Minister?

THE MINISTER OF STATE, PRIMARY EDUCATION (Mrs Namirembe Bitamazire): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When the honourable member rose up with this matter, she called upon the Ministries of Education and Defence to give some clarification. 

I would like, on behalf of the Ministry of Education, to inform the member and the House that if it has the label “school”, we have laws in this country governing schools. And indeed, we are going to investigate if what is being described in this House is a school or not. As you wisely ruled, we shall find out exactly what is pertaining to that alleged institution and a statement will be made in this House.

Mr Speaker, the honourable member, in addition, mentioned a proposed institution for children from the disturbed areas. I would like to inform the member and the House that the Office of the Prime Minister has not yet concluded, but it is in the process of planning for that institution. As soon as the plans have been finalised and all the resources have been raised, we shall definitely make a statement in the House. 

So, Mr Speaker, within the timeframe provided to the ministry, we shall come out with an investigated report on the issue raised by the Member of Parliament. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: How soon? Can you indicate? How much time do you need?

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Let us make it 10 days, so that we can get the necessary details. I thank you.

THE MINISTER FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Bakoko Bakoru): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank hon. Santa Okot for raising that critical issue. I believe the hon. Members of Parliament are aware that my ministry is responsible for children’s homes. We are going to find out if this is a children’s home or a school. 

We are also right now in the process of making an inventory of all the children’s homes in the country. As members are aware, the toll of HIV/AIDS and conflict in this country has left us with about 2.5 million orphaned children. So, we do have policy guidelines and standards on how these homes should be run. We will work together with the Ministry of Education to give you supplementary information to that effect. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MRS MIRIA MATEMBE: Mr Speaker, put the name aside, we have listened to this thing and to me it is not a simple matter. This issue involves children, who are taken somewhere, and we are told now some have ended up in Police. We do not know how many are escaping everyday; we do not know how many have died in the process of escaping. 

I had thought that some institution of government here would stand up and say, “Yes, we are aware there is that kind of thing”. If it is true that some children are at the Police and they have talked, it means there is something somewhere, where the children of this nation are suffering. 

I was waiting for a government official, at least while we wait for investigations into the logistics and that kind of thing, to say that “well, this thing is there and in the meantime, this will be done”. Within these 10 days, what is going to happen to the children there? 

Can we just say well, the Minister of Education, who seems not to be aware of it at all, and also the Minister in charge of Youth, who does not know anything at all, are just going to start investigations (Interruption)- I do not want, I first want to finish my clarification. (Laughter). 

Are we just going to walk away leaving the matter as vague as it is, with no answer from any institution of government as to the existence of that thing? Are we just going home to wait for ten days for the honourable minister to find out something? We must be promised something in the meantime. Otherwise, we are not serious.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Matembe, the matter has been reported and therefore, it has to be investigated.  Do not think somebody will just jump here and give you something of which he does not know. It is necessary that this matter be investigated not only by the ministers mentioned, but also the ministers in charge of security. That is the report we are going to get. Otherwise, what information do you have other than the information you have got from hon. Santa and hon. Sitenda Sebalu? I think it is better to act on facts. 

Therefore, let this matter be investigated, we get the facts, and then we can act. Otherwise, how are we going to act now? As Parliament, are we going to say, “today we are going to investigate, let us set up a committee which is going to investigate”? The Minister has said within ten days she will report. There is a minister in charge of children. The Minister in charge of Security has also heard, we need not tell her to go and do this. I think she will go and bring us a report.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will give a short ministerial statement on the presence of a South African, named Sello Litheko Patrick, in Uganda. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, you will have read from the press reports -(Interruption)- The statement is being distributed.  

Mr Speaker, honourable members, you will have read from the press reports, stories indicating that a 30 year old male South African, known as Sello Litheko Patrick, sneaked into Uganda on board an aircraft that carried the pressmen and women who were here to cover the visit of President Bush. Some of the statements that appeared in the local press are not correct. I wish to take this opportunity to put the record straight.  

It is true that Sello Litheko Patrick came to Uganda on 11 July 2003 aboard a US plane that carried the international press that covered President Bush’s visit. 

In the course of their normal duties, the joint security operatives of Uganda and the United States noticed that Sello Litheko Patrick was not part of the official press delegation. He was, therefore, arrested and interrogated by the combined security team. He made statements that have been studied by the Police and other security agencies.  

Mr Speaker, given the fact that Sello Litheko Patrick is an undesirable South African national, it has been decided to deport him from Uganda back to South Africa, for the South African Government to handle his case and do further investigations. The US and the South African governments have been consulted and are in agreement with this position.  

The South African Government is investigating the matter and will inform both the Ugandan and US Governments of the results of the investigations and what actions the South African Government will take when they have completed the investigations into this matter. Both the Uganda and the US governments are giving full co-operation to the investigations that are going on. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR WAMBI KIBAALE: Mr Speaker, I want to thank the Minister of Internal Affairs for this statement. This issue was causing a lot of anxiety to many of us in this country. We did not know how this undesirable South African sneaked into Uganda, beating all the elaborate US security circles.  

The clarification I would like to seek is that on last paragraph of page 1, the Minister says that “Given the fact that Sello Litheko Patrick is an undesirable South African national, it has been decided…” When I read that, from my understanding of English, as a teacher, it means that Sello Litheko is undesirable in South Africa as well as in Uganda. It seems as if he was a fugitive running away from South Africa. May I know if that is what the Minister meant? Thank you.

MR ABDU KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Reading today’s New Vision, the headline says that, “The South African Ambassador has been denied access to this South African citizen.” Can the Minister clarify on this?

DR FRANCIS EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was actually rising up on the same matter. I wanted to ask whether such a hindrance to access by the South African Ambassador to verify the nationality of Sello Litheko Patrick might not cause some kind of diplomatic questions. 

The other one, which we are also wondering about, is, who is going to handle the costs? Thank you.

MR DOMBO LUMALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I thank the Ugandan security for having worked so hard to unearth such a person, who had broken all the rules of etiquette and come all the way from South Africa to be arrested in Uganda. But, Mr Speaker, I want to get clarification from the hon. Minister. 

Under normal procedure, don’t the security people at Entebbe check to accredit the people before they enter? How did he cross Entebbe without going through Immigration? That is one of things I would want the Minister to let us know, because this person was arrested at Botanical Beach. How did he go through Entebbe? That would show the lapse we have in our immigration system.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, recently, the President of Uganda, while he was in America, signed a non-repatriation treaty with the American Government. Would this have motivated the transfer of this person back to South Africa, so that it could expedite and simplify the handling of the criminal, instead of handling him with our judicial system here? I thank you very much.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, as a human rights activist I know that before one has been pronounced guilty, nobody can assume they are guilty. Before the Uganda Government returns this fellow to South Africa, I would like to know whether there is an extradition protocol, which would form the basis of that return legally.

MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking clarification from the Minister on the procedures being used on the other side of the airport at Entebbe, even for their Excellencies the Presidents and other diplomats when they arrive. 

I would expect that when diplomats and the Presidents arrive at the airport, they go through a formal procedure through the diplomatic lounge. Even then, they will take stock of who is entering Uganda before he is allowed to go to the other side of the airport. Was this procedure followed and tallied? Because if this is not being followed, we are getting frightened that whenever Excellencies arrive, very many people sneak in with them unnoticed.

MS WINNIE BYANYIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Some time back I spent a few years in the Ugandan diplomatic service. I recall that whenever there were undesirable Ugandans in the country where I was, France, we would get information at the Ugandan mission about them. If we sought to see them, we would be availed the opportunity to see them. 

It is part of the duty of a foreign envoy or an Ambassador to ensure that the right of his citizens are respected in the country where he represents his country. So, it is normal for an Ambassador to make inquiries and even want to see somebody who is in detention and to ensure that their rights are respected. 

I feel that the denial of access of the South African High Commissioner to this undesirable person in Uganda was some kind of diplomatic breach. It is not normal to deny an Ambassador to meet their citizen. I really would advise the government that these strong-arm methods of work do not put us in good light with our neighbours and in the international community. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is very well known that the principle of reciprocity is very important in diplomacy. What you do to Tom, Tom will also do it to you. Denial of consular services –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But honourable members, an honourable member asked the question whether it is true the High Commissioner was denied access. Why don’t we get the answer and then other questions will follow? Because, what you are talking about is a newspaper report. Now you have asked the Minister, I would imagine that you should wait for the answer. If he says he was denied access, then you proceed with the other questions.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Speaker, I take your wise counsel. But the reports quoted officials of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and that establishes a precedent. Maybe, would the Minister care to assure this House that the circumstances have been fully explained to the South African Mission, and that there are likely to be no retaliatory measures? 

Some of us may want to fly to South Africa, and in case of any event, we could also be denied the consular services from our mission. I think that is a very serious matter, which we should not simply brush off and say, “No, it is okay”. It has serious diplomatic implications.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, let the Minister answer. Following the answer, you will develop those questions. Can the Minister answer?

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On the point raised by hon. Wambi, actually this short statement on Page 1 refers to the fact that Sello Litheko Patrick is undesirable in Uganda. That is why the Uganda Government has taken the decision to deport him to his country.  

There was a point raised by hon. Katuntu and a number of other colleagues about the South African Mission. It is true that the South African Mission did approach Government and the Government has duly granted consular contacts between the mission and Sello Litheko Patrick. So, ignore the press reports. A meeting between Litheko Patrick and the South African Mission has taken place today.

On the question of costs, which was raised by hon. Epetait, the American Government will provide the necessary transportation for this person that the Uganda Government has deported.

I fully agree with the comments made by hon. Dombo, that actually Ugandan security forces, supported by their colleagues from the United States, did very, very commendable work; as usual, anyway. I am sure they will continue doing very good work in future.

There was a question raised as to how this fellow was able to enter the country. We are actually working with the Government of the United States, and also the South African Government, and their respective security agencies to investigate the details. Investigations are still going on, it would be premature for me to give a definite answer to some of these points concerning this man.

Hon. Lukyamuzi raised a point about the extradition protocol. This is a case between South Africa and Uganda. It is the legitimate right of Uganda, if it considers it appropriate, to deport a foreign national.  

Hon. Wambuzi also raised concerns about procedures of entering Uganda, and whether these big people are actually crosschecked and their passports examined and stamped. Yes, they actually go through the normal immigration requirements. In fact, you may find that this could have helped in nipping the bud in this rather disturbing incident of Patrick sneaking into our country.

Hon. Byanyima says foreign envoys should have access to their nationals, and she quoted the case of UK and other countries. This is normal. Uganda, as a civilized country, respects diplomatic etiquette. And as I have already indicated to you, consular contact has already been arranged for the South African Mission to meet this gentleman.  

Hon. Wagonda Muguli said that there could be drastic actions taken by the South African Government against Ugandans. The relations between Uganda and South Africa are excellent. In fact, the manner in which South Africa and Uganda have co-operated over this case will instead enhance the co-operation between the two countries. I think, from the way this matter has been handled by both governments, we may subsequently benefit in the treatment of each other’s nationals. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of State for Security has requested me to allow her give a statement. I believe copies have been given to you. Can you make it now?  

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF STATE, SECURITY (Mrs Betty Akech): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing me to make this statement to Parliament. This statement is on the visit of His Excellency President Mwai Kibaki of Kenya, to Uganda. The Minister in Charge of the Presidency should have read it, but he is at the airport at the moment with another visitor, that is the Vice President of South Africa. 

Mr Speaker, honourable Members of Parliament, I would like to take this opportunity to inform Parliament that His Excellency President Mwai Kibaki of Kenya will be in Uganda on a three-day state visit, starting from 16th to 18th July 2003.  This visit has been at the invitation of His Excellency, President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni of Uganda. 

The President of Kenya will arrive in the country on 16 July 2003 at 3.00 p.m. After the usual official ceremonies at the airport, he will be driven to Speke Resort, Munyonyo where he will reside for the period of his stay in Uganda. There will be a state banquet in his honour that same day, in the evening.

On Thursday, 17 July 2003, at 10.00a.m. he will come to State House Kampala and hold bilateral talks with His Excellency, President Yoweri Museveni. The talks will be centred on matters of bilateral co-operation. In the afternoon, President Mwai Kibaki will open the agricultural show in Jinja. Later in the evening, he will meet Kenyan nationals at Speke Resort, Munyonyo.

On Friday, 18 July 2003, he will have lunch with members of the Uganda Manufacturers Association. In the afternoon, he will conclude bilateral talks with our President, Yoweri Museveni, at State House.  Thereafter, he will depart at 3.45 p.m. on the same day. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR KATURAMU HOOD: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the Minister of State in charge of Security for this information she has delivered to Parliament. The intended visit of President Mwai Kibaki is a clear manifestation of Uganda’s efforts in promoting regional co-operation, and indeed Members of Parliament will support and applaud this visit.  

Mr Speaker, I vividly recall that when President Daniel Arap Moi was in his last stages of handing over power peacefully, he did come to Uganda and addressed Parliament. President Daniel Arap Moi said farewell to us, as Members of Parliament. I would think that in this programme, President Mwai Kibaki, who succeeded him, should also have addressed Parliament and we welcome the new President of Kenya. 

I seek clarification from the Minister whether this is not possible due to time constraints, or it can be corrected and you adjust the programme. As Members of Parliament, we are eager to have a word from President Mwai Kibaki. Thank you.

MR ODIT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to also thank the Minister for this statement. I will leave other parts for the rest of my colleagues and focus my attention on the second page.  

As chairman of the Committee on Agriculture, I had already made some consultations with my minister to see whether we could be able to visit this agriculture show. Now we are going to have a very important guest to this country, as we have already been officially informed. I would like to get clarification from Government whether an appropriate arrangement will be made for Members of Parliament to go and attend this very important occasion in Jinja.  

There are a number of reasons why I am making this request. Mr Speaker, peasants, most of who are farmers, voted the majority of our members here and they would want to know what these people exhibit. I also know that a number of them are farmers themselves; if they are not going to exhibit something, they would want to learn from there. 

Therefore, this arrangement should go beyond my sector minister. It should now be the responsibility of Government. Government should handle this, so that a bigger representation from Parliament can go and participate in this function.  I thank you.

MR ANANG-ODUR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister who kindly presented this information to this House this afternoon. 

I would like to observe that this is the first time we have got this kind of information in this House.  I want to know why it has been necessary to give this information to the House this time. I would also want to know whether it is going to be the practice that whenever a visitor is coming, the House will always be informed.

MS WINNIE BYANYIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I too thank the Minister for this valuable information about an important visit by our neighbouring head of state. 

Speaking on behalf of my constituency, we would like President Kibaki to have as much time as possible to talk with President Museveni. We would like President Kibaki to persuade him that the way ahead is that which Kenya and Tanzania took - to respect the term limit, take the Army out of the management of elections and hold free and fair elections. We do not mind him not meeting Parliament if only he can persuade our own President on those important issues. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR JAMES MWANDHA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want also to thank the Minister for this statement, and I welcome the President of Kenya to Uganda. As my colleague has said, it would have been great if the old tradition, of a visiting head of state to address the National Parliament, were followed. I think this is missing out. I think it is important for our democracy and politics, for Presidents from friendly countries to address Members of Parliament.  

However, the question I want to seek clarification on is the fact that the Minister mentioned the visit of the Vice President of South Africa in passing. Does the Vice President of South Africa not warrant a statement such as has been issued for President Bush and now for President Mwai? I seek that clarification, Mr Speaker.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join colleagues in welcoming His Excellency President Mwai Kibaki to Uganda. Uganda has a lot to study from the experience of NARC in Kenya. 

On the strength of that, I continue to support colleagues who submitted that since His Excellency is here for about three days, and will even have time to go to Jinja, why can’t we appropriately find time for him to address this Parliament.  East Africa is one; we are forging a federation of East Africa. It would be more understandable if His Excellency, Mwai Kibaki talks to you, honourable members. 

I am glad that the Minister of State in charge of Security has briefed us. I think it is good that I tried to move a motion recently in regard to His Excellency, President Bush’s visit. I would like this to be a routine, so that whenever a big man comes here, we are briefed. We are important people in this country. Do not handle matters on your own; you need the co-operation of honourable members. (Interruption)

MR YIGA: Mr Speaker, last week when we were being informed about the visit of President Bush, hon. Lukyamuzi was very concerned that he was left out. He wanted to have a cup of coffee with His Excellency, President Bush. Could I know from him whether now he has been invited to have a cup of coffee with President Kibaki? Otherwise, we should also respect our own leaders. Thank you.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, hon. Yiga.  Certainly, my wife and I have been invited to a state banquet at Munyonyo. I hope the rest of the members are also invited.  

Finally, Mr Speaker, if the process of inviting the Members of Parliament to the state banquet has begun, let it be speedily done so that the rest of the members get invitations. Thank you very much.

MS BETTY AKECH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank my colleagues for their comments on this statement to Parliament. 

I would like to state that as from this morning, actually up to one o’clock, the address to Parliament was on programme. But as I was just about to leave, I was informed that this had been cancelled. Therefore, I do not think I am in a position to push for what we, as a government, had requested but the other side had not thought possible to handle.  

Members of Parliament should attend the agricultural show; I think this is in order. I think Parliament normally has a way it facilitates its members to go to these functions. I would like to request for the indulgence of the Parliamentary Commission to consider this, so that Members of Parliament can attend this very great function.  

Is this the first time that we are giving this kind of statement? At least during the period I have been here, this is the second time for me to give a statement on visits of heads of state to the country. The first one was on the visit of President George Bush of the United States of America. The second one is this one. We would like, in the spirit of co-operation that exists between Parliament and the Executive, to inform Parliament from time to time about visits of important dignitaries in this country.  

However, there was the question that I mentioned the visit of the Vice President of South Africa in passing. I would like to say that for Vice Presidents, I think we will not be in a position to continue briefing Parliament on their visits. Some of them come on short consultative visits. This one had actually come on a very short consultative visit. So, we could not make a statement on his visit.

Hon. Winnie Byanyima, I think my head of state is capable of handling the issue of democracy. I hope that if such a matter arises, he will respond in an appropriate manner. I think I have exhausted the questions, Mr Speaker. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much.

MESSAGE FROM HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, on 30th April this year, Parliament passed a bill entitled “The Financial Institutions Bill, 2003”. The bill was duly authenticated by the Clerk to Parliament on 20 June 2003, and submitted to H. E. the President for assent. 

On Friday, the 11th of July this year, the President, in accordance with Article 91(3) (b) of the Constitution, returned the bill to the Speaker with a request that the Parliament reconsiders sections 18(1) and 26(5) of the bill. 

In accordance with Rule 117 of our Rules of Procedure, I now want to read the message, which I received from His Excellency the President. The letter is dated 3rd July and it is addressed to the Speaker. The subject is, “The Financial Institutions Act, 2003” but I think it should be “The Financial Institutions Bill”. It reads as follows:  

“Honourable Speaker, in exercise of the powers conferred upon me, under Article 91(3)(b) of the 1995 Constitution, I hereby return the above bill to Parliament for the following reasons:  

(1) Limits on shareholding in Financial Institutions: Section 18(1) of the Act, as passed by Parliament, provides that no individual, body corporate or group of related persons shall own or acquire more than 49 percent of the shares of a financial institution.  

The original bill passed by Cabinet proposed limiting shareholding of financial institutions to 20 percent, for the reason that the limit could curb the domineering effect or under influence which substantial shareholders have demonstrated in the past, and which has also resulted in series of bank closures.  

We should not allow a single shareholder of a financial institution to be in a position where he/she will exercise undue influence over the policies and operations of a financial institution.  Thus, shareholding in a financial institution should be diversified among many individuals to ensure that the Board of Directors of the financial institution includes as many interested parties as possible, to allow for a multiplicity of views, adequate debate and a system of checks and balances inside the board.  

In addition, adequate capital levels are easily maintained where the shareholding is diversified incase there is a need for injection of more capital to support business growth. Good corporate governance is unlikely to be achieved when directors and managers are subject to the dictates, whims and caprice of a powerful shareholder or one group of shareholders.  

(2) Ability of the Central Bank to revise the minimum capital requirements of financial institutions: Section 26(5) of the Act provides that the Minister, on the advice of the Central Bank, may from time to time, by Statutory Instrument, revise the minimum capital requirements as circumstances warrant, with the approval of Parliament.  

I, however, strongly believe that the Central Bank should have the ability to revise the level of the minimum capital requirements for financial institutions, as and when circumstances warrant, in order to improve on the viability of financial institutions and to prevent the failure of financial institutions caused by lack of adequate capital.  

I further believe that deciding on the adequacy of capital of a financial institution is a purely technical matter, which should be left to the Central Bank, as a regulator and supervisor of banks. 

I am fortified in this view because subjecting the revision of capital levels to Parliamentary approval will lengthen the decision making process and detract from speedy action, which is usually essential if a banking crisis is to be averted.  

For the above reasons, I return this Act with a request that the above provisions be reconsidered. 

Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, President of Uganda.”

In a nutshell, that is why he has returned the Act. He wants shareholding to be less than 49 percent. He says it should be 20 percent, or something like that. The other thing is that, the Central Bank should act without your approval. 

Now, you will have to consider this because it is constitutionally permissible for the President to return the Act, and he has returned it. You will consider the merits and demerits and decide accordingly.  

The next procedure will be in the hands of the minister in charge of the bill. He will bring it here and then we send it to the appropriate committee to reconsider it and make a report. After that, we shall see how we proceed. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2003

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the bill entitled, “The Customs Management (Amendment) Bill, 2003” be read the First Time. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is the Certificate of Financial Implications there?

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, the Certificate of Financial Implications is appended to the bill.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. The Customs Management (Amendment) Bill, 2003 stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE EXCISE MANAGEMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2003

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that a bill entitled, “The Excise Management (Amendment) Bill, 2003” be read the First Time. The Certificate of Financial Implications is appended to the bill.

THE SPEAKER: The bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE EXCISE TARIFF (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2003

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the bill entitled, “The Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2003” be read the First Time. The Certificate of Financial Implications is appended to the bill. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: The bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2003

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2003” be read the First Time. The Certificate of Financial Implications is appended to the Bill. 

THE SPEAKER: The bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

(i) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2002/2003.

(ii) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2003/2004 ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE.

(Debate continued.)

MR BRUNO PAJOBO (Workers’ Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me a chance to contribute to the Minister’s motion.

When you look at page 2, the headline is, “private sector-led economic growth”. I understand that everybody is now convinced that the only way Uganda can come out of its poverty is through private sector growth. But to some of us, this private sector has no human face at all. The people concerned do not take into consideration the people who work for them. 

Mr Speaker, I may repeat what my friends have already said, but usually it is said that great minds think alike. I may be thinking the same way as my friends. 

This is not repetition, but I only want to emphasize that many of the workers in this country are being tortured by the private sector employers. The laws do not support the workers in this country. We have been crying for the amendment of these laws, but they are still somewhere in the kitchen being panel-beaten. I do not know in which garage they are! It is very difficult to have a proper law in place to make these people respect human dignity and human labour. 

You can see this in the fact that the Inspectorate Department of the Ministry of Labour is almost dead. There are no funds for them to visit and inspect factories. So, for the workers suffering there, there is nothing. And in many districts, these people are not there; the district labour officers who are supposed to assist are not facilitated. So, you can see how the workers’ fate in the districts is also sealed. 

We thought that it will be through the minimum wage increase that this private sector will improve, but all is in vain! There is no minimum wage; they pay as they want. The answer is that, if we set the minimum wage tomorrow, the little jobs we have will disappear. But for how long are we going to work, are we going to remain slaves, with no law? 

If you went to the agricultural sector, you would see the terms and conditions under which these people are working and how they are accommodated. You would not go to developed countries and see cows sleeping like that! The way our people are treated by the private sector is miserable. This AGOA has been praised all over, but the way our people are treated, you wonder. 

I want to assure these people that there will be a time when we shall collaborate with out counterparts in the United States and decampaign how workers are treated there. And I think in the agreement, it is said that it should have a human face. They should have freedom of association, and they should have a way of negotiating and bargaining collectively. But this has been denied for most of our workers in the private sector. 

There are very few private sector employers who recognize trade unions, but many of them do not want to. Our people have a problem. Mr Speaker, it is also said that the workers are actually the people who contribute to the development of this country, but we are just hearing about this. Even in Government, many workers are not paid their wages. 

There are so many mushrooming radio stations. Some of the workers in these radio stations have not been paid for six months, three months; they are even not allowed to ask for their arrears. When you ask for arrears, you are dismissed. They only keep going to talk to the employer, then they negotiate, “I will give you this much, or give me this”. They do not respect our people! 

I understand even these radio stations are mostly owned by the big people. Some are even owned by our ministers, others by Members of Parliament. They do not want to pay the salaries of these workers and they have not given them the freedom to associate freely and bargain for their wages.

Mr Speaker, give me a little more time, I am just coming to –(Interruption)

MAJ. BUTIME: Mr Speaker, in 1889 and 1945 when the workers saw that their employers were going to mistreat them, they formed trade unions. Trade unions are supposed to bargain and represent the workers in the areas where they work - plantation workers, industrial workers and other proletariats. 

In this House, we have distinguished Members of Parliament who represent the workers. For him to come and lament, instead of advising and representing the workers through bargaining, is a little disappointing. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR LULE MAWIYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Hon. Pajobo, in his submission, has made a very serious statement. He has said that some of these radio stations are owned by ministers and Members of Parliament. He also said that they do not want to pay.  

I request him to supplement, because this is very serious. I would like to know which members do not want to pay their workers.

MR PAJOBO: Thank you. Honourable minister, I want to inform you that we have complained, but many employers refuse to recognize trade union movements. That is what I am talking about. Otherwise, those workers who have got unions, their conditions are better. 

Employers are usually addressed as “my investors” by His Excellency the President, and therefore, it is very difficult for them to recognize trade unions in their respective areas. So, these people are unruly and they are above the law. 

We have failed. I could give you an example of ROKO. We started handling ROKO and asked them to give these workers freedom. The hon. Minister of Labour is here, if I lie, let her come up and challenge me. We have no quarrel –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Zoe Bakoko Bakoru): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think that hon. Pajobo and other honourable Members of Parliament have been involved in what they call, by-partism and tri-partism. 

I believe in the last two years, we have made a lot of progress and we are coming up with that Statutory Instrument. So, hon. Pajobo should tell the truth and not be so alarmist. He should not sound his own drum and tell his workers that he has worked so hard with these employers to make their work places even better.

MR PAJOBO: Mr Speaker, I want to assure the Minister - and I repeat - that our problem is that where the trade unions are not in existence, the situation is worse. We shall continue to say this. 

We have complained about a lot of cases where trade unions are not allowed to work. Some of these areas are the radio stations, which my friend has talked about. You know them. I can tell you even now that these proprietors are our fellow Members of Parliament. So, it is true. I cannot give names here, but we know some of these stations very well, my brother. 

Mr Speaker, I want to go ahead and talk a little about taxation. It is true that for the last seven years the threshold for Pay-As-You-Earn has remained the same. 

The other issue is to allow the workers to purchase. The purchasing power of these people has been greatly eroded because the threshold has not been raised, and the bracket remains the same. It is high time the Government ensured that the threshold is raised and the bracket untied, to give workers a way to also have purchasing power in order to consume the goods they make. 

In fact, the workers produce for others. They do not even taste these goods because the price is too high for them. And the money, which is given to them as wages, is usually taken away as taxation. Thank you very much.

MS JESSICA ERIYO (Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to give my comments on the budget speech. I want to thank the Minister very much for a good speech. However, I would like to add my voice to those of my colleagues who raised some issues that I think would require more scrutiny and intervention. 

Mr Speaker, I want to comment on the measures to improve the quality of life of Ugandans. This is on page 17 of the Minister’s speech. My comment here is actually an inquiry to the Ministry of Education. I do not see any Minister of Education here, but I hope the ministers around will forward the questions to them. 

I want to find out what happened to the six seed secondary schools, which were budgeted for last financial year. Adjumani District was supposed to benefit from one of these schools, but nothing has taken place on the ground. Even the people in that sub-county are not aware that they should have got a secondary school. If I had told them, I would now be at pains to answer questions. When I asked the Minister informally, she said she would let me know, but up to now I have not got information.

I want to comment briefly on fisheries. In the budget speech, on page 6, we have a number of places that have been stocked with fish fries so that people in those areas could benefit from more fish, and therefore exploit and sell it. I want to find out from the Minister in charge what they have in place for areas especially in the northern part of this country, along River Nile, and for people around Lake Albert where we find very good fish. 

Whenever I come from home in West Nile to Kampala, I do not eat fish for a week or more, because the taste is different. Fish from West Nile is very sweet; the soup is very palatable and it looks very good. But whenever I come here, I do not find fish as good as that in West Nile. Fish like Angara is exclusive to West Nile, and people around here miss that good fish. The people of the area have already developed their own technology of salting this fish and keeping it for a very long time. 

Do we have any market for this Angara fish, so that the people in these areas could have their income improved also? How can we help them to further improve their skills of preservation of the fish? What about their fishing skills? Many fishermen along the River Nile are still using very old fishing methods, and they are still poor because they catch very little fish. 

They also lack enough market to sell their products. They, therefore, cannot improve the tools that they use for fishing so that they could benefit more. What intervention does the Government have for the people of that part of this country? In the budget speech, it is only other areas that are mentioned.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to make a comment on the interventions explained here about raising revenue. It is good to have these measures so that we improve on our revenue. When we talk about the interventions made in the sector of manufacturing beer, I would like to say that they are good. Increasing the tax on imported beer and reducing it for the beer that is made from local materials, like sorghum, I think is a very good intervention in this area. 

However, I would like to add that people who are involved in producing this beer are a bit segregative. We need affirmative action for areas that have insecurity in this country. I visited Nile Breweries, so that we in the North could also benefit by growing sorghum and our people’s income could be improved, but they claimed that the northern part of this country is insecure and therefore they could not trade with people up there. Mr Speaker, I think this is very unfair to our people.  

I would like to briefly comment about the performance of the economy. The Minister mentioned that inflation in this country is a result of the falling prices of food crops, but he does not mention solutions to this. 

Food production has grown and the price of food crops has gone down, resulting into inflation. But what measures do we have in place to make sure that the buffer stock or excess food, which has been harvested by the people, is stocked for periods when food crop prices are high? That way, the food could be sold at a good price. I think it is high time our Government thought about this, so that the people who produce food crops could be protected. 

We need to improve our food preservation methods. We need to emphasize this and also make some arrangements to sell some of our food crops to international bodies like the World Food Programme. I do not know what arrangements the Government has in place with bodies such as this; they could buy food from within to distribute to our displaced people and to refugees. We normally see food coming from outside Uganda and being distributed, yet we have excess food. This also results into inflation. We need to take that into consideration.  

I would also like to agree with my colleagues that it is unfair to offer tax holidays to some investors while we do not offer tax holidays for things like agricultural inputs. We should support the Plan for Modernization of Agriculture (PMA). If some inputs are very expensive, how do we expect the poor people to buy these inputs and improve on their agricultural practices? What category of investors are we talking about? 

In most cases, the investors that are targeted are actually people who have come from outside Uganda. But these are simply doing business, getting profits and siphoning these profits back into their own countries. What benefit do our people receive from this kind of treatment?  

It will be unfair if I do not say anything about insecurity, Mr Speaker, because my district is suffering from insecurity. People in my district are now not sleeping in their houses because of fear. If the rebels could quietly walk up to the Mission, which is about 40 miles away from the border, and simply pick children and walk away without being noticed, I think we need to do a lot more in our security sector. The Internal Security Organization should improve on its internal workings.

To inform members here, immediately after that incident, the people of Adjumani arrested up to ten collaborators of the rebels. Some of them are students studying in secondary schools in Adjumani. These students could move freely between Pabo to Atyak. And because they were students, they were not seriously scrutinised. 

Unfortunately, some of the schools do not have accommodation for the students. These students rent houses within the villages near the school, and some people come to visit them. Unfortunately, some of these people are rebel collaborators. But I would like to assure members that the people of Adjumani have become very vigilant; they managed to arrest up to ten people. 

We shall continue to help the Government in whatever it is doing to make sure the place is secure. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR JOHN ESELE (Bukedea County, Kumi): Mr Speaker, I thank you. I would like to start by congratulating the President, the Government and the people of Uganda for the successful hosting of the President of the United States of America. 

As a country, we are proud of our macro-economy. Our economy is growing at the rate of 6 percent per annum. I would like to observe that despite that, the micro-economy is still in a bad shape. The person out in the village is really suffering; poverty is biting. True, Government has programmes designed to fight poverty such as PEAP, PMA, the Strategic Exports Programme, but it is amazing that people do not know about these programmes. 

I had an opportunity early this year, on an assignment by the Cotton Development Organisation, to go around Teso campaigning for cotton production. But when I talked about these programmes, they were completely new to the people. Many people actually did not know about the existence of these programmes. Whereas if they knew that there is such and such a programme where they would stand to benefit, they would really work hard and benefit from the programme. 

So, I urge Government and everybody responsible to explain to the people about the existence of the programmes that are designed to fight poverty among them. 

Definitely, in Uganda today, to fight micro economic poverty, to fight poverty at the farm level, agriculture is the only solution. If you ask any country whose economy has developed through agriculture how they did it, they will tell you about three things: One; they utilised improved technologies, like those developed by NARO.  

Secondly, they will tell you that they actually facilitated their farmers to produce. We have a problem in Uganda; our farmers are not actually facilitated to produce. The technologies are there, they are given to the people, but they are not facilitated to utilise those technologies. The banks and other financial institutions are reluctant to finance agriculture, yet the farmers need money in order to produce. So, our production is low.  

The third reason they will give you is that they have developed agro-processing. Factories that turn raw material of agriculture into something new exist, but this is still not so advanced in Uganda today. 

Our farmers cannot compete internationally; the developed countries have got barriers to their markets. For example, they set very strict standards, especially on quality, which our farmers cannot approximate, except for AGOA. The developed countries charge very high tariffs, and that impacts negatively on our production. 

Also, some developed countries provide their farmers with high subsidies. This is a disincentive to a developing country to produce, because with their subsidies, they will engage in over production, flood the markets and sometimes even distribute some for free. Then, how can a poor farmer in a developing country sell?  

Mr Speaker, I suggest that we should take advantage of the programmes that we have. We have the Plan for Modernization of Agriculture, but the way it was designed cheats agriculture. Going by its budget, only 30 percent of the PMA is for agriculture; the rest goes to other sectors, which also have their budgets. 

I suggest that the PMA be re-designed to actually focus on agriculture. It should be re-designed to provide for short-term development financing for agriculture, as government puts in place a programme for long-term development financing. We should be able to provide credit to our farmers to produce, to process and for marketing of agricultural produce.  

There is a large area of this country we call the cattle corridor, which is potentially productive, but the problem is lack of water. I urge Government to increase public investment in water for production. 

Mr Speaker, industrialisation is the other way of providing employment and income to the people. However, industries in our country are concentrated around Kampala, Jinja and one or two other towns.  I request Government to encourage investors in this sector to spread industries across the country.  For example, the Nile Breweries recently started manufacturing beer from sorghum, and this sorghum is best produced in Teso. So, such a factory should be located in Teso, and then people there can get employment and therefore income. 

Kasese is the largest producer of cotton today in Uganda, but there is not even a spinning mill in Kasese. Tobacco is produced in West Nile, but the factory is in Kampala. Now, why not, as we decentralise, send these industries to areas outside Kampala where the raw material is produced, so that the people can find themselves employment and therefore income? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MRS RUTH TUMA (Woman Representative, Jinja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Before my brief remarks, I would like to congratulate Uganda, and especially our President, for the successful hosting of the United States President. (Applause). It is too early to see the results, but I know very soon we shall see the good results that will come out of this visit.

Mr Speaker, I have one point to make on this budget speech. If you look at page 23, taxation and tax measures, I would like to focus on measures to stimulate investment and promote export. 

One notices the concessions listed in number 88, from (a) to (g). I doubt whether, if you look at these incentives and concessions, a Ugandan citizen really benefits from this, because it seems as if we are targeting the foreign investor. 

In Uganda we have a lot of small-scale industries, which use local raw materials. These industries give employment and they are nearer to the people. Why can’t our government think of incentives to make these people produce for export, to help us transform our economy? With that, we shall also be fighting poverty.  

Mr Speaker, many Ugandans are struggling, and because they struggle to invest, the taxman is always at their door to tax them. Many of the small-scale industries have collapsed because of this. I urge Government, strongly, to give us a clear policy on how these small investors can benefit from some of these incentives. Let us have some special incentives for us, so that we can help to transform the economy and also to develop and fight poverty. 

What we are doing now is to try and make our people get some money in their pockets. But we are attracting foreign investors, and yet we are also giving them a lot of room to milk us. Mr Speaker, at this point –(Interruption)

MRS BABA DIRI: Mr Speaker, I would like to provide her information that these big investors also frustrate the small investors. There was once a factory of soft drink called Schweppes. This factory no longer exists because the big investors decided to buy it so that the small investors do not proceed. 

We also have good wine from passion fruit being made especially in the North, but Government is not making an effort to improve on that wine so that we produce our own. Thank you very much.

MRS TUMA: Thank you for that information, and I think that emphasizes my point. In Jinja, we have a lot of small-scale industries. They are in Bugembe, in Buwenge; and also here in Kampala they are there in Katwe. There are many, but many have collapsed. I think it is very important that this sector is not denied what is supposed to be its own, so that we can help to develop our country. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR TOM KAYONGO (Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me also congratulate the Minister for his good speech and his deliberate interventions to avert poverty in many sectors. 

I, however, seek clarification from my old colleague, and now hon. Minister of Agriculture, in regard to PMA and NAADS programmes. Many people contributing here have said they have not seen the results on the ground, as opposed to other programmes like LGDP and SFG. In fact, I would like to ask him about these programmes in regard to Kampala. 

How can the residents of Kampala benefit from PMA? Hon. Minister, how can the area where you were born benefit? I do not know whether you were born in Luwero, but I regard you as someone who was born in Komamboga, before it was joined to Kampala. Even now, this place is really in a rural setting. I was there this weekend to attend a Fathers Union function and we could see that the setting is very rural. People still grow coffee, which is miserable. 

We heard in the contribution of the hon. Member from Buikwe that people in Buikwe have benefited from the vanilla crop. In your policy statement, I try to look for the vanilla crop as one of those you highlight, but it is not there. 

I do not know whether in the PMA programme you would like to also capture this crop, which is new on the Ugandan market? I do not know whether you will also advise farmers with small plots, like those in Kampala where we have tree shades, so that we can benefit from this lucrative crop now.  

Also, some of us are surrounded by swamps, I do not know whether in your programmes you can advise how we can utilize these rivers surrounding us by creating fishponds, so that we can probably get fish. (Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Dr Kisamba Mugerwa): Mr Speaker, there is a conceptual problem here, and we should not back track. 

I would like to inform the honourable members that PMA has seven components, and there is a tendency to separate the components from PMA. One of the components is extension and another one is technology development. If one says I do not see PMA and yet another member says NARO has developed technologies but they are not adopted, then one does not realise that the technology, which has been developed, is under PMA.  

Secondly, crops like vanilla catch up because there is market. The Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture emphasises commercialising agriculture whereby the farmers should only select market-orientated farm enterprises. So, where NAADS has not unfolded – and it is hardly a year - the farmers have not –(Interruption)

MS NUSURA TIPERU: I just want some clarification from the Minister. Hon. Minister, most people in the country are complaining about PMA, and the feeling is that you seem to be stuck on PMA. Is it possible for you to advise Government to change the format or the method in which PMA is being implemented? 

When you talk about commercialising, you are not talking about tools; people cannot access seeds. Is it possible for you to leave your line of getting stuck on PMA and re-advise Government?

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA: It is my duty to ensure that PMA is understood because I believe it is the only way we can approach agriculture. It is a sector-wide approach and the essence is poverty, and poverty has multi-dimensional problems Therefore, it must be attacked from different -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Following what hon. Kayongo was saying, maybe if hon. Babu was here, we would ask him whether it is possible to modernise agriculture in Kampala Central.

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Well, I think hon. Kayongo was not referring to Kampala Central; he was referring to peri-urban areas, which have some substantive areas where you can cultivate. These areas can go for high value crops because the market is available and infrastructure is available. 

But in the area he is talking about, especially where I reside, the land is owned by other people and those who are residing there just rent houses. They do not reside in these areas with the interest of going into agriculture as their sole employment, but their employment is elsewhere. They either work in Owino or in different factories. Therefore, you cannot work with these people. But for those areas where there is backyard farming, it is taking up and supplementing incomes.

MS BAKOKO BAKORU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I have been privileged to visit several women groups in Kampala. In fact, some of these groups are in hon. Kayongo’s constituency and hon. Lukyamuzi’s constituency, and also in Nakawa and Kawempe. 

There are women who are actually implementing the Plan for Modernization of Agriculture in Kampala. They are growing several vegetables and selling them. I can take members to some of these places and they will see. They are growing some foodstuffs both for consumption and for selling. Most of the vegetables you see are grown here in sacks, some in buveera. I was actually very amazed when I saw those things. I could take some members there. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI: I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank hon. Kayongo for giving way. The information I want to give is that it is not enough to keep defending for the sake of defending. If members say there is a problem with PMA, it is wise for Government to re-examine it. 

A member here, in his contribution, said if Members of Parliament are finding it difficult to understand what PMA is all about, what about a peasant somewhere in Bugangaizi? If something is not being understood, it may be faulty or it was poorly designed. So, it should be re-examined instead of us really going on about it. 

The hon. Minister of Gender says that in Kawempe women are implementing it. I want to tell you, Mr Speaker, even without the plan, women have been growing vegetables and other people have been zero-grazing in Kampala. There is nothing new. So, PMA should be re-examined and re-defined if the Government is interested in going ahead with it.

MR KAYONGO: Thank you, all of you who have given information. (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, after hon. Kayongo has finished, I have some members listed here for contribution and they will contribute. But I am faced with a problem; some ministers who were supposed to answer certain points, which you raised, will be going out of the country. I intend to invite those ministers who have those assignments taking them away to make whatever comments they want to, so that tomorrow we see how we proceed. 

Honourable members, even if you do not participate in this general debate on the budget, I keep my records; I have your names here. When we start dealing with specific areas, I will definitely accord you an opportunity to make your contribution. So, let us allow the ministers to answer. 

The hon. Minister of Agriculture has religiously sat here since we started the debate and he is going away. The hon. Minister for Gender also has engagements. Let us allow them to make comments so that tomorrow we see how we proceed. I foresee tomorrow being interrupted because of the state visit by His Excellency President Mwai Kibaki. Some ministers may have to be away. So, I am proposing that maybe after him, we hear those ministers who are supposed to be away and then tomorrow I will see how to deal with this.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the honourable member for giving way. As you know, I try to be a good listener, but what I have observed is that the Ministry of Agriculture has actually held seminars and has over explained PMA. But the problem is that those who are less knowledgeable are those who do not attend these seminars. So they persist in their ignorance.  

The second point I would make is that agriculture is like the weather in Britain or America, where you have snow. Everybody talks about the weather, but talking about the weather does not solve problems of the weather. You must have skills of grappling with problems of the weather as much as you must grapple with problems of handling agriculture.  

Now, with a great deal of humility - and that is my final statement - it may be essential for the hon. Minister of Agriculture to take some of these doubting Thomases to exemplary farms like mine, so that they know that miracles can be performed in Uganda. I thank you.

MR KAYONGO: Thank you for all the information. But the progress that has so far been made in Kampala, with specific reference to the information from the hon. Minister of Gender, I would say is because of our efforts. We, the Members of Parliament, go out and mobilise these women through the traditional methods of agriculture. 

But I would like to ask the Minister to go now and probably buy vanilla vines from Kyagwe or Fort Portal, like he has done intentionally to purchase coffee seedlings and tea. Go and buy them and give them to those of us in the town who have got more holdings because of the way it yields. I am sure our people will also be helped.

In Kyagwe, as you drive out of Mukono, we have a bogged down Egyptian farm. I think it was built by Kato or Aroma. It is now five to six years, and it is lying idle. I think it was intended to process fruits, which are grown in Mukono District and beyond. It is at Rwanyonyi. It is an industrial processing farm and it is idle. What is the problem? It is not working and people are crying that there are no jobs. 

The people growing fruits are forced to sell them on the open market when they are raw, and the surplus just rots. I do not know what the problem is.

About roads, in 1999 the President went around all the divisions of Kampala and directed that they set up a committee to address the dusty situation. I understand the committee was set up.  I do not know whether it is sitting now, because for us, as members from Kampala, we were not briefed. 

He directed that all roads that had tarmac and whose surface is murram should be resealed as a matter of urgency. From 1999 to date, these roads are the same. So, I am asking, what is happening?  

I have a road, which has been politicised now and again. When the President visited that area, he said, “this road must be tarmacked”. He said it at Kasubi trading centre, in 2001. I am talking about Nabulagala Road, via the Kasubi Tombs. It had a tarmac surface, but today there is nothing. The authorities in the local government find it prudent to tarmac other roads but not that one. 

That road brings in foreign exchange more than any road in our city. Tourists come to see the traditional tombs at Kasubi and they bring in a lot of foreign exchange. But this particular road is not tarmacked. I appeal to the minister concerned to really assist my area. That road is about two kilometres only. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, can I ask for a brief statement, because as you know, you will have to defend your policy statement sometime? But there could be a few points, which you think you want to clear now, and then wait for your policy statement.  

THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRIES & FISHERIES (Dr Kisamba Mugerwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I cannot give details, but I thought I better deal with three questions. One is the conceptual framework regarding poverty eradication – the link between PMA and the Poverty Eradication Action Plan.  

The theme of this budget was, “Increased Production for Increased Exports and Eradication of Poverty”.  In a simple way, if we are to increase production, one would just open more and more acreage. But as the population is growing and people are using the same area year by year, we need to apply intensive farming.

Secondly, most of the people live in rural areas and that is where the poor people are found - the people with disabilities, the youth, the women and all those groups. They derive their livelihood from agriculture. So, if you are to touch poverty seriously, you have to address the problems in agriculture. And it was deemed that if we increased productivity, these people would earn some income and also ensure food security.  

But the problems that are constraining production are multi-sectoral. I will mention a few: 

• In agriculture, there is the predominance of subsistence production; we have to tackle that. 

• Lack of access and adoption to the best available science and technology, as the honourable member from Kumi said here. 

• There is poor delivery of field services, including extension services. 

• Pests and diseases, which have become rampant these days. 

• Reliance on raw materials and less emphasis on value addition. 

• Inadequate micro-finance to service the sector. 

• Poor infrastructure in areas to boost market. 

All the above factors affect agriculture. So, the Plan for Modernization of Agriculture was adopted by the Government to guide the transformation and development for the whole agricultural sector, which is multi-sectoral and multi-disciplinary.  

You will find that from PMA, there are seven interventions: 

• One is technology development, which directly falls under my ministry. 

• Another one is agriculture advisory services, which falls directly under the Ministry of Agriculture. 

• The other one is rural finance, obviously that is under planning.  

• If you come to infrastructure, some agricultural infrastructure could fall under the private sector, but the other infrastructure, like rural electrification and roads, falls under different ministries. 

• Agricultural education falls directly under the Ministry of Education. 

• Agro-processing and marketing fall under the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry. 

So, you cannot say PMA will run on one leg. All these components have to function for PMA to function.

In the Ministry of Agriculture, what we started with was reinstating extension. When we are discussing PMA, we should discuss it in light of the overall macro-economic policy - liberalization, privatisation, decentralization and all this. All these have affected the ministry, including the district service reform, where the mandate was changed from taking the lead in supporting and promoting, to giving guidance. 

We are no longer delivering services directly. The arrival of the Ministry of Agriculture in any one area is not celebrated by announcing government prices on hoes or distribution of farm inputs. So, we have to create an enabling atmosphere for those who are in agriculture to continue investing in agriculture, and those who have some money to invest in agriculture. The only way you can do this is to increase productivity and profitability.  

Now, how can you increase productivity and profitability in agriculture? One, you have to ensure that farmers have access to the best technologies available; these are the seeds, stock and planting material. 

Any leader in this House, and any leader at different levels, should crosscheck to find out whether in your area if one wanted a high yielding quality of seed, it is on the stock list. If I need goats, is there somebody with good goats? People are keeping goats for 3-4 years and the size is like a calf, because we are going in for profitability. One has to go for the best yielding input, and that is the first point.

Two, ensure that there are advisory services in the area. You need to know whether in your area there is effective extension work. We have tried the top-bottom and bottom–up methods and none have worked.  Now we have combined the top-bottom and the bottom-up methods to empower the farmers to contract service providers in their respective areas.

Three, in your area if one was to build a factory, is there electricity in order to add value to what is being produced in that area? 

So, PMA is multi-sectoral and multi-disciplinary. It is a good approach, but all the components of PMA are not functioning. We should work together and rally behind this programme to ensure that all the components function and then we deliver the services to the farmer.

However, there is one problem; PMA is not going to deliver inputs because the input system was privatised. We will not look for vanilla vines and buy them. We made a strategic intervention in respect of coffee, tea, fish and cotton because of certain problems 

For coffee, people were not adopting new varieties of coffee because they thought it was for sophisticated people. Secondly, coffee was already hit by the coffee wilt. Thirdly, coffee was costing Shs 50,500 and you would need about 420 seedlings for one acreage; and then there was also making those potholes and then transporting them. You would need about Shs 300,000 at a particular point in time!  

However, PMA is being reviewed year by year, as PEAP is being reviewed. Members are free to make an input so that we can see what changes we can make. But what I know is that PMA is like a baby that has just been born and you are saying the baby is not running.  

It is not that the conceptual framework is wrong; it is because the components cannot wait. Of course, we cannot wait to see all the components operating; NAADS is now operating in four districts first, then it will be unfolded to another 12 and then to 16. This financial year, we are unfolding in another five districts. 

For those districts where NAADS is operating, the farmers themselves, for whom the programme is meant, appreciate. What we have done is to take people to the areas where these programmes are in some parts, and they can give testimony. 

In some parts, it depends on the leadership of the area; they do not encourage things to work the way they should work. This varies, and that is why PMA funds are only sent for 25 districts. The guiding principle is that they should be those districts that are compliant with LGDP. But we know we are dealing with weak institutions in the private sector. Even in the local authorities, the institutions are still weak. But we cannot give up a theoretical framework, which is clear and can guide us in tackling the main problem.

Another issue - in the few minutes I have - is that agriculture is under funded. I think most people are talking about the Ministry of Agriculture in relation to other ministries. You cannot compare Ministry of Agriculture to Ministry of Works, Ministry of Education or Ministry of Health.  Those three ministries construct classrooms, dispensaries, roads, and buy inputs like drugs.  

In Agriculture, I do not open even a single garden. I do not buy inputs. All I do is to put clear policies in place and give technical back up. So, I cannot have the same share like the Ministry of Education, Ministry of Health and Ministry of Works. 

We also do not appreciate that what is going to other sectors will also affect agriculture. I am happy now we no longer talk about poor road systems, especially feeder roads, because roads were opened. These would affect the marketing, and this year’s theme is also on export. If we are to export, we must increase productivity, but if we are to sustain productivity we must have access to markets. 

Our market here is very small in terms population and purchasing power. We need to look at regional integration and also international markets, under globalisation. But what is going on is, if you go for the best technologies in America, you will not sell to Europe because of the debate that is going on.  

Here people were asking me about genetically modified food. The debate is also confusing because as far as genetically modified food is concerned, the World Health World Organization declared it safe for consumption. Many of the members here are consuming cooking oil, which is made out of soya that is genetically modified. If you have travelled to America, you have even consumed this food. But as the Ministry of Agriculture, my concern is on seeds. We do not have genetically modified foods in terms of seed terminator.  

All I am doing is to build up capacity in our technology. Soon, maybe next month, you will hear we shall commission a biotechnology laboratory.  But by law, that is not under my ministry; it falls under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. At an appropriate time, they will explain, because the Uganda Council of Science and Technology, which falls under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, is behind this.  

Biosafety regulations are not available in the country. We need a biosafety policy and biosafety regulations. This also falls under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

What my ministry is responsible for, as far as this is concerned, is just to ensure that seeds, which are coming in the country, go through the established system. We do not have a seed terminator. After all, the seed terminator debate was completed in 1999 when President Clinton was in power.  

Any improved seeds, which are high yielding, definitely cannot be planted year after year because the yield goes on decreasing. So, if we are really to overcome the diseases, pests need to go into biotechnology. If we are to acquire drought resistance varieties for these arid areas like Karamoja, we need to go into biotechnology.

Mr Speaker, I would not like to backtrack, but I can promise that my ministry will work with Members of Parliament and the local authorities to ensure that we understand the conceptual framework, and then we see where it went wrong. What we need is for the farmers to have access to high quality seeds and stock list planting materials. We want to ensure that soil and water conservation is undertaken seriously, water for production is available, markets are available and agro- processing is promoted. 

Also, come 31st December, no grocery in Europe is going to source any produce from a country where there is no proper system of certification. I am improving on that.

When I took charge of this ministry, people were asking me, “Where do you want to put more money?”  They would ask, “In allowances?” Now we have a strategic development plan and investment plan. Sooner or later, I will be laying it on the Table here when the consultations are completed. 

Someone was arguing that the ministry does not have a strategic investment plan, but having completed the Plan for Modernization of Agriculture, whose principles were agreed upon, we had to work on plans and investments per sub-sector.  

Mr Speaker, I realise we are constrained by time, but I will continue building on this with the committee on agriculture. 

Finally, I have been accused of over spending on seminars and workshops. When I started entandikwa, when people could not pay back, they told me, “Sir, we were not sensitised, we did not know we were going to pay”. Now we have a design where we are sensitising people so that they understand, and now they are saying, “we are not over sensitised”. Actually, the rationale is that we are now under pressure from our constituents; people demand farm inputs directly from us.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: This is a point I have been making every year. I have been sitting in this Parliament when we debate the budget speech, or when we have critical discussions, and most Members of Parliament ask the same questions. After asking these questions, when they are being answered as they are being answered today, there are only 20 Members of Parliament compared to 10 ministers. 

So, you can see the problem. When the minister is clarifying, they are out and the mass media is not there. So, it means that every year, these people will be raising the same questions. That is the problem we have about agriculture and many other sectors. People want to make their points but they do not listen. 

I am a very happy with honourable members like Dr Esele, who has a Doctorate, and hon. Mwandha – all these people are knowledgeable and they stay and listen. But the less knowledgeable ones raise a million questions and then they disappear. So, every year, those questions will be raised. That is another problem I have detected, because I am a researcher. I now detect what I call the persistent legislative problems Shall we cure them? I thank you.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, sorry I have to rise, but in the Parliamentary system of doing business, when Government introduces a new policy, they come up with a White Paper, which has a very fundamental function because it informs members as well as the public. 

Ever since I have been in this Parliament, we have had only one White Paper presented in this House, and that was on the Kajubi Report, presented by Amanya Mushega. Since that time, no minister has found it necessary to present a White Paper on a new policy matter.  

I am sure that if the Minister of Agriculture had come to this House with a White Paper explaining his intentions, objectives and plans, these issues that have been raised all the time probably would not have been raised. This is the only point I wanted to make, Mr Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Bakoko Bakoru): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. During the debate on the budget speech, some few questions were raised in relation to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. I would now like to take the opportunity to answer a few of these questions.

One of the issues was, what employment policy is in place to absorb the Ugandans graduating in tens of thousands every year in this country? Every year, close to 340 youths actually reach the working age of 16 to 55. 

The honourable members are aware that Government is committed to decreasing unemployment in this country. We do have a draft National Employment Policy, which is being developed. 

With emerging challenges of globalisation, investing in human resource is becoming a critical issue for us. We should ensure that our graduates are employable. As a result, Mr Speaker, the Ministry has continued to undertake consultations with other stakeholders, including the Ministry of Education, to come out with a very comprehensive employment policy, which should address the biting unemployment.  

We are also pursuing what we call, “externalisation of labour”. Every year during the budget speech, you hear the President say that we are earning close to US $500 million from Kyeyo. We think that there is need to externalise labour and not to have our labour get out in the manner that it has been doing. 

Skilled people now go and engage in jobs requiring unskilled labour because this has not been properly arranged. So, I want to put it on record that as the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, we are developing a policy on externalisation of labour.  

We are also looking at a programme for connecting the children and youth, which is already operational in certain districts under what we call the Programme on Youth and Unemployment. This is going to be a programme unique to Uganda, and we are pursuing it with GTZ. Soon we are going to bring it to Parliament, as well as the Social Development Investment Plan, which is going to bring a social face to poverty eradication. One of the two major priority areas of this is creation of employment and labour productivity. 

We are also working very hard to ensure that the public gets access to information on the labour market, so that people who are searching for jobs will be able to browse and make choices. We hope that a databank can finally be developed to that effect, Mr Speaker.  

The second question was, what employment policy is in place to curb employment of foreigners by foreign investors in jobs that could ordinarily be done by Ugandans? In this particular case, the honourable member was asking about drivers of the graders of Chinese companies, which are constructing roads. 

Mr Speaker, training of human resource for employment, especially in handling high technology machinery, is very crucial. My ministry’s attention was drawn to this particular case and we did approach the company. We think it is important - from the results of our interaction - that we have people whose capacity has been built to handle machinery that is of high technology. 

If you consider the road works between Pakwach and Nebbi and the machines that the Chinese are handling now, they have agreed they will build capacity among Ugandans to handle that. But we cannot stop the construction of the road, Mr Speaker, and neither can we allow people who may not be able to handle the machines properly, to operate them. That could bring about a stop in the construction of this road, which has been a pain for a long time. 

So, we have agreed that priority be given to Ugandans so that their skills are developed, and foreigners should not come here to take away jobs even at that level. 

We are also working with the Ministry of Internal Affairs to ensure that people who are not Ugandans, who seek to work here, do not violate the rights of Ugandans. We should stand up to protect the rights of our Ugandans.

The third question is: why is Government not protecting the AGOA girls who are being harassed and overworked? They said that they work for 13 hours a day, which is against the employment law. 

Mr Speaker, and honourable Members of Parliament, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has raised this issue with Tri-Star. Two inspections have already been conducted in the work place, the factory, and action is being taken with the management of the company to address this problem. 

However, we believe that it is important that dialogue – by-partism and tri-partism – should be encouraged between workers and the employers. Mr Speaker, in countries where productivity is increased, we have constantly seen that people do work very hard. We do not want to see discrimination and abuse, but at the same time we should learn other peoples’ culture of working harder to increase our productivity.  

The other question was about compulsory testing by employers, for certain employees. Mr Speaker, we have a project, which is running, on HIV/AIDS at the workplace. Both employers and workers are being involved in this project and in the fight against HIV/AIDS. 

Protecting the rights of people living with HIV/AIDS is critical, it must continue. We do not allow discrimination at the work place. It is a Government policy, and we have drawn the attention of the employer that the hon. Member for Workers talked about, to that effect.

The next question was on children in conflict, Mr Speaker. The hon. Winnie Byanyima said that the Government is not taking care of children who have been abducted or who are trapped in conflict, and that it has relegated that work to the civil society organizations. 

I want to say that in May, I was in Washington and I signed for US $3 million, with my colleague the Minister of Education. That money will be expended by the civil society organizations. I went there on behalf of the Uganda Government. This shows that we work together with the civil society. 

It is not correct to say that the Government has abandoned its work of looking after these children. It is only that we have to work as a team, and we have to work with the civil society. 

Mr Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, almost 6,000 children in Northern Uganda have been rehabilitated and resettled. We are looking to the civil society organisations to access the US $3 million so that we can work with them to improve the educational needs of these children trapped in conflict.

We are also developing a comprehensive policy on orphans and vulnerable children, and this will be completed by February next year. We are conducting a social audit in my ministry, to look at all the civil society organizations and the money, which is being put into the social sector. This is the first time that the Government is going to do this. Then we will be able to come and tell members here how much money goes into the social sector. 

Sometimes people imagine that the money, which comes to these civil society organizations, just drops from heaven like manna. This is not true. If we did not have an enabling environment, provided by the Government, I do not think these organizations would be able to operate here.

On this institution called the Matembe School for Technology, the Minister of State has already written to Luwero and we have dispatched our commissioner to go and visit that school. We will come with the report, Sir.  

On the cultural institutions, Mr Speaker, we believe that in this country, cultural institutions can be achieved when the concerned population develops complete consensus. This must be overwhelming and unanimous. The people of Kasese are striving to achieve that, and as soon as they achieve it, the Government will be able to grant their wish and desire.

On the Equal Opportunities Commission –(Interruption)

PROF. APOLO NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to refer to Article 246 of our Constitution, and in particular Article 246(2). It says:

“In any community, where the issue of traditional or cultural leader has not been resolved, the issue shall be resolved by the community concerned using a method prescribed by Parliament.” 

The Government is also dealing with the facilitation of traditional leaders, and the Ministry of Public Service was directed to handle this matter. It is handling it within a timeframe, although I do not readily remember it. If the Minister of Public Service were here, he would inform you. 

I also want to refer you to Article 37, where belonging to a culture and cultural institution is a fundamental human right. But when you practice and enjoy your fundamental human right, do it in communion with others so that you create national unity. For example, among the Baganda we do not marry our distant cousins. But there are certain tribes where people marry their cousins. 

So, when you get such a situation of inter-marriages, how do you handle it? It creates a problem, but it could be resolved through realizing that every culture is relished. When you have inter-marriages, you have to give way to certain things so that there is matrimonial sobriety. I thank you.

MRS BAKOKO BAKORU: Mr Speaker, I want to finalize on the Equal Opportunities Commission. The Government and my ministry are committed to ensuring that the Equal Opportunities Commission will be set up to oversee implementation of the constitutional provision of non-discrimination and equal opportunities. The draft principles of the bill have already been developed and hopefully in 2003/2004, the bill will be submitted to Parliament. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I thank you very much, honourable minister. Honourable members, this brings us to the end of today’s proceedings. We shall continue tomorrow when the other ministers will give brief replies, because they will have more time to deal with their committees. So, I adjourn the House until 2.00 p.m. tomorrow.

(The House rose at 6.25 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 16 July 2003 at 2.00 p.m.)


