Tuesday, 14 July 2009

Parliament met at 2.41 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to welcome you to today’s meeting and I want to remind the ministries which have not yet submitted their policy statements to Parliament that the deadline was 30th June and we expect all the statements in by the close of business on Friday this week. 

Secondly, I have got a weed here which the farmers in Busoga have complained about. It grows where there is rice and it is destructive to other crops and it is resistant to drugs. I do not know whether the Minister of Agriculture is here. I do not know its name; I do not know its biological name but I want to hand it over to the Leader of Government Business so that the Ministry of Agriculture can establish what kind of weed it is and the farmers in Busoga can protect their crops. 

2.43
MRS RUTH KAVUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kalangala): Madam Speaker, I was just wondering whether the people of Busoga have established whether it is poisonous or not. I mean, apart from all the destruction, is it poisonous as well? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is poisonous to other crops and not to humans.

MRS KAVUMA: So we can eat it with the rice as greens? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. I do not think they like it; that is why they have brought it to me. 

Hon. Members, there is going to be a workshop on Domestication of Protocols Under the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region tomorrow at Imperial Royale Hotel at 9 O’clock. Please be there. Thank you. 

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

2.44
MR WILFRED KAJEKE (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Madam Speaker, I respect and recognise this opportunity this afternoon. This is a personal statement in respect of my widely speculated resignation from Parliament. 

There is one thing that we have in common, that is, at some point in our life we will face adversity. It is not a matter of “if” but “when”. In my 35 years on earth, I have come to realise that the difference in our success or failure is not change but choice. When adversity strikes, it is not what happens that will determine our destiny but how we react to what happens. 

There are only three important days in one’s life: the day you were born, and I was born on 26 July, 1973; the day you get married and indeed I am married to a very beautiful lady by the names of Primrose Kajeke; and the last day is the day you die. But before that one comes, another day has emerged in my life and that day is today. Today is the day I will live to remember in my service as a political leader.  

Madam Speaker, I joined this Parliament in the year 2001 through a by-election. My journey to Parliament started in a unique way. While most political leaders are asked by the people to serve them, on the contrary I did not ask the people if I could serve them. I was at home in Kampala listening to one of the FM stations in the morning. A listener called in and he was asked by the presenter to name a Member of the Seventh Parliament who had resigned. In a very clear and unwavering voice, the caller replied, “Hon. J. Tanna”. May his soul rest in peace! 

I did not believe it so I called a friend who confirmed to me that indeed hon. J. Tanna had died. I instantly told him that I was offering myself to contest for the seat. I knew J. Tanna very well and had actually supported him.

The friend, Paul, readily appointed himself as my mobiliser. Later in the day we had lunch together and we agreed that I should contest but not until I had assured him of the availability of all resources and the machinery to execute the campaign. 

That very afternoon we decided to pay a courtesy call to the late hon. James Wapakhabulo - may his soul rest in peace - at his NPC office. His advice was simple: “Get down to business. You have my blessings but know that there are others in the race.” That was the advice he gave me. The rest, as they say, is history. I was sworn in as a Member of Parliament representing the Youth of Eastern Uganda on the 16th September 2001. 

Madam Speaker, in the Seventh Parliament, I voted against amending Article 105(2) of the Constitution, in regard to lifting the two term presidential limit. Therefore, I did not partake of the infamous Shs 5 million and I do not regret the decision I took. If there were another opportunity, I would still say no and never to lifting of presidential term limits. 

How I wish that unfortunate decision by the Seventh Parliament could be reversed by this Eighth Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. Hon. Members, if this Parliament finds it too much of a request from me, I appeal to other Ugandans who will join the Ninth Parliament or any other subsequent Parliament, to do so.    

Again on the 16th of May 2006, I was sworn in as a Member of Parliament for Mbale Municipality of course for the Forum for Democratic Change: One People One Uganda. 

As I leave this House, I wish to say the following: That this country Uganda is big enough to accommodate all of us irrespective of our political affiliation, tribe, religion, creed or gender. None of us applied to be born in this country. We found ourselves here therefore we must live in harmony with equal rights and equal opportunities.

Hon. Members, the future of this country lies in your hands; don’t let the people of Uganda down; if you do, one day you will encounter them at your gate or even on the streets of Kampala demanding for their share. So if you want to enjoy your comfortable life, please make sure you make their life better too using your mandate as a Member of Parliament. 

Abject poverty is looming in all the corners of the country. Today as I make this statement, thousands of Ugandans mainly from the Eastern and Northern parts of our country are under threat of starvation to death. Hon. Members, with all arable fertile soils coupled with good climatic conditions in most parts of the country, how do you explain people dying of hunger in Uganda? It is a shame! We are the third most corrupt country in Africa and indeed the whole world; the most poor and most corrupt, what a contradiction? 

Our total indebtedness stands at US $4 billion, not withstanding the fact that about the same figure was written off a few years back by our creditors. Who will pay this money; of course your children and grand children, but for what? There is nothing to show; you have to stop this irresponsible and reckless mortgaging of our country and placing the huge burden of repayment on innocent Ugandans most of whom are not yet even born. 

The question that will be asked is: “What did you do when the country was being mortgaged?” Do not say that you will be dead by that time. It is even worse, Madam Speaker, for the same question to be written on your grave.  

If I have the mandate to stop this reckless and irresponsible mortgaging of our country and I cannot do it, then thee is no reason whatsoever for me to continue being in this House. And that is why I am leaving, but not for a UN job but rather to liberate my conscience. 

I have been a Member of Parliament for Mbale Municipality for the last three years; I have fought all forms of theft, corruption, public land grabbers including the degazetting of Uhuru Park (Independence Grounds in Mbale Municipal Council); what moral authority do you have to continue preaching patriotism when you cannot even protect the symbol of patriotism? I have done everything humanly possible to see that there is semblance of responsible leadership in my constituency but in the circumstances I cannot do much.

There was a whole commission of inquiry to investigate the mismanagement of affairs in Mbale Municipal Council in 2007 headed by the venerable hon. Fiona Egunyu. The people of Mbale and Bugisu in general left their work and queued every early morning for over a month to get an opportunity to testify before the commission. The inquiry was concluded and the report was handed over to the Minister of Local Government with a number of people implicated in wrong doing. They were such good recommendations in that if the were adopted, would not only correct the maladministration in Mbale but also in other local administrations. What happened? No action; time money and other resources were just wasted. This was the only hope of the people of Mbale and their Member of Parliament. 

Madam Speaker and hon. friends, what else can I do? In my opinion there are only two options: either to join the system and fully participate in the looting or say enough is enough -(Interjection)- I have chosen that latter and I am leaving. And that is the more reason I am leaving; because of that kind of behaviour. (Laughter) 

Sometimes in life you have to take certain hard decisions and take full personal responsibility. This is one of those times and I have decided I must leave and be ready to face the consequences of my decision squarely. 

A lot has been said, which I expected of course that I am a coward. I want to tell you that resignation is not in any way an act of cowardice. To the contrary, it takes courage, bravery and honesty for one to say enough is enough. It is only a man or woman of these attributes who can say enough is enough. I stood the knife. (Laughter)   Hon. Mallinga, you know that I stood the knife on the 3rd of January 1992 without blinking and therefore no amount of pain, pressure, speculation, intimidation and blackmail can weigh me down. That is for sure; none of the above will make me change my decision.

Madam Speaker, on saying that I have been bought or compromised, let me state in emphatically and categorically here now that no individual or organisation has bought me for the simple reason that I am not on sale. Above all, no amount of money can equal my conscience. 

Many respected colleagues and friends have even innocently advised me to hang in there just to pick the money for the remaining period. That I should just stay, do nothing, do not attend Parliament and not even visit the constituency. My question is: what would I be collecting this money for? I would be cheating myself and the taxpayers of Uganda. Comrades thank you for that advise but with due respect, I decline to take it.

I also wish to make it very clear in no uncertain terms that I am and still a member of the Forum for Democratic Change, a party I formed and founded and no one has the capacity to herd me out. I have not crossed to either NRM or any other party or organisation. But people are entitled to their opinions but not to their facts because facts must be supported with evidence. Of course you cannot stop any person from speculating; maybe that is how that person earns a living. I hope all this puts to rest all the speculations and the speculators. 

To the voters, the earlier they understand that Members of Parliament are to offer service to them and not for jobs or money, the better. If it were for money, Parliament is not the place. So I am asking the voters to stop putting a lot of unnecessary pressure on their Members of Parliament. If they do, I want to assure them that sooner than later all reasonable persons in society will soon shun Parliament and they will only have pure businessmen and women who will be here just to “cut deals” and that is when they will feel it, but it will be too late; they should not say that I never warned them. I told them that they should stop putting unnecessary pressure on their Members of Parliament. 

As I leave, I would like to thank your office so much, Members of Parliament and the staff of Parliament for according me a conducive environment to dispense my obligations and duties in this House, and of course not forgetting my colleagues with whom I worked closely with in the seventh Parliament. 

I must sincerely thank the marvellous youth of Eastern Uganda, who tirelessly made it possible for me to access the Chamber of this House in 2001. I did not let them down. In the same vein, with a lot of humility, I appreciate and I am very grateful to the people of Mbale Municipal Council, especially my campaign team, who against all odds placed their hope in me to represent them in Parliament in 2006. I have done my best together with them in the circumstances but alas, I cannot do much; the problem lies with the municipal council and that is what we should focus on by strictly exercising our civic rights if we want to revive the lost glory of Mbale. Do not expect any action from anywhere; I have virtually exhausted every office that matters in this land.

It is not criminal for us to demand for better management of our affairs. It is our right and in fact a duty to demand for proper leadership in terms of accountability and provision of all social services. 

In the same vein, it is the duty and obligation of any legitimate government to, first of all, listen to its citizens and secondly, to provide for them. It is not a favour for a government to construct roads, water supply, educational facilities, et cetera; it is a duty. 

Madam Speaker, it is immaterial enough for anyone to continue reminding Ugandans of where we came from without telling us why we went there in the first instance. So long as the circumstances and conditions that made us go there still prevail, no amount of reminders will stop us from returning there. The only problem in Uganda is that it is very difficult to annoy a Ugandan and therefore so many leaders have taken advantage of this misfortune -(Interjection)- I am not annoyed. (Laughter)

Please understand and bear with me if this decision has disappointed you. I am sorry, I cannot continue being in Parliament when I cannot cause any positive change to the lives of my people. Until such a time that circumstances can enable me exercise my mandate as a Member of Parliament to cause positive change to my people and the country, then you may give me that responsibility. When news of my resignation filtered in, I was surrounded by a number of colleagues across the political divide who actually succeeded in convincing me to revoke my earlier decision. I say, thank you very much for that solidarity, but I want to assure you that all that is not in vain. As a generation, wherever I will be, it is my duty and obligation to work for the cause of our generation. I am just opening another front. We shall be in touch and you will embrace my decision later in the struggle. 

Before I pen off, may I make one special request to His Excellency, the President and ask for your support, colleagues. As a young man, I have only witnessed three peaceful transfers of power in this country in my lifetime. One, in 1996 from President Museveni to Mr Museveni; two, in 2001 from President Museveni to Mr Museveni; three, in 2006 from President Museveni to Mr Museveni. Mr President, come 2011, the young people who may regard you as the father of the nation wish and are sincerely yearning for that day at Kololo Independence Grounds to witness another very peaceful transfer of power from President Museveni to another person of the choice of Ugandans, even if that person is hon. Janet Museveni. We will not mind because at least there will have been a semblance of change. (Laughter) In that way, you will have a set a precedent for future presidents. Until then, I wait to see.

Colleagues, what else can I say? I will miss you. To those I have wronged, please forgive me. I have forgiven those who have wronged me and we shall be comparing notes. 

I am not stonehearted and like any human being, I feel for and listen to others, and I take lessons. I have benefited from the wise counsel of the elders, my family, religious leaders, my friends, both junior and senior members of my party, Members of Parliament across the political divide and above all, my supporters - the people of Mbale Municipality in particular and Bugisu in general, some of whom still bear scars resulting from the beatings occasioned on them by the NRM functionaries before, during and after the 2000 elections. 

I am functionally versatile and very flexible and therefore in honour and respect of these people, I have reluctantly but with a lot of pain extended the effective date of my resignation from 20 July 2009 to 20 December 2009. That is the furthest I can go. For God and my country! I thank you. (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, Members. I am really not sure of what to say. The honourable member has been grappling with this matter for about two months. Last evening at 6 O’clock, the Speaker called me and said that the member has resigned and that he had accepted his resignation. So, please, are you here or are you not here? The Speaker called me and asked me to allow you to resign. 

3.08
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Madam Speaker, I think I was going to rise on a procedural matter and ask that I say something, not to debate the statement because it would be against our rules. But as the Leader of Opposition and a person who was closely involved in some of the things that were going on, it would really be a failure on - not my part only but on the part of Parliament if the statement were left hanging without a clarification. 

And so I would seek your indulgence to allow me say something –(Interjections)- that is why I have sought the Speaker’s indulgence. Madam Kabakumba, please you are supposed to be a lady and not some hooligan. 

To many people, this looks a very simple matter; it even looks a matter that you can dismiss, but that it is happening in our group, in this Eighth Parliament, it is a big challenge and the country watches how we respond to it. If we are dismissive, it will not help us. So let me say this:

Two months ago we heard rumours that hon. Kajeke had written to the Speaker resigning from Parliament. What I did was to consult and we went to the Speaker. The Speaker told us that he had received a letter from hon. kajeke and that he had prepared a response. And this is after we had a Business Committee meeting that we followed the Speaker. 

I would like to put on record what I said. I said, “I would have no problem if hon. Kajeke resigned out of his free will but we would be put to task if we did not appreciate the circumstance of the resignation”, and we thought that he was not resigning under normal circumstances -(Interjections)- please, let me finish. I am talking about the first letter of two months ago. 

The Speaker showed me a copy of the letter which was typed and I told the Speaker that personally I would have loved to be invited as the Leader of Opposition to share this because things happen with explanations. If hon. Kajeke needed help – that is what I said that time – if he needed help and we just accepted the resignation and later it turned out that there was a problem we did not address, we would be held seriously accountable –(Interjections)- fortunately, Dr Mallinga as a medical man understands what I am talking about. 

I requested the Speaker to give me time to consult with hon. Kajeke and colleagues; we did exactly that. Eventually colleagues on both sides of the House sat down with hon. Kajeke until late that evening. At that time hon. Kajeke accepted to rescind his resignation and he wrote a letter a copy of which I received. I called the Speaker who was in fact relaxing somewhere asking him if we could go and meet him. We went and met the Speaker with two other colleagues. And that day we met hon. Bakkabulindi and hon. Tubwita – they were on their own other mission. (Laughter) When we presented hon. Kajeke’s letter rescinding the first letter, the Speaker said, it was okay; he had received it. From that moment I assumed the matter ended.

Yesterday I was returning from my constituency and I got a call that hon. Kajeke came to my office giving a letter of his intention to resign, and I said, “I will see the letter tomorrow morning”. 

This morning I saw the letter informing the Speaker that he will resign from this Parliament with effect from 20th December. This morning I had a series of meetings and when I came to my office I found a letter from the Speaker of Parliament, Edward Kiwanuka Sekandi, accepting hon. Kajeke’s letter of resignation. Shortly after, I was brought the Order Paper that had item No.2 as a personal statement from hon. Kajeke.

Madam speaker, the difficulties you face are the same as the ones I face. Once hon. Kajeke provided his intention, my own belief is that it would have been good for us to think over it. We are all here representing very many adults from our constituencies and we still do things on their behalf -(Interjections)- let me finish. Guidance is not a procedural matter and so it is okay. 

The question you asked, Madam Speaker, I believe is contained in the letter that hon. Kajeke sent to the Speaker which was copied, I think to you, but it was copied to me and I saw my copy. And in the circumstances, I have not read the letter that the Speaker wrote whether he was accepting a resignation that does not take immediate effect or he was accepting the fact that he is free to resign come 20th December. But regardless of what will happen, this is something that Parliament should find the earliest moment to reflect on because this is telling so much on this Parliament and on some of the difficulties that we face. This is what I wanted to provide. 

I cannot respond to what hon. Kajeke said in his statement. Our rules do not allow us to debate. But I thought it was important, and it is important, that I, as the Leader of the Opposition, to whom the letter of intention to resign was copied, and to whom hon. Kajeke is responsible as long as he is in this House, to say what I said. I did not have prior knowledge of the content of hon. Kajeke’s statement because this is a very personal decision. But I do hope and pray that between now and 20th December, if - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Leader of the Opposition. I think this House is being taken for a ride. (Applause) Either the Member intended to resign or he was issuing notice. (Mr Kajeke rose_) Please sit down. 

Two months ago hon. Kajeke wrote to the Speaker resigning; he did not give me the letter. Other Members of the House came to me and said, “Let us help this young man not to make a mistake.” I worked behind the scenes and he rescinded his resignation. So, I forgot about the matter. 

Yesterday I was in my house at 7 p.m. when the Speaker rang me to say, “Hon. Kajeke has resigned and I have accepted his resignation in writing. Allow him to make a statement tomorrow.” So I said, “Fine.” Well, I came to my office and organised the Order Paper. I did not think it was very important so I did not include him on the Order Paper. I received a call saying, “You have not included hon. Kajeke on the Order Paper.” So, I did so. 

Now what do you want the Electoral Commission to do? Is this seat vacant or is it not vacant? Hon. Kajeke, please, either you have resigned or you have not. What do you want the Electoral Commission to do? Are the people of Mbale represented or not? 

MR KAJEKE: Madam Speaker, I want to respond - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, hon. - 

MR KAJEKE: I have a letter accepting my resignation -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. No! 

MR KAJEKE: From the Speaker and I want to read it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. 

MR KAJEKE: Yes. You wanted it and I want to read it to you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Rukutana.

3.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Mr Rukutana Mwesigwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not need to stress that the conduct of every Member of this House must be in accordance with the Rules of Procedure of the House. Where the Rules of Procedure are not specific, then the law regulating this House comes into play. Where the law is silent, then we look at the Constitution. What does the Constitution say on such a matter?

Article 83(1)(a), “Tenure of Office of Members of Parliament: 
A Member of Parliament shall vacate his or her seat in Parliament:
a)	If he or she resigns his or her seat or her office in writing signed by him or her and addressed to the Speaker.”

If hon. Kajeke tendered in his resignation to the Speaker in writing, and the Speaker accepted his resignation that was complete resignation. There is no provision for rescinding or even giving notice of intention to resign. The moment he put it in writing and it was accepted by the Speaker that was fait accompli; he ceased to be a Member of this august House. 

Actually, if it is true that the Speaker received a resignation in writing and he accepted it, then hon. Kajeke has no audience before this august House. That is the law that I know. I thank you very much. (Hon. Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Members. I think hon. Kajeke should not be in this House. Let us proceed with other business. 

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT TO THIS PARLIAMENT ON THURSDAY THE 4TH JUNE 2009

(Debate continues)
	
3.23
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to support the motion as moved by hon. Rose Najjemba acknowledging the State of the Nation Address. 

Much as the attention of Members is still on the previous matter -(Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Procedure, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Dombo.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This day puts us in very unusual circumstances and it is because of this that I ask for your indulgence. I do this because usually personal statements are personal statements. But hon. Kajeke has just made a personal statement which touches the integrity of the Members and the integrity of this House in which case it ceases to be a personal statement. 

The future Hansard readers will read his statement and believe what he said about the House. If we left this statement the way it is, it will not auger well for this House and for the future Hansard readers. (Applause) We do not know under what circumstances, if he had resigned, he was included on the Order Paper because in that case he had ceased being a Member of Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence. Will it be prudent in future for us to respond to the issues raised by hon. Kajeke so that the integrity - or those who read the Hansard, will know that he has resigned because of personal failure, it is not because this House has failed to execute its mandate and as Members of Parliament. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, you have presided over this House for a long time. We came from very far and we have gone so far. Actually, what is happening in the country is because of what this House is doing. So, I want to ask whether you would allow Members to respond to this, or you will do it in future so that hon. Kajeke may go but those who will come here will appreciate that we, as a Parliament, were doing our job as we are required to. Even when the going becomes tough the tough will keep moving and -(Interjections)- this House. I seek your indulgence.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will give you an opportunity to respond, but I want to move on with my other business today. 

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much.

MR TUMWEBAZE: So, Madam Speaker, thank you. I will resume my contribution on the State of the Nation Address debate. I have three issues to comment on.

I beg to be protected. The environment is still for resignation, not for the State of the Nation Address – (Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Tumwebaze, five minutes.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Much as the environment is still for something else, I have some issues on the State of the Nation Address. I would like to say that, I too, join other colleagues to appreciate the well-read statement from H.E. the President. 

I want to quickly make a comment in regard to the agricultural sector, especially NAADS. On page 16 of the State of the Nation Address, the President talked about the restructured NAADS and how it is operating. I welcome the idea of restructuring NAADS, especially by involving political leaders in helping farmers to do enterprise selection. I am saying this because the guidelines for NAADS today allow a constituency Member of Parliament to do enterprise selection. The same guidelines also allow the constituency Member of Parliament to chair a constituency meeting and decide on the preferred constituency enterprise. To me, that is very important. As Members of Parliament, we need to do that in order to guide our constituents. 

However, we should also demand that our farmers select, as opposed to being dictated upon by technocrats who may have other intentions. My understanding is that the guidance by technocrats should be on how to carry out the enterprise, but not which enterprise to select.

I would like to add – despite the mood being dominated by the tension of resignation – that under NAADS, we need to review the concept of community procurement. I wish colleagues could listen to this other than debating the resignation letter. Currently, - and I think the Minister of Agriculture should take note of this – according to procurement for NAADS, if they exceed a certain amount of threshold, they are advertised. However, sometimes the practice has been that procuring crops or emergency seeds takes long, with farmers at times having to wait for long periods, hence missing certain seasons. 

In that regard, I would like to suggest that community procurement be reviewed so that farms in some localities are used for direct procurement, if necessary. If you are buying for example, epuri-puri seeds, then you are not going to advertise in order to procure them from Mbarara; you will have to procure them from the place where epuri-puri sorghum is grown. It is in this respect that I now suggest that the community procurement system under NAADS, especially the tendering system, be reviewed to orientate it towards local farming needs.

On NARO, I would like to say that, quite often in the agricultural sector, we emphasise NAADS, which is for extension and input supply, but we tend to forget the National Agricultural Research System (NARS), which is implemented through NARO and other sister agencies. Madam Speaker, you have just told us about the threatening weed in your constituency; that should be the work of the NARO people. However, NARO cannot do that because of little funding. 

The National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) uses what NARO produces. The output from NARO will guide NAADS in its work. We really need to emphasise and prioritise funding to agricultural agencies the way we talk about prioritising the energy and road sectors.

In that regard, let me now comment on roads. On page 19, the President talked about the road network, especially the rural road network. I would like to seek more clarification for the Ministry of Works and Transport; I would like them to now tell us something about the status of community roads. I am saying this because in the past, before the allocation of more funds to that sector, records showed that only 15 percent of our rural network community roads were in a fair state. Now, with increased funding to the sector, I do not know whether more community roads have been improved.

Finally, I wish to make a comment on the economy, and something which was tackled in the statement by the Leader of the Opposition. Quite often, people talk about forged figures of the economy not reflecting the will of the citizenry. I beg that we draw a difference between two things; micro economics cannot be forged. If it were inflation, either high or low, it is for real. 

The quality of service delivery is another area for us to investigate and mitigate the challenge there, though that should not make us fail to acknowledge that it is fiscal discipline for our Government to pass all borrowings through Parliament – (Member timed out)

3.33
MS OKORIMOE JANET (NRM, Woman Representative, Abim): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to join others in thanking H.E. the President for the State of the Nation Address. I want to thank Government for the progress so far made in all the sectors. However, allow me to also say that we should pull up our socks in areas where we have not done well.

Let me now say something about security. On page 35, the President said that the security situation in the country was excellent. He further stated that the whole country was peaceful and that it would remain peaceful. 

I would like to say that the situation has changed, especially in places like Abim District. For the last few days, we have been attacked by warriors. I want to say that it was very wrong for any person to decide that soldiers who had been deployed along the road between Kotido and Abim be withdrawn. This has opened up ways for the warriors or the wrong people to attack the innocent people of Abim District with impunity. My appeal to Government, therefore, is that it needs to protect the people of Abim District.

On health services in the country, I would like to say that even though Government is doing its best by putting up these structures, monitoring and supervision is not being done well. Last week, the Minister of Health told us about the renovations that were going to take place in some hospitals. Well, that is good, but when I hear about renovations I do not get excited. 

I am saying this because some of the renovations are being done haphazardly by companies blessed by the ministry itself. A case in point is Abim Hospital, where some renovations were done, but as of now, they have never been completed - the roof still leaks and the hospital still has flash toilets, but without running water. If that is the kind of renovation we are talking about, I cannot be impressed, especially if that is what is going to continue taking place.

I would like to further urge Ministry of Health to take keen interest in hospitals that are upcountry. The renovations still leave a lot to be desired. 

I also want to comment on education. I want to thank Government for the progress being made in education. However, some of us from the Karamoja sub-region are still waiting to see the implementation of Cabinet’s resolution that Karamoja sub-region should have boarding primary schools to uplift the standard of education in that part of the country. That is a promise that was made. We have not forgotten about it and we want Government to assure us when we are going to have it. 

I also want to thank Government for always responding to disaster cases in Karamoja. However, I think it is high time we thought of long-term solutions such as irrigation. Sometimes we talk about irrigation here, but it seems like a taboo to talk about irrigation for Karamoja. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

3.38
MS ANIFA KAWOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion. I want to add my voice to the others in thanking H.E. the President for the elaborative State of the Nation Address. 

While I associate myself with the issues raised by the mover of the motion, I am extremely disappointed as chairperson of the Equal Opportunities Committee. I want to bring it to the attention of this august House that Article 32 of the Constitution of Uganda is clear about the issues of minority and marginalised groups. I anticipated something in the address and the Budget focusing on minority groups. 

Article 32(3) and (4) is clear. It states that an Equal Opportunities Commission shall be established within one year. The Minister of Finance said nothing about the minority groups in her budget; even the commission was not mentioned anywhere in that speech. 

The plight and concerns of the minority groups have become a public outcry. In the 2008/09 financial year, a budget was provided for the establishment of this commission but up to now, the commission is not yet set up. Why is Government taking over four years to establish the Equal Opportunities Commission? What happened to the budget that was released in the FY 2008/09? What did it establish? Where is the money? What is the problem in establishing this commission? This is a concern for every Ugandan woman; even you, Madam Speaker, are on record for fighting for the minority groups. The Committee on Equal Opportunities is about to come here with a report on minority groups, their concerns and their plight. 

Government seems to be very reluctant when it comes to issues of the marginalised groups. It is my humble request that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development tells this august House why the commission, which is mandated to look at the issues of the marginalised groups, is not yet in place. 

The plight of this country is seen, for example, through these ethnic conflicts arising out of the formation of new districts. The people are fighting amongst themselves. This commission would have worked to help in such a situation. Is it that the Ministry of Gender does not give the marginalised groups priority - issues concerning persons with disabilities, those who need sign language and so on? I want to see this budget cater for these groups. I want an assurance from the Ministry of Gender when this commission is going to be set up.

My next concern is on page 16 of the State of the Nation Address. While I agree with the President on the six homesteads, I want to say that they are not enough. These homesteads are selected from villages basing on model farmers, but this programme focuses on improving the poor of the poorest. This means that the programme is now in support of the theory that those who have shall be given more. The people in Ssembabule District are leaving below the poverty line and many of them cannot get the chance to be selected. I want to ask the Ministry of Agriculture whether they have any intention to consider affirmative action for the poor of the poorest, especially the marginalised groups. 

I move to resource distribution under NAADS, under the model of six villages. You may find a sub-county that has three parishes and another that has six parishes getting the same amount of money. When the time for distribution of this money comes, some groups get more money then others and this causes a problem. 

3.43
MS ANNE AURU (Independent, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I rise to support the motion. I want to thank His Excellency for the precise exposition of government policy contained in his address. I am going to comment on three sectors: Infrastructure, education, and peace and security. 

I want to thank His Excellency and his Government for the policy of upgrading all the major roads that connect us to the outside world. That is very important. On this matter, I want to appreciate Government for tarmacking Gulu-Atiak-Nimule Road. Those of us who come from that side have suffered so much on that road. Upgrading it will go a long way in improving business with the neighbouring countries. 

I would like to also observe that there are roads which were being tarmacked before, like Atiak–Adjumani–Moyo Road which was contracted to a Chinese company in 1996. Due to the insecurity in that region, the Chinese had to abandon that project and up to now, the project is not yet complete. I really expected the President to mention that road and to ensure that it is completed. I pray that it is completed soon. 

I would like to thank this government for providing water transport in form of a ferry for islands and for some districts which must be reached by water. In particular, I want to thank Government for the Obongi–Maji ferry, which connects Adjumani and Moyo districts. 

On energy development, His Excellency talked about on-going projects and those that are to be started in 2010 like Karuma Power Station, a heavy fuel plant, renewable energy projects and rural electrification. However, His Excellency has forgotten that there are districts that are off-grid - districts that cannot be connected easily, especially with the power shortage in this country. These are districts like Adjumani, Moyo and Moroto. 

I expected him to mention in his State of the Nation Address that these three districts were supplied with 750 KV generators and what is required is distribution. I bring this up because it is not mentioned anywhere that distribution of these generators is going to be implemented. The institutions and individuals in those districts need power for their development. 

Let me talk about peace and security. I want to thank Government for the peace and security that we are enjoying in this country. The northern and eastern regions have really suffered a lot, and it is good that Government took it upon itself to pursue Kony up to Garamba Forest. We know that innocent lives were lost there, but the benefits we are experiencing now are far greater. 

My prayer is that Government ensures that the peace that has been secure is protected. Rebel activities and thugs should be managed properly. We still have threats from neighbouring countries. I know Government has a programme to settle border issues, but that should be expedited. 

On education, I want to thank Government for the universal education in primary and secondary schools. This has gone a long way in improving access and cutting on illiteracy levels in Uganda. However, the qualities of education still leave a lot to be desired. (Member timed out) 

3.49
MS JULIET SEKITOLEKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me also take this opportunity to thank the President for the good and focused address. It actually touched the people’s lives and we really appreciated. 

First, I would like to convey thanks from the people of Kibaale for the response from Government when they were hit by hunger, especially Mpefu Sub-County. The people appreciated and actually utilised the relief very well. 

I would like to address two issues. In the previous address, the President was so passionate about the roads and as he spoke, most of us kept clapping and were very happy. In fact, the people of Kibaale got hope that at last the roads of Kibaale would be constructed. I am talking about the Hoima–Kagadi–Kyenjojo Road; people still hope that this road will be constructed. It was mentioned that time and it has since been mentioned, but there is no sign that the road will be constructed. The road is so terrible and when it rains, it becomes impassable. 

Look at the whole road network in Kibaale – people are really stranded. I will give the example of the road from Kibaale headquarters to Kagadi - I am still wondering who supervises these contractors - it was contracted by Uganda National Road Authority for about Shs 290 million. These people have one grader, they have been on this road for several months and when it rains the road becomes impassable. I do not know who is letting the President down because he is so passionate about the road network in the country. I would like to call upon the minister to help, because it is his people and the people of Kibaale that are letting us down.

Secondly, I would like to talk about child sacrifice. The mothers of this country are yearning for action. On page 4, the President talked about arresting people involved in child sacrifice, but people want action. When there was a lot of robbery in this country, we had Wembley. This operation was up in arms and the thuggery in this country was controlled. Why can’t we have another operation like Wembley to control child sacrifice in this country? 

I will give you an example from my own district. There is a sub-county called Nkoko where recently, there was child sacrifice, and the mothers look at us as their only solution. We could have laws, but people want action that they can really touch and where they can even get involved, like the establishment of Wembley. So, we are asking for strong action against child sacrifice. There are so many people that are caught in this act and when they are taken to court, things just die out silently. Most people are not happy and we need action on this. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

3.54
MR MEDDIE MULUMBA (NRM, Luuka County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion. That notwithstanding, I have a number of issues I want to raise. 

First, I want to talk about the progress of road transport. During the Budget Speech of FY 2008-2009, the then Minister of Finance, Dr Suruma, said he was launching an assault on roads. In Luuka where I come from, we have not even realised a pinch concerning the assault that Dr Suruma promised us, as most of our roads are impassable. We are talking about Bonna Bagagawale, but I have some roads which were last done in the first government and which are now impassable.

On the issue of Prosperity for All, I thank the President for the efforts that he has undertaken, including restructuring NAADS. I also want to say that modernised planting materials are good but they should come on time. Also, we should not just look at planting materials. We are always relying on God to give us rains, but I think it is high time that Government made serious efforts towards irrigation. 

In most rural areas, people have been cultivating their land but their crops are dying because of dry spells. We are going to get problems if Government continues the way it is without taking irrigation into account. Right now in Busoga region, we are realising that there is hunger. People are not yet dying, but I think that soon we are going to get problems. I would like the Minister for Disaster Preparedness to try and go there to evaluate the situation on the ground. People are suffering, there is no food, the maize did not grow properly and so many other things. 

On the issue of NAADS, the new structures are good but there is a lot of corruption and haemorrhage in NAADS. People are receiving chicken at over UShs 20,000. When you receive local chicken at UShs 20,000, it is broad day robbery and most people do not know it. They think they are just giving them things for free, so they are willing to take anything. I wish to call upon Government to seriously look at these things. Government has very good policies, but good policies with poor implementation will not take us anywhere. 

The President talked about rural electrification, and in his address, cited a number of schemes which need completion. However, there are so many other schemes, which he somehow forgot about. A case in point is a scheme I have, which was started in 2003 from Nakabugu to Lambala. Eighty percent of the work was done, but up to now, nothing is happening. We want these schemes to be completed so that we can have electricity.

Finally, I want to talk about education. I thank Government for UPE, but the funds for UPE are becoming so insufficient, and the manner in which they are coming is not regular. You do not know when funds are coming; up to now, for example, they have not received money. Head teachers are always saying they are using their money to help run schools.

Madam Speaker, I thank you and I end by supporting the motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, with regard to NAADS, I received a notice that there will be a workshop here on the 20th July. I would really urge members to attend in big numbers and deal with these policy issues a bit more than we are doing here.

3.59
MR KIBEDI ZAAKE (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion that thanks of Parliament be recorded for the clear and precise exposition of government policy contained in the State of the Nation Address. 

I am happy that His Excellency the President diagnosed that we have a problem of unemployment among young people. In his address, the President noted that it is not enough to educate a large number of people without creating jobs for them. He then concluded the matter by saying that the Minister of Finance would say more on the issue of job creation during her budget speech.

I listened to the budget speech very clearly and the speech that the minister made was not sufficient compared to the need for employment among young people. The problem of unemployment is escalating every day. As a youth Member of Parliament, if I had not read about Martin Luther, I would also have taken the course hon. Kajeke took and resigned because of unemployment. However, Martin Luther said that the ultimate measure of a man is not only during the time of comfort and convenience, but also during the time of challenges, and this is the reason why I have not put in my resignation. 

We need to take affirmative action concerning this problem of unemployment. We have 27 universities in Uganda today and there are about 120,000 students graduating every year and only approximately 500,000 job opportunities in the civil service. What can we do about this? Coming up with speeches is not enough. We need to take this as a serious matter and create a job creativity fund or a special fund. 

Some years back, we had what they called Youth Entrepreneurship Scheme (YES), which used to be accessed by students who have completed school and who have the knowledge to create their own employment, but do not have the access to do so. We can revive this programme so that youth who are educated and have gone through vocational training can access money to start employment, and even create employment for other people. Thereafter they pay - after a certain period of time - without interest or with very minimal interest that is affordable to a young person who has just finished school. 

Another issue which I would like us to talk about is the programme on health. During the address, the President said in his conclusion: “I would like to encourage the honourable Members of Parliament and the public to visit these facilities and report any anomalies including drug stock-outs and absentee health workers.” This is a serious problem. In my region, everywhere we move to, there are few drugs in the health centres, and employees are absent. When you come to the national centre, the drugs are there but there is a problem of getting them. This calls for extra work to be done by this House. 

We need to resolve ourselves on this so that we come up with a regional health inspectorate. This inspectorate will help us make sure that drugs are delivered on time to the health centres. Without this inspectorate, district directorates do not do their work on time. People are dying because they lack drugs, which are there but do not reach the centres on time. We need to pass this resolution in Parliament so that regional health inspectorates are formed to take the responsibility of making sure that health services are delivered on time and they reach where they are supposed to go.

In conclusion, there is another important issue that I would like to talk about. His Excellency said that the programme of rural electrification is going to be revived this year. I would like to encourage the Minister of Energy to make sure that he does his homework and they start with areas where a survey was done but the programme did not reach. 

Government is going to pay a lot of money. In my area, Bugweri, they went and cut trees for the programme of rural electrification two years ago but up to now, power has not reached them and people are planning to go to court – (Member timed out)

4.04
MS THEOPISTA SSENTONGO (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to add my voice to those who support the motion. 

I would like to thank His Excellency for fulfilling his obligation according to the Constitution. I want to start by applauding the Government for sustaining the environment in the country that has enabled an economic growth of seven percent per annum. However, I have to repeat this - and I have been doing this now again on this Floor – I still decry the working conditions of workers which have not improved, despite the wonderful labour laws that this House legislated. This has been contributed by a number of factors. One of them is lack of enforcement. There is no implementation of these good laws. They are just left in the books, and yet workers are suffering under the hands of employers. 

The other contributing factor is under funding of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. It is evidenced by the decentralisation of government activities, which has rendered workers vulnerable to the district authorities. 

Industrial relations officers are not taken as people who are productive in the coffers of the districts. Therefore, there is no vote specific for catering for workers’ activities. If there is any dispute or an accident at a workplace in any given district, especially those which are far from Kampala, no one can attend to such cases because the industrial relations officers are not mobile, they are not facilitated and the districts do not even mind about them even if they asked for facilitation. 

Another issue is about the absence of an industrial court. I remember very well that on the Floor of this House, it was resolved that the industrial court should be funded from the Consolidated Fund, but up to now - I think it is now about five years down the road - this has not been put in place. I would like to hear from the Minister of Finance about what is really happening. 

There are quite a number of disputes that are lying in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development between workers and employers, which are not attended to just because the industrial court is not functioning. This renders the workers vulnerable and they suffer quietly, yet they are contributing to the country’s GDP, which we are all proud of.

In view of that, I would like to ask the Government to increase the budget for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. This has been going on and on whenever we discuss government budgets. This ministry has been marginalised all along, and yet it is representing a good number of those who are vulnerable in our country - people with disabilities, the workers, youth, the elderly, and so on. However, when you look at its budget, it is really appalling. We need the government to look into this very seriously. 

I also want to address myself to the poverty in our country. A big portion of our population is living in the rural areas. Those living under the poverty line are about 31 percent. This means that an average Ugandan finds it difficult to access basic needs like education, shelter, food, medical care. Now we are hearing about people dying of hunger. It is unbelievable! The life expectancy of Ugandans is below 50 years, just because of the generally bad conditions that people are living in.

The other issue regards lack of planning by Government for rural-urban migration. This has resulted in our urban areas developing many slums because there are no plans that Government has put in place to ensure that people who move from rural to urban areas have facilities that cater for them. That is why we find the Kivulus. 

We need to harvest water because dependency on predictable amounts of rainfall has now changed due to deforestation, among other things. So, we need to harvest water and we need to also introduce irrigation systems in our country. We have many rivers, but people are encroaching on them and in the process depleting trees. Along the River Nile, for example, people have depleted the trees and all the fertile soils have been washed away and have ended up in other countries that we share the river with. It is very unfortunate. 

4.10
MR JULIUS BALYEJJUSA (NRM, PWD Eastern Region): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute to the State of the Nation Address as delivered by H.E. the President of the Republic of Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, I will put much emphasis on what he termed as progress in human development. My challenge as I was going through this booklet was on the issue of education. We are aware that there is a certain section or group of persons that need special education. I found a very big challenge, more especially when it came to the issue of UPE and USE –(Interruption)

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On both sides of the House, our Rules of Procedure clearly spell out that there will be a front bench and a back bench. And while the hon. Minister has moved after hearing me – (Laughter)

MR BALYEJJUSA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the issue of UPE, as regards children with disabilities, the biggest challenge I found was that in regard to instructional materials, the money that government sends to cater for UPE is uniform, but you find that when it comes to children with disabilities, more especially the blind who need more instructional materials, their cost is higher than that of normal children. I would, therefore, request that Government does more in this area under both UPE and USE. The money sent should be different; if not we should encourage emphasis to be put on special needs education units. Like if we developed Madera School for the Blind and make it better than it is by putting more infrastructure, instructional materials and posting there more teachers.  I think it can go a long way in helping develop the human resource among the blind.

Madam Speaker, recruitment and retention of special needs education teachers is also another big challenge, but which I believe as Government could be handled. These teachers get the same pay and yet they do more work than the teachers who teach the normal children. They do extras, for example, in brailing and doing other things for the special needs education children. Therefore, I would request government to go an extra mile in coming up with a clear policy, maybe on recruitment and retention of special needs education teachers, maybe by giving them an extra allowance. 

Another challenge with regard to this comes to the vocational training institutions or rehabilitation centres for persons with disabilities. They were established a long time ago, but most of them are in dire need of rehabilitation and need more facilities to be put in place. 

There was a curriculum which was launched by government, which is called thematic. I find it a bit challenging, especially when it comes to translating it from the local languages to Braille, and even to other languages which can be understood and read by the visually impaired and those with hearing impairment. This is a very big challenge, and as Government, I think we ought to have come up with clear policies.

Another challenge I found out with this thematic curriculum is that of employment. If one is to teach in a local language, then a person from Nyondo might not easily get employed in Pader because they cannot speak the local language in Pader. Therefore, this is a very big challenge, and it somehow creates some gaps because, how do you deny me an opportunity if it is in Pader because you have to promote thematic curriculum? This is really a very big challenge.

Whereas in towns pupils can be taught in English, the villagers will have to be taught in their mother languages and by the time they start coping with the English Language at the time of doing exams, those in urban areas would have gone a step higher and we shall continue having a very big gap between the rural set-up and urban set-up. I think government ought to have come up with something clear on this one.

As I wind up, I want to comment on this programme of SACCOs. We have done research and very many people are willing to subscribe to SACCOs, but in Busoga sub-region, for example, and most especially eastern region, we had TEAM, which robbed people; we had Dutch International and people were robbed, but up to now, Government hasn’t done anything to see that justice is done. Therefore, some areas in eastern Uganda have not subscribed to these SACCOs and they want to find out what government is going to do if we are to promote our programme as Government, and also to create confidence and bring back the saving culture among our people. We have asked government to give us reports, but up to now, every time we ask them they say they are coming. But we shall keep waiting; after all patience pays. I thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity.

4.18
MS REBECCA AMUGE (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Madam Speaker, allow me to thank the President for honouring his constitutional obligation. Allow me also to thank the Leader of the Opposition for having responded, and the mover and seconder of the motion. 

Madam Speaker, you remember that the President signed the roadmap to maternal health. I thought that the President would mention something concerning maternal health, but somehow, he ignored a very big percentage of the population, that is, the women who are really his voters. 

We have over 63 percent of women who deliver in their rural homes and not in hospitals. We also know that very few women can access health facilities. We know that in the health centres, especially the referral hospitals, the women must pay Shs 20,000 to be tested for cervical cancer. I thought the President, who signed this roadmap to maternal health, should have said something about it. I am shocked that he did not mention anything at all. I also want to remind the President that women are the biggest percentage of voters and they should not be forgotten. 

Madam Speaker, I am making a proposal that as we have the child health days in this country, we must also have the mothers’ health days where mothers are given services like tests for cervical cancer or anything to do with reproductive health problems and this should be free of charge. If this is done, then we will know that the NRM Government puts the women, who vote for them massively, in their programmes. 

The President throughout his address tried to find out the group, the people and other issues that are sabotaging the programmes of the government, and he called some of them the ‘nnugu group’. But allow me to enrich the list of the President of those who are sabotaging his programme. The first and very pertinent one is corruption - that is nnugu no.1. Two, is widespread poverty. Three, is poor human resource management and inequality in most sectors. Four, is the lack of proper planning; and the next is unfulfilled pledges; some of them have gone unfulfilled for the last 23 years and that is a very important nnugu that the President must know. Another one is broken deals and agreements – the agreements made are never followed up, and that is also a very strong nnugu. 

I want us to look at Bonna Bagaggawale as a programme. We have ghost Bonna Bagaggawale programmes which people do not see, and that is sabotage for this government. We cannot forget the arrogant agents of the government and the impersonators. I am told that they have gone as far as impersonating the President. That they ring you and say they are the President. That is a very big level of sabotage if the President did not know. 

We have the sycophants who are very comfortable with the status quo that they don’t allow you to tell them the right thing. They cannot allow you to say that this area must be corrected, and they benefit from that level. So, this is another group of people who are sabotaging this government, but not the Opposition. 

I would like to conclude on this area that, to correct this, the NRM Government needs business process re-engineering. Re-engineer yourself, re-engineer the members, re-engineer the Cabinet and re-engineer the way you do your work. Thank you. 

4.23
MR ALEX ONZIMA (FDC, Maracha County, Arua): I thank you, Madam Speaker. In my view, the security of the nationals of any country forms one of the major components of any meaningful State of the Nation Address or State of the Union Address as it is referred to in the United states of America by any president worth his name. His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, just like his predecessors, the late Milton Obote and the late Idi Amin - may their souls rest in peace - among others, is the President of the Republic of Uganda, and at the same time, the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces. While the late Obote boasted and questioned Mr Paul Semogerere, then presidential hopeful in the controversial 1980 general election campaigns - whose (the latter’s) army generals were in the 1979 war that toppled the Amin regime - the late Obote himself was overthrown twice in a short space of 10 years by his own generals. On the other hand, the late Idi Amin suffered attempted military coups by his own generals, among them the late Brig. Charles Alube, who was instantly murdered by Amin’s loyalists at the command of the late dictator. 

On the contrary, under the Museveni administration, top military generals are court-martialled. They are jailed; they are put under house arrest; and are put on Katebe - dropped from being army commanders - without any slight threats to national security. (Applause) In my view, therefore, President Museveni has distinguished himself as one of the most capable contemporary commanders-in-chief on the African continent. No wonder, therefore, that the young army of the Republic of Uganda has in a very short time gained international credibility and is now serving on the United Nations peace-keeping missions, globally. 

Madam Speaker, since Mr Museveni draws his title of Commander-in-Chief from the presidency, he is not only a president, but a president and a half. (Applause) It is my prayer that future Ugandan presidents will benefit from the above foundation built by President Museveni. 

I totally agree with the report of the security as presented by the President. As West Nilers, we did not merely and consciously enjoy the said security, but we are true eye witnesses of the security that we are about to see, which security is actually invisible. 

Until recently, travelling between Pakwach in West Nile and Karuma Bridge through the Murchison Falls National Park during the day, and moreover in very heavy armoured military convoys, was one of the most riskiest and most dangerous ventures in the world. As we speak now – (Member timed out)

4.29
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Independent, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the President for fulfilling his constitutional obligation by presenting to Parliament the State of the Nation Address. 

The framers of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda looked at some of the best international practices, and that is why the Constitution is a hybrid of both the Westminster model and the American Constitution of presidential system. The State of the Nation Address has got its origins in the American presidential system. It is not enough for us to stand in Parliament or anywhere else and say the President is the best. It would be great for us to make these statements after comparison.

In America, where we borrow this system from, the President makes the State of the Nation Address eight times; meaning that this statement is made once every year. The President of America cannot go beyond eight years. But ours is a unique scenario where we want our President to give the State of the Nation Address nearly 35 times. This is not the best case scenario. 

As a nation, we must always strive to improve. We must always look at the best case scenarios. If there was a presidential scorecard, to borrow Mr Pulkol’s model, and we scored President Museveni against Idi Amin, Amin would score seven percent and President Museveni would score 87 or 90 percent. But if on the same scorecard we juxtaposed President Museveni and Nelson Mandela, President Museveni would score less than five percent and Mandela would score over 90 percent. So, depending on the person you are comparing with on the presidential scorecard, you can say what we have is the best. We should stop comparing ourselves with the worst case scenarios. We can never compare Uganda with Somalia, neither should we continue comparing Yoweri Museveni with Idi Amin, because those are not the best case scenarios.

In 1986, when President Museveni was swearing in, he said Uganda’s problem was not economic; it was political, and we are fully in agreement because politics has been defined as the management of scarce resources. But in many respects, 23 years down the road, the President is failing to solve Uganda’s governance problems. Ask yourself why we still have this tension between Mengo and the central government –(Member timed out)

4.35
MR ISHAA OTTO (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the President and the Leader of Opposition for the subsequent State of the Nation Address and the reply. I read the address of this financial year, but I did not find much. Alternatively, when I was perusing through the reply of the Leader of Opposition, I got a lot of facts about this country, and what in my view would be a true representation and reflection of this country. 

This is the second time that the State of the Nation Address was presented in this country while I am in this Parliament. Unfortunately, in the past, I had not seen nor read a State of the Nation Address by the preceding heads of state in this country. But in my own understanding of the State of the Nation Address, I was expecting many issues in this document, but I found nothing.

I am going to comment on only one thing that I read in the State of the Nation Address, that is, the fight against corruption. In President Yoweri Museveni’s 2006 manifesto, he promised Ugandans zero tolerance to corruption. During last year’s State of the Nation Address, the President mentioned the same thing. This very year, he repeated zero tolerance to corruption. 

However, if you read the report of Transparency International, it pronounces this country as the third most corrupt country in the world! This is a shame to this great nation. This is a shame to the Pearl of Africa. It is a shame to us all! 

Look at the state of the economy of this country and see where we are in corruption. The World Bank report listed Uganda as the sixth worst destination for investment in the world because of corruption. These are facts and not insinuations by hon. Ishaa Otto or any Member here. It is research that is based on facts. 

Madam Speaker, we have had issues here: Temangalo, GAVI Funds and corruption in local governments. Everywhere in the country, the level of corruption is appalling. One would not even believe that this is happening in our own society. Even the way we talk and respond to issues is corrupt in its nature.

Karl Max said that man was born free, but corrupted by the society. Today, children who are being born in this country are already corrupt because of this environment in which we live. This is unfortunate because we have no future. How do you fight corruption by reappointing public servants who have been implicated in corruption cases? 

The President, in the State of the Nation Address, enlisted the progress made on many of the roads, but when it came to corruption, there was no highlight of how many people are in jail, or how many people have been implicated or how many public officers have actually taken responsibility, just like my brother here was trying to do; to resign because of errors they have caused in the various ministries or offices where they serve. I have not heard nor have I seen any person who has been dismissed by the President, or the relevant officers, including ministers, because of being involved in corruption. 

This statement should be clear that we are not going to transform Uganda and its people if we continue to condone corruption in this country. I thank you very much.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let me remind Members that it is also corruption not to attend this House and then collect money. 

4.41
MR MATHIAS BIREKERAAWO (DP, Bukoto County South, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank His Excellency the President, for having honoured his constitutional obligation, and also thank the movers of this motion.

I would have expected the President, in the State of the Nation Address, to give a balance sheet of the country and not to make something like a budget proposal, because his speech is more like a budget proposal. Instead of giving the state of the nation - for example, this is our fourth year under the multiparty dispensation, and I expected the President to talk about the politics of the country over the last four years as far as the multiparty system is concerned. 

When he talked about good governance, my party, the Democratic Party, is committed to pursuing the free and fair capturing of power. In 1961, the DP led this country to independence. In 1962, even when we lost elections, we conceded defeat. 

On the political scene, I expected the President to give us his roadmap as we move towards the 2011 elections. You have always been reading in the papers that my supporters, now 19 of them, are languishing in Luzira for having attended a public rally in Ndeeba and also Kyengera, and yet there is now a law - I challenge anybody to tell me. This is Statutory Instrument No.53 of 2007 that was only to last up to November. Madam Speaker, with your permission, I would like to lay it on Table to let the nation know under which law the Police continue to harass and to beat up Ugandans - (Interruption)

MR BALIKUDDEMBE: Thank you, hon. colleague and thank you, Madam Speaker. What hon. Nsubuga is saying on the Floor of Parliament is that, Police Instrument No.53 of 2007 should not be applied anymore because it was supposed to run for only one year, but it has become a precedent for the Police to engage in our public rallies and our mandate as Members of Parliament. We are not supposed to go down and consult our people. 

Just yesterday, I wrote a letter to the DPC, Entebbe, who referred me to the Inspector General of Police, and he told me that I had to get the mandate from the Inspector General of Police. I have been calling the Inspector General of Police since yesterday; I visited his offices, but we are being referred to Police Instrument No.53, which is not in service.

MR BIREKERAAWO: Thank you very much for the information. 

Madam Speaker, this Parliament makes laws. And if we make laws, why should we continue respecting laws that are non-existent. I, therefore, wish to lay on Table, this archaic law that the police is continuously using to harass the opposition.

On security, I believe you have been hearing of deaths all over the country. In my constituency, Bukoto South for example, since last year, six people have been killed but with government making no statement in respect of this. 

In Kyanamukaaka, in Bukoto Central Constituency, which neighbours mine, and which is represented by the Rt hon. Speaker of this House, about eight people have been killed. Even in other parts of this country, including the city, we have been hearing of people dying – we expected the President not to only talk about the killings by Kony, but the entire security situation in the nation.

I have here a report of the Human Rights Watch issued in April, which talks about safe houses in Kampala from where Ugandans are being tortured. If you accept, Madam Speaker, I can lay it also on Table to – (Member timed out)

4.47
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity to express my thoughts and views on the State of the Nation Address. 

Listening to hon. Mabikke a few minutes ago, I said to myself: the problem of this country is not leaders who refuse to give up power; it is not the failure to sort out the political question; it is us Ugandans who set low standards to accept poor quality services, elect poor leaders and accept the low-life standards that we lead. What I am saying is that, the transformation must begin with Ugandans who accept all these low-standard statements and lives that we lead.

Having said that, Madam Speaker, H.E the President said that the size of Uganda’s economy is now Shs 29.4 trillion, which is 8.4 times what it was 23 years ago, before the NRM took power. As a student of Business and Management, I know that performance evaluation is a factor of the size of the job; of the target set; of the time spent on the job; and of the cost of the job. Since the President used 1986 as the baseline, so will I. 

By 1986, Madam Speaker, this country had received, in grants and loans, a total of about $2.86 billion in 23 years. And what was done with that money is by now a common story. Since then, in the following 23 years, this country has received, in loans and grants, over $25 billion. What has been done, and what has not been done, is also known. 

In 1986, the external debt of this country stood at $286 million. Today, the external debt is $4 billion, not to mention the $4 billion that was cancelled.

Let me also add that, before 1986, this country had road, rail and public air transport. Today, Madam Speaker, the public transport policy seems to be boda-bodas. Before that – the only thing I can say is that we had one presidential jet. Now we have two. But in the 60s, we are told that 80 percent of the population of this country was engaged in agriculture, and that percentage contributed 80 percent to GDP. In the 90s the same 80 percent was still stuck in agriculture, but contributing only 40 percent to GDP. 

This year, the hon. Syda Bbumba, Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, informed the country that 80 percent of the population of Uganda are still stuck in agriculture, but that they contribute 15 percent to GDP. This means that, while in the 60s, each person is deemed to have been contributing at least a unit to GDP, today 15 percent of the population of this country contributes 80 percent to GDP, while 80 percent wallop in poverty and only contribute 15 percent. I would like to ask: Is that development where only 15 percent of the population is growing, while 80 percent seem to be walloping in poverty?

The President also said that the cattle population had increased from three percent, in 1986, to 11 percent. My question is: Who did the census in 1986? In any case, can we know how many people owned the three million cattle, and how many now own the 11 million cattle since the people of Teso, Karamoja and Acholi who used to have cattle, now do not have it – (Member timed out) 

4.53
MR JAMES AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. After the President delivered the State of the Nation Address, there is one figure that totally stuck in my mind; that is the per capita figure of $440.

In the address, the President tried to relay it to $264 of what the NRM found in 1986. I was fortunate to get an opportunity to write an open letter to the President examining these figures. It was published in two news papers, the Observer and the Monitor. My research revealed that contrary to popular opinion that the economy has been growing between seven to 10 percent every year, the figures do not support that notion. 

In fact, from 1986, we went through a period when figures dropped to $170. As we speak now, the Minister of Finance released figures last year, together with the bureau of statistics and the per capita income for last year was $479. 

This year, according to the President, the economy has grown by seven percent; the per capita income has decreased by eight percent. Somewhere along the lines the figures are not telling the truth. Unless we have a population growth greater than seven percent, then you can explain the declining per capita income. Otherwise, we have to look at inflation, and these are matters that we do not seem to want to tackle. But even going by the $240 per capita, it is still depressing. For the average person it works out to Shs 80,000 per month. And the reality is that we have people of such great opulence in a sea of poverty. How is the country moving? If this is the growth that is coming up then we are in a serious problem. The 80 percent, whom my colleague was talking about are in absolute poverty, yet we have a few individuals who are swimming in billions; even within this House; they have accumulated so much wealth. 

That brings me to my next point, and that is corruption. My sister hon. Kabakumba is talking about the Milton Obote Foundation. That has been investigated under two governments, Amin’s Government and your own government and it was found that public funds were not used. Otherwise, we would still be in court, but the matter was settled in court. 

On the question of these mansions rising all over Kampala, when are we going to do the investigations? And when we find out how people have acquired all this wealth, what are we going to do? We either go the China way, where corruption is considered economic sabotage against the state and carries with it a sentence not different from treason, or else, we go the opposition way like what we did when handling the war in the North. This may sound strange, but if we are going to curb corruption then maybe the government is going to consider amnesty. There is no stage where we have seen zero tolerance for corruption in action. 

If you are not going to go for the corrupt, find another way of dealing with it. Consider amnesty and the corrupt should come clean; return some of the ill-gotten wealth and the country moves on. 

As we stand now, we have figures that do not add up; growth that we do not see and a lot of suffering. Poverty is the greatest enemy of our people. We may deceive ourselves that this growth is reaching the common man in Uganda, but the reality is that this government is failing the common man. 

4.59
MS SUZAN NAMPIJJA (CP, Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. According to the President’s speech, I think we shouldn’t be proud of the current food sector which is seven percent; its indicators are deceptive. It contradicts the state of environmental report of 2008. 

According to that report, between 1993 and 2005, the forest cover up to date remains 3.1 million hectares. This is alarming. About 90 thousand hectares of forest cover are lost annually. If nothing is done, between now and 2040, Uganda will be a desert. 

Secondly, the rest of the negative story which is likely to impair agricultural production is the phenomenon of climate change. The President did not talk about climate change and as a country we have not demonstrated any effort to ensure that climate change is catered for. 

Madam Speaker, the current situation is saddening. If you look at our agricultural produce, seasons have changes, rainfall patterns have drastically changed, and floods have washed away human beings and animals. You can imagine the state in which we shall be in twenty years from now. Unless something is done to revert the situation – and something can be done if we work together to renew our forest cover through planting frees. 

Madam Speaker, we have no programme to regularise tree planting. We have no adaptation action plan in the ministry. There is no national public awareness programme in function. Something must be done immediately.

Finally, the President talked about removing bail for cases like child sacrifice, treason and others. How can you talk about removing bail for such cases when you have neglected your constitutional duty of appointing appropriate judges? This is really bad for Ugandans. There is a standing backlog of cases and I think the President should appoint judges, even retired ones, to fill the gap. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.03
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will add my voice to those of other colleagues who have spoken before and congratulate hon. Najjemba and hon. Ndeezi for having moved this motion. It gives all of us an opportunity to look at this address and see whether it reflects the status of this country or the state of the nation.

I have been examining Article 101(1) of the Constitution under which the President gives this speech. Unfortunately, the constitutional makers made a very fundamental error in that they didn’t go ahead to define what sort of address this should be. The temptation, therefore, that a head of state will degenerate and turn this into a campaign platform is so high and that is the problem that we have today. 

What is the State of the Nation Address? Whether you look at Article 101(1) or 102 it is the same. We would be expecting the President, like a general meeting of a company, to start addressing challenges of a country: “These are the problems that we have”, and say maybe, “These are the solutions”, and present not a manifesto. 

Listening to His Excellency, the head of state and the resultant standing ovation was as if Uganda is a first world country. You need to travel around the world and see the state of Uganda. There was nothing to be proud of. A State of the Nation Address that cannot even tell us that three weeks down the road we are going to have a disaster; a famine, a drought and 20 percent of the people are going to be affected and you are telling me that, that is a State of the Nation Address? The President could not even envisage something, which was very clear; that there was going to be a problem because it was not unforeseen but was unfolding? Instead it was a chest thumping address.

I will talk about four sectors and start with education. I know others are still talking about time because they don’t want to talk about the facts. I will start with education. We have a fundamental flaw in our education system right from primary, secondary up to university. We are not producing professionals who are worthy. Why? Because students are now being taught to pass exams and that is why you find that in the law field we have 80 percent of them failing to pass a postgraduate law course and the head of the Bar course is saying what they are producing are quacks. 

Once you don’t have a professional base, it affects your human resource and, therefore, productivity. For us who are employers, we know the sort of graduates who are coming out. You can’t even speak good English and you say you are a graduate; from which university? And here we are chest thumping! 
	
You see, education is about quality and not only quantity. Our emphasis should be on the quality. You would rather have three doctors than have 20 quack doctors because you will be endangering the people. Our problem is, how can you have an education system and you say, “Let everybody pass”? Is that education? People are just growing up in schools up to university and then they move out and say they are university graduates. This is the state of the country today. (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in the public gallery we have students and teachers from Mitala Maria Muslim Primary School in Mpigi, represented by hon. Namirembe. They have come to watch our proceedings. You are welcome.

5.08
MS ROSE NAMAYANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakaseke): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank hon. Rose Najjemba and hon. Ndeezi for a precise motion and to thank the President for the State of the Nation Address. 

On behalf of the people of Nakaseke, I want to express my appreciation to government for starting the process of tarmacking the Semuto-Matugga Road. We are not complaining in that aspect.

I will just restrict myself to one sector and that is agriculture. I will refer to a submission I made here and I quoted the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy. I quoted Objective 22, which was misconstrued I think because I had to move out for other commitments. 

As a lawyer, I know that the objectives are not “justiceable”. I also know that they reflect the spirit the framers had in writing the Constitution. I just want to make it very clear that there is a difference between the right to food and the right to be fed. The right to food is actually what is embedded in Objective 22, that Government shall take the necessary steps to ensure that there is access to food. The right to be fed is what is being done in Teso today, relief and that is Objective 23. Relief, like I said that time, is short term and meant to clear a short term problem but that government must have a strategic intervention. 

In 1986, Uganda ratified the International Convention on Social, Economic and Cultural Rights and Article 2(1) of that convention obliges member states to do whatever is possible in their means to ensure that they, first of all, respect the right to food, protect it and also fulfil it. 

I know government has done much under the NAADS programme and other initiatives, but all I am saying is that it can do more. I am wondering whether the Ministry of Agriculture has a Strategic Investment Plan like we have in education and other sectors. 

Secondly, I am wondering because Uganda is still a signatory to the Maputo Protocol, which actually talks about ten percent of the budget going to agriculture; but the percentage of the budget that goes to agriculture in Uganda is less than five percent. 

We are giving relief in Teso and other areas in Karamoja, but on Monday I was in my constituency and other parts of the Central region. Even in Gomba, there was this massive drought and you could find that somebody planted five acres of maize but it all dried up and he is cutting down the field. That means we are going to have food shortage everywhere. Why am I saying we can do better than that? I will just give the example of Malawi. 

In Malawi when they had a drought, President Bingu Wa Mutharika launched what he called the Feed the Nation Initiative. The package was simple. One, to reduce export of maize; two, was to ensure that there is supply of improved seeds to the farmers; three, was to ensure that they cut costs of fertilizers by 40 percent and four, to ensure that wherever they have water, there must be irrigation.

This country I know can do more than what we are doing because the problem is big. In 2003, there was a budget cut in every department of government to fight the war in Northern Uganda. It was done in good faith and that money was put to use and we have seen the results. 

In 2007, we had CHOGM. There was financial restraint on many departments but because it was a national priority, we got the resources, and we had one of the most successful conferences in the Commonwealth. So I believe that under the same spirit, government must prioritise agriculture otherwise –(Member timed out_)

5.14
MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to join colleagues in commenting on the State of the Nation Address by the President. 

One issue that the President mentioned was about the economy and I think we were informed that the economy grew by nine percent per annum. Of course that is very right and I would like to correct the impression created by the hon. Akena who was saying that unless the population reduced, how could we have the income per capita reducing? 

It is possible that if the few people who have the income have made losses then they will divide what these people have reaped in a financial year by the same population and you can have it reduce. This is very possible because he was saying it is impossible. 

The point I am making here is that indeed the economy grew, but I would also like to mention that there is need for us to make this income felt by all Ugandans and we can use about two policies, either the fiscal policy or the monetary policy. 

By monetary policy I am saying that we have higher interest rates, and if you reduce the interest rates from say 20 percent to about ten or 12 percent, then most members will get involved in business and they will feel the economic growth. As such, there is need for redistribution. 

Secondly, the President talked about exports and he said that in as far as exports are concerned we have had a lot of improvement in the services sector. I think this is very clear, for example in tourism. 

I would also like to mention that when you encourage the importation of machinery like tractors, I think we can have a lot of investment in agriculture and here we will not be creating imported inflation. 

So, I would like to urge the Minister of Finance that there is need for us to import farm equipment like tractors and irrigation pumps. This is because we have many water sources, and I am sure this way we could solve the problem of famine.

On page 5, the President talked about the industrial sector and said it is doing well. I would also like to support that. However, there is need for us to have EPZ or Export Promoting Zones. Sometime back there was a plan that every district should have at least an industry specialising in local raw materials. I am sure that this is something that would work. 

So, I still urge government to create as many industries as possible in areas where there are raw materials. We should not leave behind whatever we had planned in as far as EPZ is concerned.

About mining, the President said the mining and quarrying sub-sector had grown by 9.2 percent. I am sure this is very right. Two weeks ago I went to Kyengegwa, Kyaka County and I saw a lot of kyegegwa or rocks. This clicked in my mind because last time when we passed Shs 1.1 trillion for the roads, some ministry officials were saying we don’t have the capacity or the stones. If we could have as many quarries as possible beginning from Kyaka, I think we would have our road network completely free because they were complaining of lack of stones. So can we begin there and have as many quarries as possible?

On NAADS, it is true that the restructuring has been okay especially where a Member of Parliament is supposed to be the Chair of the NAADS committee. It is also good that on 20th July, we are going to hear more from the Ministry of Agriculture. I would like to mention that in as far as NAADS is concerned, as government we should have a food security policy to ensure that we guard against famine. 

When I was growing up in those other regimes, every family had to have a compulsory garden. We are talking about famine in Teso, but there is going to be famine in Busoga and Bugisu because of the drought and climate changes. So there is need for us to have a policy that makes it compulsory to have food and not sell it all thereby causing famine. 

On electricity, the President said we are likely to have much more electricity after all the dams are constructed. I would like to tell the Ministry of Energy that in 2002 we heard that Bugote, Lwanika and Bwonda were going to get landing sites with a lot of electricity –(Member timed out)

5.19
MS EUDIA KWIZERA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kisoro): Madam Speaker, I also thank you for giving me this opportunity to contribute towards the State of the Nation Address, which His Excellency presented to this august House on 4 June 2009. I have to say that it was a well packaged address in that it showed at least where Uganda has been, where it is, where it is going and how we can get there. In the interest of time, I will speak about the education sector and the idea of adding value to our produce. 

These programmes are so good, UPE and USE, but I want to talk on behalf of girls. As you are aware, it is the government policy to at least have a secondary school in each sub-county. When you go to the grassroots you find that schools are located at extreme ends of the sub-country and as a result our girls travel quite a long distance. And as you know, down in the village, people are being ruined by poverty so our girls are being used by men when they go to school and return home. 

I am proposing that the government should plan and come in assertively to build dormitories or hostels for girls so that at least our girls can stop going through these risks and being used by men when returning home. As a result, a good number of our girls have been forced into early marriages; they have been affected by these dangerous diseases especially HIV/AIDS and that is why you find that at the end of it all we do not have women professionals. 

When you go to schools, even at primary level, we do not have enough female teachers. The ratio of female teachers to male teachers is very alarming. Madam Speaker, I was of the view that as much as these programmes are good, it is like having a newly born baby, you need to feed the baby, you need to cover the baby, you need to make sure that the baby is very comfortable so that the baby can grow well. Likewise, UPE and USE are young projects which we should guard safely so that at the end of it all we get qualitative education. 

Another important and serious issue I want to handle here is that government should make sure that before we have programmes and projects, at least the beneficiaries should own it all. Usually what we do is to involve the beneficiaries in the middle of the project cycle. And when you involve beneficiaries during the middle or at the end of it, they do not own it all, and that is why you find that most of the programmes and projects which are started by government are not sustainable; we do not achieve sustainability. So, that point should be noted seriously. 

Lastly, I want to talk about the idea of adding value to our products. Madam Speaker, I think you are aware that Kisoro grows the best quality Irish potatoes and quantitatively, Kisoro brings a lot of Irish potatoes here but it is unfortunate that our farmers are given little money for their produce. We are of the view that if at least we could have a factory in Kisoro, our people would get employment. And we have researched that we can get crisps, we can get chips, starch and they say that there is a certain beer which can be got from Irish potatoes. So, we are praying and requesting that at least we get a factory for our Irish potatoes in Kisoro. 

I want to thank the government on my behalf and on behalf of Kisoro people for our Kabale-Kisoro-Kyanikabunagana road, which is being upgraded. Right now, life is already better. (Applause) We used to take five hours to travel from Kisoro to Kabale but now within just one hour and a half, you are in Kabale. 

I want to thank the government for the security. You know in Kisoro, we live near the DRC and Rwanda border but the security is there. Our people are safe. Their property is safe and I pray that we continue working together.  

Madam Speaker, I am not happy with the Opposition. Really, how can you stand in this august Parliament – I have been hearing you debating, all of you saying that nothing has been done. Even you yourself cannot achieve 100 percent success. Have you fulfilled all your goals? Rome was not built in a day, it is just a process. (Applause)

5.25
MS BEATRICE BARUMBA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kiruhura): Thank you for giving me the opportunity. I want to thank His Excellency for fulfilling his constitutional obligation and I want to thank the mover and seconder of the motion; and I support the motion. 

First of all I want to thank His Excellency for being hard working and for his progressive programmes especially UPE, USE and Prosperity-for-All. 

Secondly, I want to thank him because he is a God fearing leader. You know, without the guidance of God you cannot do much. Uganda is a God fearing country; we always pray before we begin our debates and he always quotes the Bible and I think it is God who helps him to achieve his programmes. 

I want to thank the President for his programmes because in most cases he does not even delegate. He goes and sees the problem for himself. The other day he was in Teso to check on those people. He was in Owino when there was calamity. He went to Budo. So, he is very hard working. (Laughter and Applause) 

I also want to thank the President, as the Commander-in-Chief, for having a disciplined Army. We were all here; we know what was happening in the past regimes. (Applause) You meet the army at night or even during the day and you suffer but right now, you can stop a car of an army man and he will take you where you are going. We give credit to the Commander-in-Chief for that. 

Lastly, I want to talk about ritual murders. I want to thank His Excellency because he mentioned it and it is a big problem in this country. People resort to witchcraft to the extent of being told to kill somebody because you want to put up a big house or because you are constructing a road. I think that is a sense of hopelessness; that is a sense of not knowing God. And I want to appeal to you colleagues, as we seek re-election; this is the time to know God. (Laughter) When we are on this microphone, we do not have to talk about government and other things alone and forget the Creator. This is the time to clarify everything about God and to tell everybody that He is very important and with Him everything is manageable. (Applause)

As a representative of Kiruhura, when we got a district, we had a lot of hope that we would get electricity, but it is not there. We thought that we would get a tarmac road; it is not yet there! We thought that we would get a government girls’ school, it is not yet there! We thought we would get a technical school, it is not yet there! (Laughter) The people of Kiruhura want to give you 100 percent as NRM, but give us what I have mentioned. Thank you so much. (Applause)

5.28
MR FRED BUKENI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion moved by my colleague. 

I have heard complaints from members that the President did not talk about climate change, as if we do not appreciate what climate change is and what Government is doing. When we talk about Government setting aside funds for getting alternative energy by building many dams and developing all the potential areas, this is a very big mark in terms of handling the issue of climate change. 

The Government has set aside funds to construct Bujagali. The President clearly states here that come December 2010, they are going to start constructing the other dam of 700 MW. I think that is a very big mark in as far as climate change is concerned, other than the paltry figure of Shs 1 billion that Government was setting aside for planting trees. This money is being increased now, and I have also heard that Shs 36 billion is now available for tree planting. This is very good. 

The only issue now is that Government should be proactive in that direction. It is not good for Government to plan for a small number of people who can afford and who can use electricity. It is not good for Government to use over Shs 100 billion every year to buy down prices of electricity. It would be good if money from our budget is made available for the majority, because the majority of the people are the ones using firewood. That is the area where Government should invest more, other than investing more in projects that are serving fewer people. 

On the issue of roads, maybe I have not been to all corners of Uganda, but I have tried, because I worked in the West, I come from the East and I went to school in the North. I have been to all these places, and sincerely, Government has tried to work on the roads. So many roads that were impassable are now passable. At one time, I could not go to Kampala if I was in Ibanda, unless I passed through Mbarara. Now I can drive from Ibanda to Kampala without passing through Mbarara. This is because there are many alternative roads that are passable.

The only problem with the Ministry of Works and Transport is the opening of roads depending on districts. These districts were once sub-counties and counties. So, if you open a road in a district which was a sub-county, that road continues up to the next district; but if you open only one side of the district, then you cannot access the other side.  

I wish to advise the Ministry of Works not to peg roads to districts, but to peg roads to numbers. There are roads that cut across three districts, and if you open one section in the middle, you cannot access the other part on the other side. I will give you an example. There is a road that I would wish to use to move from Kampala to Ibanda, but because Ibanda has worked on its part and Kiruhura District has not worked on its part, I cannot connect with Mubende. This is because they have not worked in the middle. There is a road between Tororo, Manafwa and Mbale; even if Manafwa has worked on its section and Tororo and Mbale have not, I cannot access the main road because theses roads are now small. 

I hear these roads are given to the districts where the greater length exists, so that they are worked on from one district to another. Our districts are now too small and working on one section without completing does not solve the problem.

5.33
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to take this opportunity to thank His Excellency the President for the State of the Nation Address. I would also like to thank the honourable colleagues who moved the motion of appreciation, as far as the President’s State of the Nation Address, is concerned.  Allow me to also thank the Leader of the Opposition for his response in as far as some of the issues are concerned, which I think will call on us on the side of Government to try to address.

Allow me to raise just a few concerns, which I think the various leaders should put into consideration as we deliberate the State of the Nation Address, and as we proceed into the budgeting process for this coming financial year. 

His Excellency the President stated thus on page 40: “All leaders, political or otherwise, should guide the people to refrain from mixing politics with development programmes”. I think this is where the gist of the matter lies in as far as transformation of this country is concerned. Many of us have remained politicians rather than following up development programmes. 

I think there is a big dilemma in as far as leaders following up the implementation process of Government programmes are concern. I have prepared a document, which I have submitted to the office of the Minister of the Presidency and the Chief Whip, so that we can strengthen the performance monitoring mechanism in all government programmes, especially Parliament. 

Parliament appropriates resources at every year’s budgetary starting point, but when do we have the time to monitor all the programmes which have been implemented in the various ministries and local governments? Do we have time, maybe at half year of our budget cycle, to launch all the projects that have been completed so that we can be able to be part and parcel of the process of the implementation programmes that are being carried out down there? 

I am aware that we have been invited to different ministries, but is this a deliberate policy where Government says that at half year, let us take stock of all the projects which have been implemented so that we are able to launch them at national and local government level, so that MPs do not look like strangers in the implementation process at local government levels. At the end of the year, we can also take stock so that we are able to document together with RDCs, LCV chairpersons and the district councillorship.  At the end of the year, we will be able to say that we were able to implement a,b,c and d so that we flag a document, which can even be a basis for the President to use. 

After a year in my constituency as an MP, I am able to say that I endorsed so many projects, and we were able to realise them being implemented, rather than having Members of Parliament having aside mechanisms of implementing their own programmes and projects. This is one of the biggest dilemmas we need to look at. 

Close monitoring of the programmes will limit corruption and will increase the vigilance of the leadership at the political level in participating with the technical teams. When you look at the current contract system, for example, most of the people on the contracts committee are the technical team - the civil servants who originate the bills of quantities. They also go ahead to award contracts; to monitor performance and implementation of the programmes; and to offer certificates of completion; and eventually, even the payment is carried out by them. So, there is a big problem. 

As Government, we must look for a mechanism in which we can increase on our monitoring and streamlining of the implementation process. We, the politicians, can then closely monitor, launch and follow-up on the implementation and the eventual launching of the completion of the projects. I have done it with several of my programmes. 

I have been monitoring the roads, and I appreciate the Ministry of Works that has taken over Kyaka-Kasensero road. It is being implemented, but I am closely struggling, monitoring and following it up, together with the regional Ministry of Works engineer, and the ministry officials, so that we are able to see that quality work – (Member timed out)

5.39 
SP. RTD SILVER BAHANE (NRM, Bufumbira County North, Kisoro): I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this motion. I also want to identify with my colleagues who moved the motion and all those who have reacted to it. I want to thank the President for fulfilling his constitutional obligation. 

I want to thank the President for being visionary by staying the construction of Karuma Dam, which was to yield less power than what is now proposed – that is 700 Megawatts. We should be thankful for the extension of the power to some districts, which previously did not have power like Kanungu, Kibaale and Kalangala. I have noted with concern that a site at Kafu River, called Nyamabuye, which had been identified for generation of three megawatts way back in 2005, has been ignored. These three megawatts, I think, would be more than enough to produce power for the people of Kisoro and Kabale. I would like Government to take up this project so that power is generated for that part of the country, other than relying on power which is being exported from our neighbouring state, Rwanda. 

On corruption, I want to thank Government for the effort it has put in combating this scourge. A number of activities have been undertaken, including training officers with the IGG and the Police, but at times, it is not about the number of courses the personnel attend, but the commitment and motivation. As I talk, investigators in these institutions are in a way suffering. I have talked to some of the officers in some districts, and a whole OC CID is given just 50 litres to run a district. I do not know how much investigation an officer in charge of a station or a district can do using just 50 litres. I am grateful that the chairman of the committee, and the minister, are here. We have to do something so that our people, the investigators, are motivated, if we are to fight this scourge of corruption. 

On the issue of road infrastructure, the President gave a list of roads that are either being worked on or are about to be worked on, in addition to a host of feeder roads that have been taken over from the local governments. However, there is a road which connects Kisoro from Nteeko in Nyabwishenya, to Kanungu, which has been neglected. This would be a security road, and I think it is less than 10 kilometres. I am aware of the environmentalists’ concerns, but I think we need this road, especially along the border. The security situation across the border is known. We need to have this road worked on, such that our gallant soldiers can easily move and monitor the situation along the border. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.44 
MR TRESS BUCANAYANDI (Independent, Bufumbira County South, Kisoro): Madam Speaker, thank you for giving me the opportunity, and I specifically want to contribute on food security sequentially. 

For any family or anybody to be food secure, has nothing to do with growing the food. All you have to do is to have the money to buy the food, and this is an important issue that I want to orientate and advise the House on. Many of us here, for example, are food secure, but we are not growing the food. Therefore, Government should have the ability and capacity to provide employment so that everybody has money to be able to buy food. 

However, in practical terms, and sequentially, the situation is that for the rural people who may not have the money, the only way out is to store part of what they produce. This used to happen. It used to be mandatory that at least you preserve some legumes and grain at the rate of 10 kilograms per head in the family. That is a practical way. Secondly, the process would be to have some national stores or institutions. Again, this happened once in the past, but it could be reactivated in institutions like the army, the police or schools, so that it becomes a practical element. 

Thirdly, in the area of food security, we have to minimise post-harvest losses, and this is where value addition comes in. Every place in the whole of Uganda has something to process in terms of grain, legumes, root crops, fruits and so on. So, value addition must be given emphasis by Government. 

One of the ways to encourage people to do this business is to activate the functions of Uganda Development Bank and other lending institutions, so that money is put there specifically for adding value. This becomes important because most people may not be able to raise the money, and at the current levels, some of the equity required by these banks may be such that they cannot be afforded by communities and entrepreneurs who want to engage in this business. 

Fourth, in that order, once you have value addition in the villages, it automatically increases the shelf life of these food stuffs; that will enable the availability and movement from areas of plenty to areas of deficit. That kind of process minimizes post-harvest losses, and creates employment in the rural areas, and will inspire development everywhere. We can take a leaf from what they used to do in the past. Wherever we had coffee, the colonial administration had put in place coffee factories. Where we had tea, we had tea factories. Where we had cotton, we had ginneries and so on. 

Finally, in the movement of food from areas of plenty to areas of deficit, in my view, I would reallocate this responsibility from the Prime Minister’s Office to Ministry of Agriculture, which is relevant; or even more radically, to the Army, because they have the facilities and manpower to do it. Where people are suffering, it requires rapid response, and the Army has the power as well as the transportation. 

If we put in place those practical elements, we will be able to see less of food shortages throughout Uganda. I have every reason to believe that Uganda as a whole is not a food deficit country. If anything, we are in surplus so that we are sending to Sudan and so on. All that is required is minimum organisation so that we have the whole thing going. I thank you. 

5.49
MR BRUNO PAJOBO (NRM, Workers’ Representative):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to contribute. I thank the President and also the movers. I will comment on two issues: 

One, investment; I have just realised that emphasis is put mostly on foreign investors, but I have not seen us praising local investors. I think it is the responsibility of Government to encourage our natives to invest so that the profit remains within, other than giving it to those people who invest and transport all the profit abroad.

Two; the main issue of the investor is to create jobs, but it is unfortunate that jobs created are not for Ugandans. These investors come with their workers to take most of the good jobs, and Ugandans remain slaves in their country. Unless we change this, so that Ugandans work in Uganda, they will not love their country. Where is patriotism when I am made a slave in my own country? We have to come out and protect our people. 

My sister here said kind words - that the conditions of work are very bad - but she did not tell you the truth that in fact, these people are like slaves. You talk of Ugandans being sold and taken to Iraq, but there are slaves here as well. Our people should be looked after properly. The law should protect them.

People are talking of creating EPZ – I do not know why. What conditions are in EPZ? Why create EPZ when we workers are completely opposed to EPZ? To my understanding, EPZ means that the employer is allowed to gather the people, and lock them up, and there is no national law to affect that area. Are we going to work in such zones? We are put in zoos – (Interjections) - Yes, the workers who will be in EPZ will be like in a zoo; they cannot complain because in EPZ there is no law. 

We need to know what EPZ is and how it works from our neighbours. Kenyans fought to remove EPZ, and even the Ministry of Labour is not allowed to go to EPZ. This is very bad and I do not encourage it. I warn that we should avoid EPZ.

On wages, please deal with this one. There is a problem with agriculture. What do we give to farmers? They are using hoes. We propose that each county should have a tractor programme so that we work and increase production. With a hoe, how long will you work? I am sorry, but we need to increase productivity in the agricultural sector.

The other issue I want to talk about is the issue of corruption. Everybody says it is in the civil service. The usual people to be accused of corruption are the police and civil servants. What about you, the politicians? What happens to you people? If you are a big man and you tell a clerk to write a voucher and yet you know that is wrong, tomorrow he will also write his. How do you direct your people to make vouchers in your favour so that they collect money to give to you? Do you think they will be happy? Let us all join hands and fight corruption and also judge ourselves and see how we are giving instructions to our permanent secretaries –(Member timed out)

5.53
MS EVERLINE TETE (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukwo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am Tete Chelangat Everline from Bukwo District. I have not been here for two weeks because I have been in the constituency on official duty. I bring greetings from the people of Bukwo.

I want to join my colleagues in thanking the President. The people of Bukwo are grateful for four things: For the first time, the Kapchorwa-Bukwo Road is going to be tarmacked. However, seeing is believing; remember Thomas did not believe that Jesus had risen until he touched his wound. So, until we touch the road, we shall not believe that the road is there.

The other thing that we want to thank Government for, is the deployment of the UPDF. Security is now okay. We also thank Government for the great gravity flow scheme.

We also want to thank Government for the construction of our district hospital, which is going on. We are very grateful as people of Bukwo. We have been going to Kenya for treatment because there has been no road, but I hope we are going to come back to Uganda.

The people of Bukwo and Sebei as a region are requesting Government to upgrade Kapchorwa Hospital to a referral hospital. Like I have told you, Madam Speaker, I came from Bukwo yesterday and there is a terrible disaster. All the crops are dry. There is a lot of famine and people are dying. When you go to the health units, all of them are full, and there is nothing. 

However, I am happy that we have sorted out things with the Prime Minister. Thank you so much! We have hope now. I hope the Sebei region is going to be included in the mainstream regular distribution of food, Rt hon. Prime Minister, because we are also affected like other regions. We have been forgotten for long and we have not been included in the programme. 

It is unfortunate that there is no programme for rural electrification in the Sebei region, yet as you know, Sebei is a home of water. We have a lot of streams which are wasted. I wish the minister could do something. I do not have anything. Thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

5.57
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your supreme patience in allowing us the opportunity to debate the State of the Nation Address as presented by the President. It was an honour to receive the President in this House to present the State of the Nation Address. 

I read through the State of the Nation Address and with reference to the Constitution, Article 101 (2) regarding presidential addresses, my honest advice is that the President should not concentrate on one address which gives him the opportunity to come and address Parliament. This Article states, “The President may, also, in consultation with the Speaker, address Parliament from time to time, on any matter of national importance.” It could be because of the concentration on one address, when the President comes here once every year, that his speech is either crowded or less effective. So, I would beg that those closer to the President advise him to come to this House more often, so that we discuss these issues vehemently. 

Madam Speaker, allow me also to thank the Leader of the Opposition, who eased our work by giving a broader response to the speech by the President. 

I want to touch on three areas: One, jobs. On page 33, when the President was talking about jobs, he made reference to, and I quote: “It is not enough to train large numbers of educated people without creating jobs.” He went further to say that we were now modernising agriculture. This is under contest, because agriculture receives a minimal budget, and yet the President talks about building more industries, encouraging service companies, and small-scale and cottage industries. 

The whole speech sounded as if the President was a visiting head of state and not the one in charge of Uganda. He is quite aware that all these industries collapsed under his rule, and so it would have been modest for him to apologise, first of all, for not taking care of these industries before they collapsed, including the railway. But to sound as if he did not know that these things happened, was unfair of him.

Madam Speaker, allow me also to talk about peace and security. The President talked about peace and security but he concentrated on Kony. Kony is not the singular problem for peace and security for Uganda. Every careful listener did not hear the President talk about the killings by security personnel in town, including that massive one in a bar in town recently. So, for the President to come here and concentrate on Kony means that, either he does not see other problems as peace and security problems, or he wants Kony out of the way and then he will deal with other issues later, which will be a catastrophe. 

The President did not talk about the Police situation in this country, and yet the Police are clamouring everyday and night for improved pay and better accommodation. I think the President should be advised by individuals around him, and those in senior positions, to take care of the Police in a special way. The Police are crying out. Some of us come here and stand up to tell you that they are crying, and they are still crying!

The President did not mention anything regarding violation of human rights. It was extremely sad that the head of state could give a State of the Nation Address once a year, and was either not reminded or he himself did not remember that there was a report pinning Uganda for violating human rights, including deaths in safe houses. 

So, I think these areas should be presented to the President, that if time was not enough, he should come to Parliament at other times and explain these matters very frequently.

The President also talked and touched on a matter which was actually crucial. He gave advice regarding speed limits to his drivers, and I was happy about this. What made me unhappy, however, was that the President was not told that when his drivers are with him they drive at 80 KPH, but when they drop him they change the mode. I am not here to enumerate the accidents that have been caused by the presidential convoy! Everyone who has been attentive in Uganda knows that this happens. But because the President is never told of this, he advised us to tell our drivers – he needs to advise his drivers too, to drive at 80km per hour –(Interruption)

MR EJUA: Hon. Kyanjo is telling Parliament issues against which he cannot ascertain, whether in the accidents he is talking about, there was over speeding or not. I notice that he is speculating. And, to talk about the person of the President in the form that his convoy over speeds, sounded very unfair to me. So, is he in order to say such statements without any specific facts, say a report from the police? Thank you.

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for regarding that as a modest contribution from the hon. Member, because I am sure the President was referring to speed as a danger. My word is to thank him for that recognition, but also to add that he should be able to tell his drivers to maintain speed and care after dropping him – (Member timed out)

6.04
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to appreciate the address on the State of the Nation by H.E. the President of the Republic of Uganda.

However, I would like to say that, in a multiparty democracy, there are usually two addresses on the status of the state, and the one from the Leader of the Opposition should be entertained.

I am going to comment on the following areas, the first one being education. In Northern Uganda, it is sad to note that this year’s intake for senior one in some schools was disappointing. For example, Dr Obote College admitted only 300 students; but 224 students did not report because of lack of school fees due to poverty.

In Lango College, there were 230 students who were admitted, but 100 of them did not report again because of lack of school fees. Comboni College had 51 out of the admitted 130 students who failed to join. While St Catherine, your former school, had 108 who failed to report because of poverty.

Madam Speaker, I would like to say that, if no affirmative action is taken, in the long-run, we shall have no leaders in Northern Uganda. My suggestion is that the education policy be re-addressed. Some of the students resorted to third world schools because the fee is on average Shs 80,000 or 60,000. I think you can now see the situation. 

The other problem is that in the sub-county secondary schools, there are no dormitories, yet students cannot walk from their villages, especially when it is raining. The schools also lack other major facilities like laboratories. That is why I am saying, this is an area that should be addressed seriously.

On agriculture, I would like to thank the Minister of State for Animal Industry for launching Local Chicken Commercial Production Project in Erute County North on the 3rd July this year. However, the challenge here is that everything in Uganda, according to some observer, is for cash. That is why some people have been said to be selling their children.

You will agree with me that every crop that is grown can be sold. That would not be a problem. What we observed is that some of the sub-county chiefs are to blame on how the NAADS funds are being used. In my constituency, for example, they all hid when the minister came to address them on NAADS. They thought the minister had come for them. Even some chairpersons of LC III were absent without apology. 

In view of the above, I suggest that we should have a sub-county agricultural officer to address the NAADS problem. This will help so much because, as of now, there are no extension officers, yet some of these people are dealing with district NAADS officers to evade accountability for NAADS funds. That is why we need a demonstration station in every sub-county manned by a sub county agricultural officer. If that is done, I think we might see some positive changes in regard to the NAADS programme,  and probably other policies.

I think the President’s challenge is that we have some MPs from the other side who keep telling the President that for a programme, like the recent computer programme, to succeed, it should be implemented by NRM MPs. This is a very serious offence, which we cannot tolerate. This has been mentioned and we cannot shut our eyes over it – (Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think the time has gone and I want to thank you for your contributions. I think, so far, at least 100 Members have spoken to this motion. Members who have not been able to speak to this motion will be given an opportunity; I am keeping a record. I would like to encourage you, Members, to register with your whips, because many of you did not register. So, register for the next debate.

I have two comments: One is about the issue of famine. Last year at about the same time, we were debating the same thing; it is becoming an annual event. Can’t we improve on planning for it? 

Then, as we were talking about absence of food in the homes, the minister promised a community mobilisation bill in this House. I hope somebody will be able to tell us what has happened to it. That will help us to organise homes and enforce productivity. 

So, hon. Members, let us close for today and then the Rt hon. Prime Minister will respond tomorrow with the other ministers starting at 2.00 O’clock sharp [Ministers: We have Cabinet]. Even if you have Cabinet, you come here; you know you have got to work here. It will be 2.00 O’clock.

Then the other one is the Anglican Chaplaincy has invited Members for a fellowship after the plenary today. I think they are meeting in the lounge; the address is not given. 

You wanted to say something, Leader of the Opposition. 

6.10
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank all my colleagues who have persevered. 

I got out a short while ago and something took my attention. And when I looked closely, I found what to me is shocking, dumped in the dust bin is a ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development: “Summary of Project Support Managed Outside Government System; Policy Statement, Uganda Revenue Authority for the Financial Year 2009/10.” 

There were envelopes where some documents came from; I saw some name which I cannot mention. But unfortunately, this is an act of one of our colleagues.  Many of us do not read these policy statements. Well, if you go there, you would see the name written on the sides. In fact, the name of that person belongs to the government side and if you provoke me, I will name it. 

The point I am making is this; we cry to ministries to submit their policy statements on time. And when they are given to Members of Parliament, not many of them take the trouble to read them. If you could only read some of these things, you would love this country so much. So, I thought I should bring this to the attention of colleagues. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, that is another form of “Nnugu”; it is also corruption! Yes, because the Executive spends time to organise those papers for us, delivering 300; my office spends time distributing - and then they are dumped in the dust bin! That is corruption also! 

MR NASASIRA: Madam Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition opted not to mention the name in his wisdom. So, I think we should stop at that. The Member was not mentioned, and we do not know the side to which they belong.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Whichever side of the House, that is corruption! Whoever dumped the government documents in the dust bin is corrupt! 

Hon. Members, House is adjourned to 2.00 O’clock tomorrow. 

(The House rose at 6.15 p.m. and was adjourned until Wednesday, 15 July 2009 at 2.00 p.m.)
