
Wednesday, 12 July 1995


The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliamentary Building, Kampala.


PRAYERS


(The Deputy Vice Chairman, Mr Cosmas Adyebo, in the Chair.)


(The Council was called to order.)


MOTION

(General debate continued.)


THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, as I told you yesterday, we have very limited time and yet there is a lot ahead of us to accomplish, and I would restrain members from really taking to the Floor even if their time of ten minutes for contributions has elapsed.  I am calling upon you once more to stick to your time specified by law established and I would ask the Clerk to give you notice by ringing the bells.  But if you so stick to the Floor without giving way after 10 minutes, the microphone will be withdrawn from you.  Please, let us stick to time.  But I will also urge hon. Members who would like to contribute from the Communication from the Chair, and if you are not picked, that does not mean your name has not been with me, it is just time and I would also urge you that, you should wait until during the Budget discussion which is going to take place anytime from now, because some of the discussions will be irrelevant, even the issues we are raising can be raised during the further debate; and on that note, we shall proceed.

MR NTIMBA JOHN (Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara):  Mr Chairman, I thank you for giving me the opportunity to contribute on this debate, and I would like to echo His Excellency’s appreciation to Members of this august House for their contribution towards nation building and rehabilitation of this country after so many years of turmoil.  I will not labour too much about our role in setting up a Constituent Assembly and other things. I will not labour too much about the number of statutes we have passed; but let me single out one activity in which Members of this august House have through self sacrifice played their role in developing their own constituencies as well as developing Uganda general, and that is through fundraising.  Since many Members were elected to this House, I have seen many members organising fundraising activities both in their constituencies and also joining their friends and participating in fundraising activities.  I think this needs to be very highly complemented.  

Let me use this opportunity to thank all those hon. Members of this House who under your generous leadership came to Mbarara recently and participated in fundraising activities for Mbarara University which is in my constituency.  This is the first time that we have been participating in fundraising activities for tertiary institutions, and it is my sincere hope that many Members who have not been able to contribute will do so.  In coming to this exercise, the hon. Members have complied with government’s policy of extending tertiary education to as many areas of Uganda as possible.  The University in Mbarara is taking root; and let me use this opportunity to express the hope that in not too distant future, this House will be called upon to debate a Bill, I hope, setting up another agricultural oriented University in the Northern part of this country.  I am expecting the hope that government will, during our lifetime, consider bringing into this House a Bill so that we can - before we leave - establish another University in the Northern part of this country.  

I move on to the agricultural sector.  The President pointed out that in the last two years, Uganda has experienced a growth of 3.9 per cent in agricultural sector.  This may be a good achievement, but I am inclined to think that we can still do better, and in saying this, I am reminded that one time in the passed government was thinking of establishing what I think is called a farmers’ bank.  I do not know whether this idea has been given up or not, but I think, it is very, very necessary for out farmers, because our farmers are exposed to many hazards like draught, like the locusts which invaded us recently, and if we had an agricultural or a farmers bank to give our loans on liberal terms, maybe, the farmers will be able to produce much more.  

Let me take this opportunity to urge our Sectoral Committee on Agriculture, under the wise leadership of our friend hon. Zack Olum to follow up this matter when it comes to passing the estimates of the Ministry of Agriculture.  I would also like to urge the government to ensure that funds from this divestiture exercise made available to the farmers who would like to engage in agro-based industries.  

Last night our Colleague hon. Matembe raised a complaint that this fund was not being made available, but this is another area where government would help the farmers in boosting their agriculture through the use of divestiture funds.  Mr Chairman, the President talked a lot about corruption and accountability.  Let me take this opportunity to throw a few bricks at some of the worst ministries.  Again, I am talking about the Ministry of Agriculture.  When we read in the papers and are told that the Ministry of Agriculture has lost billions, not millions, but billions of shillings in the last few months, we wonder as to whether this House should vote any money to that ministry when it comes to debating the estimates. 

 I think many of us Members, have seen how the Public Accounts Committee has broken up in disarray after failing to get satisfactory replies from the accounting officers about the way that ministry has been handling the tax payers’ funds.  Going further on this, I want to say that, as far as accountability is concerned, there is still a lot to be done; many ministries are defaulting in the way they are handling the tax papers’ money.  For example, every year each ministry is expected to have a board of survey appointed to look at the cash and stores, and this is supposed to be done at the beginning of each financial year.  Let me stop and ask whether these boards have been appointed, they should have been appointed last week, at the beginning of this financial years so that we know cash and stores are being properly looked after.  

The other areas where our ministries are not looking after our funds and there is no accountability is that ministries dish out a lot of money and there are a lot of standing advances which have not been settled.  For example, in the year 1989/90, there were 170 million unaccounted for; the following year, in the year 1990/91, as much as 1.4 billion shillings remained unaccounted for.  Now 1.4 billion shillings being dished out to officers who do not account for them, and this is equivalent, if we look at our this year’s statistics, 1.4 billion shillings is comparable to what we are going to vote for the Prime Minister’s Office of one million; and for Audit Department we are going to vote UShs 1.4 billion.  Internal Affairs we are going to vote UShs 1 million and so forth and so on.  Now, if that money had been accounted for, it would have been enough to run these ministries I have mentioned.  Then we have cases where ministries spend money by producing either unvouched or improperly vouched expenditure.  In the year 1989/90 as much as 1.385 billion shillings was spent through improper vouching; then the following year, 1990/91, the figure shot up to 5.6 billion shillings, unvouched or properly unaccounted for!  Again this money according to this year’s estimates is enough to run about four or five medium size ministries.  However, on the other side of the scale, one can congratulate some of the ministries, which have done reasonably well; they have appeared before the Public Accounts Committee, and I think they have satisfactorily answered the questions.  On this, I would like to single out Makerere University, the accounting officer who used to be part by the back, and I am happy also to point out our Clerk to the National Assembly, who is our accounting office, when he appeared before the Public Accounts Committee he did well, he answered the question very well.  So, that needs encouragement and he has to be congratulated for that.  

In summary, I want to congratulate the ministries which have really played their role in the last 9 years since NRM came into being.  

Let me start with one of my favourite ministry, Education.  Since NRM came to power, the Ministry of Education has been able to launch a new education policy which is meant to revolutionalise our education system.  Many governments of the past failed to do that, but recently, we received here a White Paper and approved some of the proposals, and when they are put into effect, I am sure our education system will deliver the goods.  I want to congratulate the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, as an old boy of that Ministry, for having shifted emphasis from what is traditionally known as political diplomacy to economic diplomacy.  This is where we really want to reap the fruits of our foreign relations as a developing country.  The Ministry of Works - we have seen the Ministry of Works developing a net work or roads in the last 9 years.  The shape of our roads, 9 years ago was very different from what it is now; communication has been very much easier under their effort.  We must congratulate the Ministry of Environment Protection for having played their role in ensuring that our environment is not destroyed.

Finally, let me talk about Local Government.  This is where the NRM government is well know for having gone into the idea of decentralisation; that is bringing power to the people.  However, on this I must sound a word of caution.  If decentralisation has got to succeed, accountability must be ensured, and these local governments which are going to be self-accounting should ensure that the people they appoint will be the responsible people who can account for the money that is put under their charge.  Under this, I think the NRM is heading towards preparing this country for a bright future and we all look forward to another five years of the NRM Government which I think will assure of a better tomorrow and prosperity for this country.  Mr Chairman, I support the hon. Mover’s Motion.

PROF. WANGUSA (Bubulo County): I thank you, Mr Chairman, for allowing me to support the Motion before the House and I am going to say just three things Sir.  One is a comment on His Excellency’s salute to this House on the work we have accomplished; two, I want to say something about Uganda’s version of democracy and thirdly, Sir, although this is becoming tedious, I would like to say something about the Constitution.  

Sir, on page 16 of His Excellency’s speech, he pays a tribute to us - of this House.  Hon. Members, you will no doubt remember that our country was once a pariah - a pariah is an outcast - in the international community.  This is now history and Ugandans can once again walk with their heads high in the knowledge that they have been reinstated into the civilised word.  This is one of the biggest achievements of the last few years in your efforts to restore decency.  I would like to associate myself with that and to say that we may not only walk with our heads up, but with kifuba mbele, chest forward.  I for one I am very happy to have been associated with the membership here and if I do not reappear in the next Parliament and I have to return to my other constituency of academician, I shall carry with me the wonderful memories of working with Members here.  

We cannot, of course, really be the best judges of our own achievement; it is like a fish trying to study itself for a fish to study itself it must get out of water first.  For us as fish we shall get out of water when this House is dissolved; looking back, may be we shall do a better analysis.  All the same, I think that there are some things we have done, there are some things we have achieved, some wonderful legislation we have done when need revisiting soon.  Among these, may be the Press Bill with its controversial instance on degrees before you can become a member of NUJU, maybe, traditional rulers and divestiture, for obvious reasons have to be revisited soon, may be, by the next Parliament.  

But among our achievements, must surely be listed the nature of this House that we have a Parliament where we do not have a government and opposition side.  I think we are moulding a new political reality; we should be happy to bequeath to our children and to lend other African countries to imitate.  All the same, it is a matter of regret that some of the Bills we have passed such as the Leadership Code have not been put into practice; we have not gone to a point where the executive can execute this matter; and it is also a matter of regret that we should at this point, I think take His Excellency’s words with caution when he says that he discovered that after all corruption had always been there and the good thing about own good selves is that we recognise that corruption is there; and my humble comment on this is that once we have decided hat four legs are good and two legs are bad we must not get to a point when we begin saying you know, but I think, two legs are also good; no.  

Another word of caution, is purely on the supremacy of the economy.  I would like to read from my version, page 7 and 8; the supremacy of the economy in our operations, if you may allow me to turn to that Sir, I have this clumsy version.  His Excellency says on page 7 that, Hon. members will agree with me that economics governs politics and National Resistance Movement Government is keenly aware of this.  We have, therefore, tried our very best to revive and build an economy which was in shambles when we took power in 1986.  I am so keen on this subject that I have been politely accused in many fora of laying overdue emphasis on the economy to the exclusion of other things.  I wish to admit my guilt but allow me to emphasize that the economic well being of a country is the basic foundation of stability and democracy, and when the economy is health most other things are health too.’ 

The word of caution I want to make here is that, this reminds me of an ancient saying that, seek ye first the Kingdom of God and the other things will be added unto you.  This was, of course, parodied some 30 years ago by Kwame Nkurumah; he said, seek ye first political Kingdom and all other things will be added unto you’ and you know what followed, and I fear that we might be heading in the direction of saying seek ye first the economic Kingdom and all other things will be added unto you.  I wonder about that, I am just saying we need a bit of caution there.  

On laying foundations of democracy, which is my next point, we have been laying the foundations of democracy of our own kind, and the point I want to make here is that I wonder we should go on insisting that what we are practising in Uganda is democracy.  I think we are practising something better than democracy.  Democracy has its origins; some 30 centuries ago on the Greek peninsula, where people used to sit together and you get a whole trading centre equivalent of an RC.1, a city state, everybody to sit together and agree to talk about something and agree Ujama style; when elders sit under a tree and talk until they agree.  We have moved a long way from that; in the West when people now mention democracy, they are thinking of multi-partism; they are thinking of regular elections; they are thinking of the rights of the individual protected in the Constitutions; they are thinking especially, of the importance of the majority, of the pre-eminence of the majority, of minority and especially they are thinking of a government of the majority, of minority, and especially, they are thinking of a government side and an opposition side in a house such as this.  I am saying that we in Uganda have gone a little beyond that; we are not practising just democracy in the Western sense; we have departed and this is a healthy departure, and I am suggesting that we should call our version of democracy, movementocracy. (Laughter)

MR BUTAGIRA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the information I want to give to the learned Professor; let me suggest another term of democracy, and that is democratic authenticity.

PROF. WANGUSA:  Mr Chairman, I thank the hon. Member for democratic authenticity - maybe, he will pass on that to you, but I am suggesting movementocracy.  Better still, I think what most governments are concerned with really is justice, economic justice, political justice, social justice, that is what we are all about -(Interjection)- let me suggest this one, Sir, before I take the information.  I am suggesting that if you do not want to take movementocracy, I guess we could buy justocracy.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I think the best term for the kind of democracy we now have in Uganda is not movementocracy, is not justocracy, I think it is Musevenocracy. (Laughter)

PROF. WANGUSA:  Mr Chairman, I thank the hon. Member and assure him that it was one of my three alternatives; it was the one I was going to mention next.  But be that as it may, I want to move on to my last point which is on the Constitution.  A lot has been said about this, and really what I have to say in all humility, and I hope that Members do me the favour, you have always done me, of listening to me on this one.  

After all, that has been said in this House as to our right to demand, to know and to guide the last proceedings of the CA, I think, that some hard questions can be asked.  Do we need a Constitution that will stand the test of time?  Bernard Shaw once said that if a good writer sets out to write a book which would be so good that to be read through future generations; if you set out to write for future generations, you will end up writing such a bad book and nobody will read it.  But if you set out to write for your time, to write up very, very good portrait of your time, the book will be so good that it will become a classic and be read by future generations.  I am saying that we should aim at a Constitution for ourselves; a Constitution that will work for us for our lifetime, our generation; and if the future wants to change it that is up to them.  

Another question, the other thing is, really do we want a Constitution in which everyone is a winner?  My option is for a Constitution in which no one is a winner.  Those who have read military history, will remember the battle of Sharifima in ancient Scotland -

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Could the hon. Member wind up?

PROF. WANGUSA:  One minute, Sir.  In this battle of Sharifima there were two formations, the attackers and the defenders and one wing was winning, and then the other wing of the opposite side was winning.  But the following day it was not clear who had won, and so they wrote a small poem about it.  Some say, we won, some say, they won, some say, no man won at a man.  I am saying that we want to write a Constitution in which 99 are important and so is one.  We want to write a Constitution, in which this mention under God - and God is invoked, in the first line of our national anthem and is invoked in our coat of arms.  We want to write a Constitution in which spiritual values are enshrined.  This has to do with God who throughout history has built his Kingdom on remnants, when the majority has been carried into exile or has died there, God has always revived the nation through remnant; a modern word for that one is minority.  This is the same God, Sir, we read of as figuratively leaving 99 ship and going after one stupid one lost, like federalists and pluralists and I am saying, Sir, this minority ought to be enshrined in our Constitution such that in the end we shall say like those of Sharifima or changing the poem a little, such that when this constitution has taken care of everybody, we shall say; none won, none will say we won, none will say they won, all will say no man won at a man; everybody will have won or nobody will have won.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR OPIO (Samia Bugwe County, Tororo):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for giving me the opportunity to contribute to the Motion moved by hon. Kiyonga.  I would like only to restrict myself to three areas; first is the economy.  The President says that we should be appraised for the Bills we passed here, one of the Bills passed is the Revenue Authority Bill.  

When a Member from Kalangala was speaking here, he alluded to a point which is also prevalent in other parts of Uganda and those who are sharing Lake Victoria.  We people also have piece of the lake and some of our fishermen who have got boats, whom they allege they have no licences, these boats are being vandalised by the Revenue Authority arm which is called the Anti-Smuggling Unit.  As it was stated, if the allegation is true, we would request that these people are compensated for their boats.  We also say that it is not official to have roadblocks within the country, unless they are on and off.  But to have a permanent road block like one in Busitema is not right.  The best place for the road block should be at the border, that is Busia and Malaba, that is where the officers should be to check on goods entering and going out, but to have a permanent road block within just inside the country is not right.  If there is inefficiency within the officers in Revenue Authority or they are not many, the best thing to do is to train them an then put them at the border, but not to make a permanent road block within the country.  We are also told that they were going to have a dry port in Malaba, this is in the last two budgets.  Now, rumours have it  that the dry port may be moved to Namanve.  If that is true, this is not very economic.  First of all, why do we move the trailers the whole way from the borders to Namanve, and then from there some take off to, maybe, the North, and some to the East, when you should at least, save the road tyre and ware on the road to have the dry port at the Board?  Also, it will encourage a lot of -(Interruption)

MR KASAJJA:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, I rise on a point of information arising from hon. Opio’s statement that the dry port which was originally planned to be constructed at Malaba is going to be shifted to Namanve; as you are aware whenever there is need to construct any permanent structure, there is also need to do research and find out the feasibility study and the possibility of whether that thing is going to be useful or not.  As of now, feasibility study is going on both sides, Namanve and Malaba, whichever is going to be found most suitable and more economic is going to be taken on.  So, as he has said that is a rumour, it is still a rumour and not correct that we are going to construct at Namanve.  Let him wait for the results, and then he will get the truth.

MR OKELLO LUWUM:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the point of constructing a dry port at Namanve is a serious one, that is why I have stood up.  There is a saying that there is no smoke without fire; it could, actually be true that the Uganda Revenue Authority is planning to construct a dry port at Namanve, but I want hon. Kasajja who is also a Director there in the Uganda Revenue Authority to take the message that such a move would convenience trailers going to a place like the North, because there is another root which goes to the North through Tororo, Soroti, Lira and so on.  So, I think, it will really make it so cumbersome for trailers to pass through Namanve and then go through the long root.  I think it is not a feasible idea please.  thank you.

MR OPIO:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like to really emphasize the Director who is here that you do not need to do a lot of feasibility study to find out the cheaper of the alternatives.  Unless there are other reasons, we would like to be assured that other reasons which are not economic should not prevail over economic reasons.  Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

MR MUKISA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to give information that while the Director is telling us that feasibility studies are going on about the two sites, the Tororo site that had been earmarked for the dry dock, the area is busy being allocated to developers.  It looks that by the time the feasibility study is over, there will be no land for the dock and automatically Namanve will take just like sometime back some of us thought that the best site for a permanent site should be in Jinja, but somehow some people manoeuvred and the permanent site came to Kampala, the Jinja has just been put there for agricultural.  Also about the permanent road block, I would like to inform the hon. Member that I tried very much to remove that road block and actually, removed the road block for over a month when I was there as DA.  But these very people came to complain that they felt insecure without the road block.

MR OPIO:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  It depends on which people go to hon. Mukisa, if they are just a few he should always ask me so that since I represent him, I will tell him the majority view.  I would like to say that, there is also need to allow industries to have bonded warehouses at the border.  There are reasons which make these very economic.  First of all, it will have a spill over on the border town.  

Secondly, they will be easier to export and import from the neighbouring countries to buy our goods.  South Africa has done this and has attracted a lot of business in South Africa.  They had bonded houses on the border with Namibia, with Zaire and with Angola; and what we are, therefore, requesting the Revenue Authority is to allow the industries which would like to have bonded houses at that border to have them; after all they have so many employees who can control the revenue aspect of it.  We people would like also activities at the border and this would be very, very useful; and after all, after the industries have found out that there is business, they could even have some branches of their factories and, therefore, we have some factories at the border.  Mukwano tried on the Western side and Revenue Authority came out and stopped it, but I think, in the future, it is better to have bonded warehouses at the borders so as to encourage work there instead of having people working only at the factories.  

The other area I would like to talk about quickly is the exploration of oil reserves.  We were told here and some Members were very happy to find that we have got some oil in the country and that there is a company which has been given the permission to explore.  The name of the company is so new, which is called Uganda Works and Engineering Ltd.; a company to explore oil must first of all be in possession of high technology.  It must have it capital and it must have people who are experienced.  When you look at this company which has been given 25 years to have the right to explore oil in Uganda, I do not know how, they have the risk capital and they have experience.  A certain hon. Member went to some places trying to ask people to purchase shares; surely if an investor wants to purchase shares, can you really purchase shares from a company which has not been tried and successful, and especially in an area like oil exploration.  I think we are not serious, and giving 25 years to a company which has not tried anywhere, it is not really - this is a very big resource for the country, why not UDC to come in and develop and people buy instead of giving these exclusive rights to a company which is not yet proved.  

I am in conclusion saying that the President said that there are companies which have been formed to mine lime in Busia, I would like the President to know that we do not have live in Busia, but what we have is gold.  So, whoever really wrote this thing should do some research again; we do not have line in Busia, but we have gold, and this tends to make me believe that some of these statements are usually written without proper research.  I would like to say that Tororo as a district has been marginalised.  PAPSCA never went there, -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Could you wind up, hon. Member?

MR OPIO:  Okay, I am winding up, Mr Chairman.  I would like therefore, to end by saying that as far as we are concerned people in -(Interjection)- the entandiikwa is very, very untried and it may not at least, take off as far as some of us know.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR KASAJJA (Bulamogi County, Kamuli):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I stand up to support the Motion moved by the hon. Minister of Internal Affairs hon. Dr Crispus Kiyonga.  I will be speaking on three major topics; one, on the performance of the House; two, democracy; three, the economy and four, on privatisation, time allowing.

I would like to start by commending the President’s speech for giving tribute to this House for the good performance they have done in this country.  We have been described by the President that this House is the most innovative in the annals of history, I think, ever since we started having Parliaments in this country.  I do agree to this statement because most of the Members who are here have different professions and the way they have been contributing here has been in the form of lectures, that is why you find when somebody stands up here, most of us are busy taking notice, because they are using their professions.  So, I think, it is not surprising that this House has performed so superbly and we have made history.  I would like to encourage the hon. Members and me inclusive that we should continue with this spirit.  I would like, on this tribute given to us, to commend the House for the good job done to establish the Uganda Revenue Authority.  

As you are aware, of course, some complaints may come from Members, but we should also appreciate the good job that this authority has done.  In order to appreciate this, we need first of all to look back as to how this economy was before the NRM Government took power.  I would like to take a short one, to remind the Members that before NRM Government took power in this country, Uganda’s economy was among the worst economies, and we have always been told that whenever Members used to go out, Ugandans used to go out, we were looked at as people coming from a country with almost no future.  But ever since URA was established, the economy has taken root, democracy has taken root, politics has taken root.  So, whenever we are walking outside Uganda everybody who goes out is always walking with his head in the air.  

Recently, I was on a seminar in Britain when we went to attend the Chairmen’s programme, that is Dublin, I was surprised to find that among the African countries that were represented there, Uganda was always being cited as one of the best performers in terms of economic performance.  So, I was given really a good reception because every time I used to stand up to contribute, I knew I was contributing in an atmosphere where I was getting a lot of respect.  

To go back to Uganda Revenue Authority, I would like to inform the Members that as the President said that since Uganda Revenue Authority was established, we found the collection of revenue had fallen far below the level that we would expect.  A good country with good governance to be able to have that collection to be sustained.  Shs. 44 billion which was being collected in 1991 was so little that it could not even sustain at least, economically two or three ministries.  But I would like to inform the Members that ever since Uganda Revenue Authority was established, now the collection that we were collecting in one year, Shs. 44 billion, is now being collected in one month.  In fact, we can even exceed 44 billion, because I remember in March this year, we have hit the target of 49.6 billion shillings, and I think this is a mark which hon. Member should be proud about.  

Many Members have been complaining of course, about this amount of money, but you should also realise that so much as the performance has improved lately, this economy was coming further away from the doldrums; it is just like a person who has fallen in a ditch of about 30 feet.  Even when you have moved up about 20 feet still you will be down, but of course, the fact that you have been moving up would not be erased.  So, we are moving and I am sure in the 1995/96 financial year, this economy will be able to collect revenue to cover the recurrent budget and shall also be able to remain with about Shs.15 billion beyond the Recurrent Expenditure.  This one has not existed in this country, and if we can continue like this, I think, this is a good performance.  

I would like to give some figures globally as to how Uganda compares with other countries in the world, in terms of democracy, in terms of the inflationary control.  These figures are from the world report, and I had got them before this report came out; in The New Vision we were given the 13th position among the best performers in terms of having the best economy.  The world economy report of 1995 gives this as the best performers in the world.  We have United States in terms of Gross National Product growth.  United States performed 2.3 per cent growth; Japan 2.9 per cent; then Malaysia 7.8; Uganda 10 per cent.  You can imagine, this one is again giving us a good name internationally, and among the African countries we came out to be the best.  Then the other figures also, which are talking about the inflationary changes or inflationary trend.  United States is given as having an inflation of 2.6 per cent in 1994; then Japan 0.7 per cent; then Malaysia 4 per cent; then Uganda 2.9; you can imagine also there we are not doing badly.  So, in terms of the economy, I would like to thank the Members for having put up the Uganda Revenue Authority and we should continue with this spirit.  Then I go to democracy, Mr Chairman.

On democracy, I would like to inform the Members that if you are to be a good democrat, you should always give the best example.  I would like to call upon the hon. Members who are in the CA that if you are going to be good shinning examples, you should also give this an example, because the recent example of some people who walked out was not a good one and my constituency and I condemn that act, and I would like to call upon the Members who walked out that, let us fight and come out with a Constitution which is going to give us ever lasting peace so that Uganda can continue to have this good image globally.  Otherwise, if we do not do this, we shall be killing our nation.  I thank you very much for giving me this chance to contribute.

MR OKIA (Bukedea County, Kumi):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I stand here to support the Motion moved by the Minister of Internal Affairs, and since he is the Minister of Internal Affairs, I will start by dealing with security.

Three quarters of this country today is peaceful, Teso the region I come from is very peaceful, you can go and sleep with your hose open without a problem; you can move from place to place and nobody is going to stop you.  With our neighbours the Karimojong, we are now working very well with them.  Two weeks ago -(Interjection)- give me a chance to prove my point.  Two weeks ago, it went in world history, the Karimojong themselves returned our animals that they had rustled; these animals were given to Kapchorwa district.  In my own county, we received the animals that were taken.  I am not worried about whether they returned the exact animals -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  What the Karimojong did good to people in Kumi, they are not good to people in Kapchorwa.  Last week we said, some animals were raided from my constituency on 16th of last month and were taken into Karamoja; hon. Naburi denied it, but the reliable information which I got over the weekend is that those animals, 25 of them, are being hidden in a place called Angaru which is between Chekwi and Piane county, but in Chekwi county and they are about three kilometres from where Naburi resides. (Laughter)

MR NABURI:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member through you that, he might have got that information, but I would like to inform him that I was there a week ago and I stand by the information I gave to this House last week, and I would like to request him through you that he gets in touch with me after the session and gives me details of the information he has so that when I travel this weekend, I will be able to inform the House appropriately.

MR PULKOL:  Mr Chairman, thank you very much, but I would like to inform the hon. Member from Kapchorwa that, like hon. Marwas said, the situation is improving from worse to bad and bad to better, we are not saying everything is okay; but the most important thing now is that when that raid takes place, the difference is what is done.  Because that mechanism has been lacking before.  So, it may take sometime to get those cows but for sure the machinery is now in place and things get sorted out, and I think, that is what makes a fundamental difference.  

Now, as far as Kapchorwa is concerned, the situation is a bit more complex than appears to be.  Kapchorwa everybody knows, also continues to raid certain communities within Kenya, for example.  The Pokot of Kenya continue to raid into Kapchorwa much as the Karimojong; certain groups also in Karamoja continue to raid in Kapchorwa and vice versa; raids up to Baringo, for example, and getting cattle and hiding those - it is also know that even today -(Interjection)- it is important to have a whole round picture about the state of affairs in that area, that is really lowly endowed with facilities, resources and so forth, and mechanisms for dealing with the problem, but for sure what I am saying is that, we would need that kind of information to give the machinery on the ground and definitely now the machinery to track down this criminal elements is in place and also the facilities to track them down; and the general will of the population is now in our favour.  So, I think, it is just a question of time and we need cooperation from both sides; but of course, care must be exercised; even what goes to Kenya is attributed to Karamoja.  Thank you.

MR OKIA:  Mr Chairman, it has now gone in world history that the Karimojong are able to return the animals they take by themselves.  So, that is very important and I would particularly like to thank hon. Pulkol for the work he has done there.  Mr Chairman, some people have expressed a problem we have with our brothers.  With Kenya, I know, because I am neighbouring Kenya; Kenya lost when NRM came to power in 1986; we used to buy all the beer, all the soap, everything from Kenya.  Now, they are not happy that we are able to produce these things here; they wish that we get everything from there.  So, when you say that Uganda is disturbing the neighbours, I would like to talk about Kenya the one I know, near me; that they are not happy with what is happening here, they think we should be back in 1985.

I would like to touch briefly on the economy.  I think since 1986 something has been done; there is laying of the infrastructure, which is very important.  I have been in many places of this country and found where roads have been opened.  I went to a place called Kyawempe, in that place, there were no roads and now they have opened the roads.  A goat from there used to cost say, Shs. 5,000/- today because the roads are open, they are able to sell a goat at Shs. 20,000/- or 15,000/; is that not an achievement?  So, when people say they are poor, we should be abe to point to them and tell that make the use of the infrastructure which is there.  If you are able to sell a gat at 20,000/- instead of Shs. 2,000 because the roads are open and then what do our people do themselves?  Because when people say we are poor, we cannot take children to school, what are they doing?  There are so many people who want to eat in this country, but very few people who want to work.  So, when we say that we are poor, we do wake up at 10.00 O’clock and just come to town and look for money, do you earn money when you have not worked?  Do you eat food when you have not worked? (Applause)  There are many people who are eating but are not working.  Mr Chairman, -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Will you wind up?

MR OKIA:  Mr Chairman, people have talked about privatisation we do not have any cure in the whole world the only cure now is privatise, we must accept there are mistakes made in privatisation okay, but we are not going to run away from privatisation that is what everybody is doing in the world.  

Employment is a function of good sound investment policy.  Do we have investment policies, yes, this House established investment code.  If we established Investment Code and many investors are coming, the economy will flower then jobs will be there one day, jobs cannot come just like that, the tree has to grow, the tree has been planted, it must flower when it flowers, jobs are going to be there, there is no short cuts to jobs other than sound economic policies with the NRM Government has. (Applause)  

Before NRM Government came to power, we got sodas, beers, everything from Kenya and steps are being made, the Indians were given there property and establish Investment Code, things are going on well today, but there are people who go and tell people, you cannot pay fees under NRM.  But, if the primary school fees is 200/=, 300/=, who cannot rear a goat, who cannot rear a pig, or cannot rear something to pay that money -(Laughter)- sorry, but I have mentioned it, sorry. (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the speaker on the Floor that, it can also require morality before we can find money to educate our children.  I was listening to one of the Members from Kumi, Bukula, he told us that, he was in Kumi and in the area he was out of the - all the headmasters he met less than five per cent of the students who are in those primary schools had paid school fees.  I would like to inform the speaker that this was Kumi and if five per cent is true have paid school I am wondering if those people are lazy or they cannot work.  Thank you very much.

MR OKIA:  Exactly, what I said that these people must be made aware.  Mr Chairman, I would like to touch on democracy and I would like to tell this House that democracy is not an invent but a process many people think democracy is not an invent but a process many people think democracy just comes in a day and say, we have got everything here.  What the NRM Government has done since it came to power is calamatized by the elections of the C.A.  But many people in the C.A said there is no democracy, they went to the C.A through democracy; through the elections?  Are they telling us that they want there illegally or what?  They went there because of the democracy which is being established by the NRM that is why you came to the CA. and why people walked out in the CA. is there many people who cannot sole their plight?  Many of these members especially from my place were saying that when we go there that is the end of NRM and that is one end we bring another government next day, and they tell people about multi-party, people do not know about multi-party, I have moved in this country, people think multi-party is their own party.  When you ask I want to give example of a place I went to, people told me they wanted multi-party, asked what is multi-party?  One of them said, is it UPC, I said, Mzee, UPC is not multiparty.  Then he went ahead and asked me what multi-party is? I told him, multi-party means Ssemogerere will come here, Mayanja Nkangi everybody will come; he said no, do not allow them, they will come and fight here. (Laughter)  Now, for him he knew that only his party is multi-party.  Now why do you not tell these people -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Order hon. Members.

MR OKIA:  I am talking from knowledge.  Mr Chairman, why are we not able to tell our people to tell our people what multi-party is so that they know what it is rather than saying DP my party is multi-party or UPC my part is multi-party.  The walking out from the CA was very unfortunate because people could not solve their pride.  It is very, very unfortunate that even walking from CA has been imported to this House, yes, because two Members have walked from this House.  It is very unfortunate, Mr Chairman. (Interruption)- order, could you wind up.

MR OKIA:  But however -(Interjection)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, I want to deny very, very strongly and this was going to come on my substantive contribution but since my good friend hon. Okia has mentioned it I never walked out.  In fact, I am very disappointed because, it was I think 10 minutes to 5 and I said I had a very important appointment, the very journalist who wrote this story followed me out and asked me have you walked out?  I said no, I have got a very -(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

AN HON. MEMBER:  I told them no, I have got a very agent appointment at 5.00 O’clock and I believe that it is about 5.00 O’clock.  I was not making a substantive contribution there was no substantive Motion on the Floor to walk out from, I was just giving her information and it is concise that I must go for important appointment, the same journalist goes to write; I think this is very wrong.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Could you wind up.

MR OKIA:  Mr Chairman, I would like to wind up by advising the people that, the people in the CA, we think the best you can do is that, one is at point A, the other one at point Z.  I have seen the man at point A moving up to point D somewhere the man at Z is not moving anywhere and he thinks he should get all.  Please, let us take the interest of this country and the interest of the ordinary people in the village the aspiration of the ordinary people in the village is that, they want to have stability, they want to have growth in their economy, they want to have security.  Those are the aspirations of my people at home.  Mr Chairman, I thank you.

MR KANYOMOZI (Kajara County, Bushenyi):  Mr Chairman, thank you very much for allowing me to contribute to this Motion, I will be very brief; I will touch on a few items. Item 1, I am pleased that everybody thinks there is security because that is what we need in order to be able to grow and develop.  Since the mover of the Motion is the Minister for Internal Affairs, I felt that this would be more appropriate to cause a question about security because, I have seen in my own constituency things which do not seem to - for security.  

People are being armed right and centre in an uncoordinated manner to the extent that some people are beginning to use guns against their friends. As I speak, very recently a man was shot by these unknown distributed guns and he is critically sick at Rwashameire Health Centre.  Another one in Nyabushenyi was gunned down and nothing has been done, the selection of people who get guns do not seem to be known all of us and as a Member of the area, I feel very concerned.  Since we are in a secure environment and peaceful environment, how come that people are selected in a manner which is not even known to the RCs and given guns.  These are not LDUs, the way if they were LDUs, the Chairman of LDUs would be or the chairmen of Local RCs, will be have.  I have a list here of people who have been given guns and who have started using them illegally I think I will make it available to the House.  I will take it down later, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Order, lay it on the Table.

MR KANYOMOZI:  The second point.  Mr Chairman, I now would like to touch on the issue concerning privatisation, I am sure, Mr Karuhanga said he is walking out -(Laughter)- it is now fashionable I hear.  I want to touch now an issue on privatisation, I am sure this House is in total agreement that we should privatise the economy and we all support privatisation.  I think what we disagree on is the mode of how we privatise.  There are so many methods of privatising which would live this country at an advantage rather than a disadvantage.  For example, even without the stock exchange which my hon. Colleagues mentioned abut yesterday, we can privatise and it has been done in a broad-based manner, it has been done in the Eastern Europe and it works, they did not have foreign stock exchange.  We can privatise by privatising management as we had done to Apollo Cooperation or now Sheraton, we can privatise by going in joint ventures, we can privatise in all sorts and modes that I tried to outline in a paper which was published recently.  

What worries most of us is trade sales, trade sales are dangerous because most of us do not have all that - at one time to be able to buy the assets that are being privatised, and we would like to reduce trade sales because in the end, they will make us labourers in the country of our own and that is the thing the majority of us would like to minimise. (Applause)  So, I would like to appeal to Government that much as we all support privatisation the mode which we are using towards that privatisation must be that one which maximizes the benefit for the rest of the Ugandans, because this is the only country we have we cannot go anywhere else we want to be able to own these assets.  

Point number three, is concerned about revenue, we are pleased and the Director of Uganda Revenue Authority has said, that we are doing very well and everybody agrees in terms of figures we are doing very well.  But, it is not that only we are looking at, we look also at how that revenue is being used, that is crucial by the way; Zaire even in it’s confusion percentage of GDP collected revenue is even higher than us but can we say that they are doing very well given the amount of talk and listen that we see in the papers about embezzlement and corruption which the President touched on, I think we need to look from within to improve that whatever revenue we get we use it in the best possible manner for the benefit of the country, we should reduce on the corruption and we have institution which should do so although I am wondering for example whether the IGG is empowered to actually do what he should more so, now that he has also taken to politics, I do not know whether he still has neutral as he should be.  

But, what I am saying is this, we need to see that the revenue is applied properly and used for the intention, it is intended for.  Why on corruption, I am wondering also, I do not know whether the Government Printer is empowered to edit or to censor the President’s speech I have been looking at the President’s speech, what he spoke is not - some of it is contained here, I wonder why?  Yes, because, the President talked about the elephants turning back as an indicator to reduction of corruption in this country, I do not see it here.  Yes, a Presidential statement to a national House is normally reflected in any document, it is the President of this nation speaking and the reasons why the people bow on treasury benches in a house of any sort, is for them to patch and collect and put those off cut statements in the statement but it is not here, nor is the Nyamurungas he mentioned there are not in here -(Laughter)- and, I think when the President addressed the nation, whatever he says is very important and we should reflect.  

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Could you wind up?

MR KANYOMOZI:  Mr Chairman, I am trying to wind up.  I am going to wind up on democracy.  I am pleased that our Colleagues have done so well trying to finish off the Constituency Assembly Business.  But, I would like to oppose a question since the mover of the Motion is a Member of CA.  I would like to oppose a question and the Chairman CA is here maybe, he will answer.  We passed -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  No.

MR KANYOMOZI:  We passed a Movement system and the Movement system in my own understanding is an open system, it is not NRM because I heard hon. Bidandi Ssali saying people are confusing the Movement system with NRM, I am sure it is not.  If it is not then, anything which qualifies by definition to the tenants that we are putting that Constitution would be a Movement and do not need to be one because also the Constituent Assembly said, the Movement system is open, so it means, not to be one and the people who want to have other Movements they can still go ahead and have Movements of their own as long as they contain -(Interjection)- I will finish and then he can give me the information.  As long as they contain the elements which were stipulated in the Constitution open democratic, non-sectarian, so and so.  So, I assume that rather than people quarrelling about multi-parties and what have you, we are free to form as many Movements -(Laughter)- as long as they are democratic, as long as they are Ugandan, as long as they are non-sectarian, so Ssemwogerere will start his own Movement, Tiberondwa here will start his, Museveni will start his and they go to the people of Uganda and compete for audience.  Why do I say, Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please wound you wind up?

MR KANYOMOZI:  Yes, I am trying to wind up, Mr Chairman. (Interjection)- Yes, I am winding up, I want to conclude formerly -(Laughter)- why do I say that?  It is better to have all these Movements coming up, because they will have to present programs of how they think they need to change society and involve it.  It is very difficult to go on your own and sell a programme of one man then coordinating it will be very difficult.  So, please Members of this National Assembly, go out and form Movements so that we can have -(Laughter)

MR ALAI (Nominated Member):  Mr Chairman, I raise to support the Motion moved by hon. Kiyonga in appreciation of what the President have said.  In his speech, the President mentioned something about Civil Service Reform one of the most scaring exercise the Government is undertaking.  I want to elucidate a little bit on the Civil Service Reform, we started Civil Service Reform in 1992 and precisely at the end of last month -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Order hon. Members.  Hon. Minister order.

MR ALAI:  And precisely by the end of last month we came to a clause completely one of the most important aspect of he Civil Service Reform that is the down sizing of the Civil Service.  When we started the reform we were given a list of three hundred and twenty thousand people on the pay role of the government, from this three hundred and twenty thousand, we down sized the civil service to one hundred and forty seven thousand.  It sounds very scaring but you should not be scared because on the payroll of the government, we found forty thousand ghost workers.  On the payroll we also found three thousand two hundred people who should have retired and they have been retired out of government divesting itself from other activities the Revenue Authority was given - was divested from government pay role, Civil Aviation and other functions of government have been divested that one also contributed in reducing the number of civil servants on government pay role and these functions which have been divested from government for variable recruited more people into their services.  This explains to you that contrary to what some people are thinking that we have reduced substantially the jobs in government service we have created jobs elsewhere. (Applause)  

In the near future, I am going to come up with a Ministerial Statement detain the number of places in government because we have already finished the restructuring of old ministries.  The implementation monitoring board is already preparing a full report and I think before this session comes to an end, you will know very well - exactly the number of established jobs in government.  I also want to say something about the living wage, we are moving very steadily towards a living wage and we are definitely sure that next financial year, the lowest pay in government will be 70,000 shillings if not more which was targeted at.  To show that we are moving towards a living wage -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I want to inform the hon. Minister that this promise we do not know whether it will be implemented I understand NRM term is ending December, I do not know this year, and then the next government coming whether it will follow this promise.  Because we are really worried, secondly, I want to assure the Minister that he recognises Trade Union Movement in civil servants -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Order.

AN HON. MEMBER:  He recognises Trade Union Movement in the civil servants, civil servants how have got four unions in these four unions, they should negotiate, they should not come here and announce wages, these people should be given power to bargain and really get living wage.  Thank you.

MR ALAI:  Thank you for your information, I would advise you not to get scared, the process of civil service reform is in safe hands and government is definitely going to implement that one whether this House comes to a clause or not, it is a government policy that must be implemented.  Whoever is going to destabilise it for its own possible interest is not a Uganda.  

I was talking about -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of clarification.  Thank you very much for giving me opportunity.  I would wish the Minister of State to clarify that after weeding out all the ghost workers and sending away the unwanted employees, how is that government has persistently delayed in paying civil servants salaries especially teachers, every month people are moving in arrears.  Therefore, let him clarify on that one.

CAPT. BABU:  I would not have stood up to interfere with this submission of the hon. Member.  But the point of the teachers I think time has come for us to lay it on the Table and people know exactly what is going on.  I think what is happening is total misinformation, one we have in the last two years revisited the payment of the teachers throughout.  We have made them go through the exercise and they have all filled the forms, all teachers today are being paid on time except the teachers who did not fill their forms correctly, who did not have the qualification because the forms required certain conditions to be fulfilled.  Some of the teachers who are grade III teachers in primary schools do not have O’level and they have been found that they went to TTC without having gone through O’level and they have been found that they went to TTC’s without having gone through O’Level and without that the computer will not accept that name.  That is point number one.  

Point number two, Mr Chairman, some -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.

CAPT. BABU:  Mr Chairman, some headmasters and some districts have not brought the returns of certain schools.  When we get the money and the Minister of Public Service is finished getting the information from us they - which they sent back to the district and then the district DES and the District Education Committee are supposed to pay the teachers. In some cases and certain districts have diverted this money and have not paid these teachers in time, while the government has sent the money on time.  Unfortunately, when people are talking about the payment of teachers, none of them come with a specific case, they all come and say teachers are not being paid, I would like therefore, to request the hon. Member who have made this accusation to kindly get the list of these people and their names and I am willing to give him my time and will make sure that they are paid if they have fulfilled the conditions.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.   

MR ALAI:  I think the Minister of State for Education has answered that one very adequately, I want to emphasize one point where you Members should also assist government - Central Government is remitting the salaries of teachers or employees very promptly the confusion arises where the Minister is pointed out particularly some districts, some district executive secretary and Chairman RC.5, you should keep your eyes on them.  They are the ones divesting teacher’s salaries on certain businesses, this has been the case with Mubende whereby they were frightening to go and beat the DA’s and if we are going to arrest them and if that one is not going to work, we shall not stop the teachers to deliver mob justice on them.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of clarification.  I would like to seek clarification; I thought he has powers to dismiss these DES who are under either administration, because in a way they are under Local Government but they can initiate their dismissal of inefficiency.

CAPT. GASATURA:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I seek clarification from the speaker on the Floor.  In management, there is requirement at a level that when you institute procedures in any organisation, there must be inspection and in the Ministry of Education, I happen to know that there is such a department of inspection.  Again in management, they say, your workers or employees will not do what you expect but rather what you inspect.  Why should the hon. Minister ask us to watch the DES and THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN when in fact, he is paid to watch the inspectors to inspect those procedures, Mr Chairman.  

MR ALAI:  Yes, we have inspectorates in the Ministry of Education but you as Representatives of the people; this is in order to keep your eyes in the interest of the people you represent.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order hon. Members.

MR ALAI:  Mr Chairman, I want to make one point on the Civil Service Reform.  As I have already said, we have come to a Clause of down sizing the number of civil servants to the required number, I set details which will be reflected in the Ministerial Statement.  The living wage we are committed to it and every financial year, we have been increasing putting more money for paying civil servants.  Last year we paid 125 billion to civil servants, this year we went up to 160 billion shillings and we are sure because we are moving according to schedules.  We are not taking these things at random we are planning it, we are sure we are going to reach the target for the living wage next financial year.  I want to mean a bit, I think two years back, His Excellency ordered that primary teachers should be paid 49,000 shillings per month but we have not gone to 53,000 for the primary teacher, the entry point for them.  

Now, I want to say something very briefly about the security in the North.  Security in the North have been thorn at the side of the government, but this has - because of many other things at one time I stood here and I think cautioned government that unless we move speedy to stop in - security in the North and we all this insecurity to take a regional dimension, we are going to be into problems and this is what precisely what has already happened.  That settling insecurity in the North now involves also arresting what is happening in the neighbouring State of Sudan this has made the situation even more complex than before.  I think the government is taking it very, very seriously according to the speech given by the President, that security in the North is now top on the agenda, I wish that is true, but I am rather unhappy when I hear some Members in this House tend to say that the security in the North is a matter for the Northerners to settle it.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please proceed.

MR ALAI:  Last week when hon. Nkurukenda, Women Representative for Masindi was contributing, he was saying that the road that should be tarmac from rive Kavu to Karuma should be diverted through Masindi and the reasons she gave was that until the people in the North settles their differences.  As the issue of insecurity in the North is only made up of we who come from there, sometime back when we were discussing the problem of insecurity in the North, the Women Representative from Kalangala -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Information from hon. Ongaria.

MR ONGARIA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the information I would like to inform the Member on the Floor is that, he is actually one of those who are responsible for the war in the North, he started it and he knows those he left in the bush and therefore, he should start -(laughter)- by those he left in the bush to stop insecurity.

MR ALAI:  Mr Chairman, I am fully aware of that. (Laughter)    
                                                              
THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Order, hon. Members.

MR ALAI:  Mr Chairman, I am fully aware of that because the reason for the war was understood by the Government that is why we signed agreement for peace it was understood, the reason that I started the war should not mean that the rest of Ugandans should look at our people dying and they should not intervene to restore peace.  As far as I am concerned, according to my personal observation, it is that sort of attitude that is making the Northern problem continuing. It is only His Excellency the President who is interested in storing peace in the North I can prove it.  I have never seen a single Minister going in the North to talk of peace -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

MR ALAI:  It is precisely why you are leaving the issue to us alone -(Interruption)    
                                                                                                     
THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Would like to information from hon. Colleagues.

LT. COL. SERWANGA LWANGA:  I would like to inform the hon. Member that it is not only the President who is interested in finishing insurgency in the North, the NRA all officers and men of NRA are definitely committed, men included women (Laughter)- are definitely committed to eliminate this insurgency and as I said last time that, let us not accuse each other here, the problem may take another cause but se shall at one time sit and find a solution.  So, I beg hon. Members not to accuse each other on the way in the North.  The problem is know, it is as if you are having cancer and you are carrying it, you do not cut off your hand because you have got cancer in your body.  But at one time when the doctors have properly diagnose it, he shall have to cut that hand.  So, hon. Members, let all of us be committed and when we come here, the Minister for Defence to ask for more money to buy more sophisticated arms, I think you will give us -(Laughter).

MR ALAI:  Mr Chairman, let me wind up by making one point -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, in the management of society there is corrective responsibility, I expected the hon. Minister on the Floor who is a Member now, he is a Minister of State and, therefore, attends Cabinet and when I look around the Minister they have been on a regional balance.  Is it therefore, in order for the Minister who has been put there on regional balance to put the issues of that region to the Cabinet for decision to come here not to accept corrective responsibility in the Cabinet? (Applause)  

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members this Parliament in what normally spoken here is not spoken ordinary in public and I think the Minister is also representing a community and sometimes from his experience he is trying to put across to you the colleagues so that you could share his statements and I think he is in order.  Proceed.

MR ALAI:  The second point, Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Please could you wind up.

MR ALAI:  The second point, Mr Chairman, I do not want to labour on that one any more.  I want to make one point -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Could you wind up, hon. Minister.

MR ALAI:  Yes, but they are delaying me.  Mr Chairman, I want to make one point on Constitution making.  His Excellency warned that those who are there making a Constitution which will guide this country for prosperity should rather be vigilant because anything can happen and destroy this country.  We often say that leaders go but the country remains.  But, if we look back into history where is the Roman Empire now and others?  They are all gone, they disappeared because of mismanagement of state affairs, I therefore, say that the warning given by the President should be taken very, very seriously, it is not a matter of leaders go and a country remains.  This country can as well disappear, it is possible, what is difficult with it if the North can join Sudan, if Buganda succeed and join another mission, what is difficult with it, the country of Uganda can disappear -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

MR ALAI:  Mr Chairman, because we are run short of time, I want to end up here but some Members who treat what was said by the President as a laughing matter should better try to be serious as representatives of the people.  Mr Chairman, I thank you for giving me opportunity.

BRIG. MOSES ALI (East Moyo County, Moyo):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I have four points that I want to touch slightly.  One, I want to thank the NRM Government and everybody who will claim the success for as it is stated in the speech that this House has done its best to govern this country.  One thing I want to talk about is, the rule of law which actually enabled me t stand here now and speak, and not only to speak here, but also to speak in the Cabinet again.  That is I think, a show of justice and as a practical example, if you take from me that in this world you have to be careful sometimes you will fall in a ditch but do not harass people, you just be very careful, you will come out maybe. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

BRIG. MOSES ALI:  So, I appeal to those specifically to hon. Omara Atubo with whom we were in the cabinet before and I left him in the Cabinet when I went to study - (Laughter)- but not so long, I saw him also he was sent to join me and we all graduated.  But, I think we should show example of being tolerant, we must also reconcile, have a feeling of reconciliation forgive each other.  Because Omara Atubo who is he going to fight now?  This is the last session of the NRC, tomorrow I do not know what it will be called, why can he not reconcile and forget even going to prison? (Laughter)  Maybe, at the end of the two years, he will come back here at the front line, why can he not cool down? So, that is my advice to my brother whom I left behind here because he came late, I left him there to complete. (Laughter)  

Next point, I want to talk to the Sectoral Committee of this House maybe, those of you who will come next time, I think the idea of Sectoral Committee is very good one and it gives chance for everybody to contribute in length otherwise, as we are now, it is going to be very difficult for everybody to say what he wants or what she wants to say.  But also the Sectoral Committee should be given some place or some things to buy, and I would even say, they should be involved in drawing up of the budget causes - whatever has been agreed here, then tomorrow you do not know what will happen, so we do not even see the role of this House and the Sectoral Committee if what has been agreed here can be changed.  

The economic problem can be discussed in this House and whatever has been brought here has been discussed, but what happens after the approval?  What other facts that were not known before that has now forced the Ministry of Finance to cut across the votes the budget that has been approved according to the Bill.  So, that is for those who are coming back, in fact, I remember.  

Another point I want to talk about although is not mentioned in NURP, NURP in West Nile, there is also a section called NURP nearly 45 per cent of this organisation money has actually been eaten by the officials, some projects even have been eliminated now because they took long time in seminars and now projects are not there, the only road for example between Kitgum and Gulu, I do not know whether these people are there, last time I read, they said, they had moved away, I think defence should help to deploy soldiers to protect these people the contractors so that they finish this road.  There should also be some soldiers to defend these contractors in Moyo to finish the road, but if the contractors are scared away, when will they go and when will peace come to the standard required by the contractors?

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member maybe, because we are busy with a lot of schedule I do not have the time to - but I will take this chance to inform the House that actually suggestions he is advancing have already been taken and the contractors are back to work.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform my hon. Colleague and dear brother hon. Moses Ali -(Laughter)- that the road he was referring to is under the Northern Uganda Reconstruction Programme and that due to the security situation prevailing at the time when the contractors were on sight it was possible for work to proceed.  The contractors is quite committed and very active the same people are handling Acholi/Gulu and they are proceeding at the rate of 1 kilometre per day.  They are proceeding at the rate of 1 kilometre per day, I was there with my Colleague and I have no hesitation, in assuring my Colleague and the House that as soon as it is safe, the contractor will go back on sight and proceed expeditiously with the work.  

Secondly, I also want to shade some sort of light on the community action programme which is operational in the three districts of West Nile, that is Moyo, Aura and Nebbi.  this programme is proceedings on a course and very soon, I will be coming with a statement to inform the House about the over all performance of all the programmes under NURP.  Thank you very much.

MR OKWERA:  Point of clarification.  Thank you very much, first of all, I want to say that I am very happy that the Minister for Works and hon. Minister in the Prime Minister’s Office is here.  The hon. Minister from the Office of the Prime Minister has just given us some NURP programme which run from Karuma to Gulu.  Yesterday, this issue was raised here, and we gather from the Floor that Wade Adams was paid a deposit of 1 billion Uganda shillings and 800,000 US dollars as far as back in July, 1994, but up to now, the work Wade Adams has done is not any where 5 kilometres and bringing murram to the tarmac and that is all.  So, we need clarification.  

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, I did tell you that when you have substantial like the one being raised by hon. Okwera from Agagu county, and his friends, you should use the procedure under our rule.  Give a Minister a question whereby he must prepare reasonable answers to the nation.  I would not like this contribution to be turn into question time, what I would advise is that prepare your questions forward to the responsible Minister through my office I will call that Minister to come here in good time to give reasonable answers to the rest of Ugandans.  Please could the speaker wind up.  

BRIG. MOSES ALI:  Mr Chairman, the CAP has almost failed in West Nile even as now I speak the district coordinator of Moyo District has not been appointed up to now for almost one year now so somebody there is acting so we do not know how and when this organisation is going to work.

Finally, Mr Chairman, there is a subject which is - many people do not know when to talk about it, today I want to talk about.  That is about the property of the Asian Custodian Board Property which has been bought by Ugandans in 70s whatever years.  Now the Asians human rights were violated and we agree the property must be given back to them, but also the human rights of the Ugandans who bought these properties should also be observed, either by recognising the sale because it was done by government anyway, even if the government we do not want but that was the government at that time, either they recognise that sale or if it is nullified as it is then give back the money and the refund should not be against somebody who bought it as if it is a punishment and people get scared to talk about it as if when we talk about we are going to harm yourself or you go to Luzira, I am ready to go back.  Let the minister responsible come and tell the world how many properties had already been compensated, during 70s some of these properties were compensated, how many and which ones have not been compensated, and which ones have been bought by who?  Let us know why are we being put in darkness.  So, this is my last point, that we want this point to be known and those few Ugandans who bought these properties either the properties given to them or their money is given to them properly in the proper way.  

MR MWANDHA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, hank you for letting the hon. Minister permit me to give information.  This House set up a Select Committee on the subject matter which is a matter of concern of the Minister.  The Select Committee prepared a report that report was placed on the Table of the House and I am aware that the Chairman of the Select Committee has tried very hard to get that report discussed by this House. When I am sure the hon. Member will have the opportunity to make the kind of comments he is making.  But for some reason, that report has not been permitted to come to this House for discussion.  As a matter of fact, the idea in that report was that, the law which was passed in 1982 be expropriated Properties Act, was totally out of date.  And there was need - and there were proposals in that report to re-visit that Act, so that it is up-dated.  So that, in fact, all the re-possessions and the sales of these properties are sold in accordance with the law which is up to-date.  But since the hon. Minister -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  But you are turning your information into contribution hon. Member!

MR MWANHDA:  I am just giving him the last information.  Since the hon. Minister is now in a cabinet, he should cause Cabinet to get that report debated by this House.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Minister, could you wind up?

BRIG. MOSES ALI:  Finally, I want to talk about Frozen Accounts.  You know, there are many things in this country.  And in fact, if we start counting how may Cabinets, there are many, many Cabinets.  Every President goes away with his Cabinet.  Now, in 1979, it happened that, that government had to go also with its Cabinet.  So, those who remain behind as frozen accounts of so many people, up to now if the account is de-frozen, then again, it is done against the owners.  Because from the time they left to the time that their accounts have been de-frozen, many things have taken place.  There was the knocking of two zeros, and the 30 per cent.  Now, in fact, if you go now to see your account, you will not go back again.  So, why cannot somebody sit down quietly and start giving interest to the accounts?  Because the money was in the bank and nobody can say the money was not used.  This money must be earning interest up to the time. (Applause)  Then, let it suffer the same fate with the rest of knocking the two zeros and cutting out 30 per cent.  It should have already earned for all these years a certain percent.  Maybe, something will be left for this owner.  But this is not done.  Where are the human rights now?  We are champion of defending foreigners human rights, your own human rights, you stumble on.  I thank you, Mr Chairman. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  I now call upon the Minister to reply.

THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Kiyonga):  I thank you, Mr Chairman for giving me the opportunity to reply and wind up the debate that we have been on for a number of days now.  And I would like to start by thanking all the hon. Members of this House for the unanimity that they have showed in supporting this Motion.  

I would like straight away to make a correction on page 6 of the bigger prints of the Speech of the President on 13th of last month, when he made reference to the traditional leaders.  What was intended to be said was apolitical and not political.  The traditional leaders by the law we passed here, were supposed to be cultural and apolitical.  I would also like to regret the incidence that took place at the Sugar Factory in Lugazi, whereby one worker was killed by a policeman.  As the press did indicate, this is an event that the police regretted and the officer that performed this hideous act is already arrested and he is going to be charged in accordance with the law.  In presenting the Motion, hon. Colleagues, I did use a proverb which I would like to go back to, for two reasons.  One, because it was partly misunderstood, if I am to go by what hon. Marwas said.  But secondly, that serves very well to illustrate my point.  I did say that the proof of the pudding is in the eating.  This is an English proverb.  That actually means that, what you experience is better proof than a say, a mere saying or a mere slogan.  

Now, in the case of Uganda, we have heard many slogans, we have been told many things.  That freedom of association is God given; and, therefore, that multi-partism is automatic.  We have been told that, once you have multi-partism, then you have the best form of governance and all the problems are solved and that therefore, the NRM should have allowed multi-partism long time ago.  Now, if I can go back to the proverb.  What is the pudding that I am talking about?  Hon. Members the pudding is what we have experienced in Uganda since we got independence from the colonial masters.  This pudding also includes what other countries in Africa and elsewhere have experienced over the same period.  I have in mind specific examples like Kenya, like Zaire, like Angola and even Italy in Europe.  Now, what is the evidence?  What have we seen?  What has been in the pudding?  In the case of Uganda, all Members are unanimous that we have seen economic recovery.  That a process towards uniting our people had started in annex, that peace and a situation of law and order, covers most of this country.  That even with a non-partisan Parliament, we could pass very useful and fundamental laws and hold the government in power accountable.  

While that is what we have seen in Uganda, other changes have also taken place elsewhere; which I would like also to turn to.  In Italy for example, they used to use a system of representation which they call proportionate representation.  And what we saw in Italy was instability at the political level.  Finally, as day will follow night, that system has been abandoned by the Italian people themselves.  Our neighbours in Kenya under pressure introduced multi-party political system.  Those who advised them to do so, believed and had hoped that, positive changes would take place in that country.  But as you know, these friends of ours in the North countries, in the developed countries, also study a situation, they will advise on situations and also follow them up with studies.  In the case of Kenya, after the elections, the US aid sent the known scholars to Kenya, to study what had happened.  And they did make some conclusions.  I am quoting a journal on democracy produced in July, 1993; which is printed in Washington.  And I will just quote some parts.  The big heading is Kenya.  
 
Lessons from fraud election.  The first quotation I want to make, goes.  It remains to be seen that, was after the elections.  Whether the new error will produce a transition to democracy or a pro-longed and potentially blood struggle between Moi and his opponents.  This was after the multi-party elections.  And the writer goes on, ‘Democratization in Kenya as elsewhere in Africa, will not come quickly or easily.’  In the end it will depend mainly on the people of these societies and especially on the attitudes and actions of competing political elites.  In the same book, they go on to say something relaxed.  And I will quote before I go to my own notes, and this was really the conclusion of the paper.  It is headed ‘PROSPECTS FOR DEMOCRACY.’  While the holding of elections is a necessary step for a transition democratic rule, would be democracy and donors alike, must accept that, democratization will require changes in the way people think about politics.  And that, such changes in attitude do not occur over night.  These are very key lessons not from very far from us; from a situation we are watching.  And indeed at the time the journal was being written, what is happening in Kenya, the tribal clashes had not started taking place.  But this scholar had foreseen this, watching the events that were unraveling in Kenya.  So, in my view and I think in the view of many Members who have contributed to this Motion, we have made progress on the way to democracy.  There are changes that have been affected in this society, that can show that we are on the way to full democracy.  In the Constitution that we are making, already in the draft, which I hope will soon be passed, one can see further steps of progress.  And I just want to outline a few.  Immediately the Constitution is in place and we go to elections, we are going to have clear separation of powers between the executive, the Parliament and the Judiciary.  This has already been included in the Constitution which we are making.  

As you know, for the past 8 or 9 years, we have been having the President who was also the Chairman of Parliament.  So, this can be seen as a great forward on the past democracy that we are going to clearly separate the powers.  We are going to elect a Parliament not by the indirect means which brought us here, through the RC system and the electoral college.  This Parliament is going to be elected by the one man, one vote principle; this will be further progress on the way to democratization.  As I said earlier on when I was presenting the Motion, the President to be is going to be directly elected by the people under the new Constitution.  

We have gone ahead and entrenched firmly that, the independence of the judiciary cannot be tampered with.  That even if you are to amend the Constitution, that part which refers to the independence of the judiciary cannot be amended, even by the people themselves.  These are clear fundamental and brave steps that the country is going to take towards a pass of full democratization of our country.  But also, on top of that, there are changes which we have effected through law or policy which need to take root and some kind of guidance. We have just started on the past to decentralisation.  And in many parts of the country, people are beginning to see the fruits of money going direct to the districts; of money staying at the sub-county level.  We need to consolidate such a fundamental gain.  We have started on the process of privatisation and liberalization.  And already we can see, even amongst ourselves that, there is need to make further changes.  This needs to be nasty and guided in such a way that, we realise the full benefits of this fundamental change that, this House brought about.  The key institution of state; the Police, the Army and the Civil Service, still need to be strengthened so that, we the political players can play on top of a firm structure which will ensure peace and security for our people.  

So, when I said that the proof of the pudding is in the eating, to me it would appear both in Uganda, is that we have taken a path of innovation for 9 years, we have tried also saying that the Europeans themselves do not have acid tests solutions to our situation.  I think if they had, they would already have given us these solutions.  And a situation in Kenya is a good example.  They say, the answer to Kenya is multi-party; they forced multi-party there.  They themselves, had written to say, we are really not yet there and the situation will take a long time.  It would appear to me, therefore, that we the Ugandans particularly we the NRC, must remain firm in what we have practiced, in what we have seen and guide our country accordingly rather than going by slogans emanating from other quarters. (Applause)  

I was very much touched by the contribution of hon. Medi and hon. Mrs Kiryapawo.  They posed a very good question.  The question was, are we talking about leadership or peace?  and I have added myself, for both.    

TAPE BLANK.

An attempt to provoke the state.  Two, insight the population.  Three, tell lies to the population.  And I will begin with Natete.  What did we see there?  I was very happy with hon. Damiano Lubega who was a host and indeed after the meeting, I personally sought appointment with hon. Lubega and I expressed my concern to him.  But there were three colleagues there whom I thought really did not keep in mind the interests of the country, the way they talked.  Beginning with the distinguished Prof. Senteza Kajubi, when he took the floor, h said, you people, do you know why you are poor?  He said, you are poor because in Obote 1, everything used to go to Akokoro and the people clapped there in audience.  He said now, in Museveni’s time, two things are happening; which he has taken the money, so that you are still poor.  One, pajeros are being bought specifically for Mbarara.  Two, guns are being bought for use in Rwanda.  This was hon. Senteza Kajubi contributing in a Constitutional consultation meeting.  After him, then distinguished lawyer, hon. Nsambu also took the Floor.  Hon. Nsambu took the Floor, he is a member of the CA for Makindye, and told the people that, you people, you should be careful.  Me, I cannot condemn Itongwa because even Museveni was like that.  If I condemn him now, and he comes to power like Museveni, what will I do?  Then lastly, was on Wasswa Lule; who was a bit careful, but still also incitive.  He said, although he had walked out of the CA, his people had allowed him to come back to the CA provided the mission was against the constitutional making exercise.  As I said, I talked to hon. Lubega, expressed my unhappiness about the irresponsibility; I talked to hon. Nsambu and I told Nsambu - my introductory words were, hon. Nsambu, you are a leader.  He said me!  Then I said, yes, you are a leader because now you are a Member of CA, you are an old man, you are a lawyer.  He said, as he said; then he said, what is wrong?  I said, for you to tell people that you cannot condemn Itongwa who is causing insecurity, is not correct.  He said, you see, I was given such small of time, I could not explain fully myself.  I looked for Senteza Kajubi, I could not see him at that time.  The police went ahead and asked these brothers to make statements; because really, these are not statements that we could have taken lightly.  At Natete, there was some improvement except for hon. Paul Ssemogerere and I am unhappy that he is not here.  

I would have liked to say, what I am going to say, when he is here.  Hon. Ssemogerere among other things said that, as soon as he takes over the presidency, he is going to change the Constitution which we are making.  And the only way really he can do that, is to do the 1967 type.  Because under the Constitution, the President has no power to change the Constitution.  Secondly, he said that, this issue of non-living, this is something he is going to solve; this question of employment, this is something he is going to solve.  That if those in authority are not going to give up power, he is going to lead with the people of Katwe or the population to the barracks, to change the system from there.  And knowing Ssemogerere, I was really surprised.  I did not believe this until I watched a cassette.  I have not believed that these were words from hon. Ssemogerere.  

Finally, as you heard at Nansana, we had this eruption of violence which we are investigating and I think we are making good progress; only a few people spoke.  But one of them who spoke was hon. Abu Mayanja.  and if I can para-phrase or as close as possible come to his words, he said, looking at the Constitution which we are making, myself and him and others, he sees nothing about the interests of the Baganda.  That the Baganda are going to be made destitutes in their own country.  Now, even if that was the fact, I am a CA delegate, the changes are to be made in the CA, I have not resigned from the CA.  So, what am I expecting the population to do?  That although we are making a Constitution, expect nothing, you might as well take another root to solve your problem.  So, hon. Members when I say these meetings have demonstrated an attempt to provoke the state, an attempt to incite the population, and a definite programme to tell lies.  I will be happy if I can be allowed to continue and finish my contribution.  So, Mr Chairman, I have illustrated what these meetings are and yesterday, I met hon. Sebaana Kizito,  Because I saw in the New Vision.  Hon. Sebaana Kizito is also someone I know very well.  

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Minister, you say, you will like to clarify on something - wait -(Interruption)

MR ELYAU:  Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr Chairman, hon. Members would be patient when somebody wants to give a contribution.  You see, for us who read from the papers, I want the Minister to make this House very clear and this nation.  These people equally say, it is the government who imported the people who went and made ‘kelele’ in that recent meeting.  Can you clarify to the nation?  Because now some of us who read, think that the Minister of Local Government has taken his people from Nakawa to disrupt the meeting; so that one, he and equally Ssemogerere hid under the banana trees.  Because this one gives the impression that, all of them did not know what was going to happen.  Can the Minister clarify this, Mr Chairman?

DR KIYONGA:  Mr Chairman, I will request if you can allow me to proceed without interruptions.  Because if hon. Elyau had been patient, I had not finished on that point.  But just to help him, I can come straight to that point.  The government in acting is using the laws of Uganda.  This government has stopped other meetings before as you know.  It did not have to go to the UK or US to ask that, can we stop a meeting.  We have stopped meetings before.  We were looking at these meetings going on.  If the government wanted to stop a meeting, it did not have to go using other hand methods, what for?  There is a very clear law which empowers the Inspector General of Police, if he is satisfied that a certain meeting is likely to disturb the peace of the people, he can disperse that assembly.  

So, we did not as a government need to import ‘wayaye’ that they go and stop the meeting.  But as I said, I do not want prejudice investigations, very good progress being made and we shall be told.  You know, we have been told many times that, there are some people who have 99 tricks.  And we are just trying to find out whether this is one of those tricks.  Hon. Members, really the time has come for us. Because some people were saying, you people why are you stopping people from holding meetings.  We were telling people really, some of these people are going to re-open wounds, if these meetings are not properly conducted.  Consultation is supposed to mean that Kiyonga I go to Bukonzo County, West and intimately interact with the people who sent me, so that, I can get further briefing to the CA.  But what are we seeing?  Patrick Mwondha, hon. Ssemogerere, Dick Odur, Wanendeya; they are consulting in Katwe, in Natete. (Laughter)  And obviously, it is going to be very irresponsible on part of government, if we allow this situation to on like that.  So, in not a too distant future, government is going to issue guidelines.  We do not want to stop people from talking; otherwise, we will have no democracy.  But on the other hand, to allow talking of the nature that is going on; people who were in government yesterday, who were passing policies, they are the ones coming and saying things and we are looking on.  The people do not know now who is telling the truth.  Those people, why is the government not asking them why they are telling lies?  So, we have no option, but to give further guidance really on how these meetings should be conducted.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Order.

DR KIYONGA:  But meanwhile, Mr Chairman, I would like to appeal to all leaders both in the NRC, in the CA and elsewhere that, as we undergo these major political changes, let us make our zero point, the interest of our people, peace and security.  Thus disturb other things, but to play around with the peace of our people is really treachery.  We are just being traitors to our own people.  

Having said that, I would like to address a question that a number of Members did make a reference to.  Constantly, I think almost everybody who spoke on this point was saying that, in a constitutional making, there are no winners and losers; and that therefore, nobody should say he has lost or has won.  Hon. Matembe tried, I think to explain that this statement could not go the way it is.  My own view really, I do not completely agree with the who are putting these lines.  Making the Constitution is part of the struggle of the people of Uganda, to ensure that they get peace and stability and start on sustainable development.  As you know, we have sent so much time and money.  If it was a simple thing, we would have e finished long time ago.  The fact that we are struggling, it means there are other forces we are struggling against.  So, if we are struggling against other forces definitely, I cannot accept either be defeated or the other side will win.  So, definitely I cannot accept that in a constitutional making you will have no winners and no losers.  There are definitely two sides.  And some of them are in the CA, some of them outside Uganda.  There are people who do not want to see a Constitution made by the people of Uganda.  So, I think the people will have won, if a Constitution that guarantees their peace, that guarantees their sovereignty, despite the struggle that we are seeing, despite the obstructions that we are seeing.  If eventually this can go through, the people of Uganda will have won.  And those Ugandans who are working for interests of other people more than Ugandans will definitely have lost.  So, to say that there cannot be winners and losers is incorrect.  We would not have spent all this time, all this money just to solve a small problem.  

Now, the hon. Members who may not support the Movement type of system.  If as we have provided, we provided for multi-partism, Movementism and any other system.  If this article finally sails through, will they have lost?  Those who will have lost are those who do not want the Constitution to be made at all.  But in my view, those multi-partists who are nationalists will also have won.  Why?  Because, there are people who support the Movement and are very extreme, as you know, they want to segregate against others.  But through this Constitution, everybody is being brought in order.  Whether you are Movement or multi-party, this is what you will do.  We have said that, in a Movement type of political system, the government must be broad based.  The politics must be grassroot based.  So, if we get the Kiyonga who goes and start saying, Mulwanira is not a Movement when we have a Movement type of system, he is already now disciplined, he has no way.  Because, definitely the multi-partists have influenced those who support the Movement through their arguments.  Of course, in a few times, they have been very arrogant and very abusive.  But, most of the time, they have been also very constructive.  And that is what happens.  If in Kasese we want to come and win Mityana in football match, we start competing against each other; some people lose, some people win, until we get the team which will come to Mityana.  

So, having participated in the debate that we have been having, we should not feel shy to say that we have won, whether we are Movement or multi-partists.  But it is wrong to say that in a Constitution making process, you cannot have winners and losers.  There are definitely winners and losers depending on your interest.  Then yesterday, I am disappointed with The New Vision because they did not carry the information that hon. Karuhanga gave which was very clear.  Because hon. Omara, I think anticipating that, I am going to alieu to this point has gone away, gave misleading information to this House that the majority of Movement supporters in the CA is just because they are Members who are brought in indirectly.  That if this was not the situation, that so called artificial majority, will not be there.  For the sake of the Members of NRC and the country, I want to just give very few statistics here.  On that night when we discussed Article 94, which the multi-partists wanted diligently, the people who attended and voted were 269.  Out of these, those who opposed the Motion were 199, and those who supported the Motion were 68 and two abstained.  

Now, hon. Omara says that, there are 74 people who came indirectly.  And this includes the women as you know, it includes the parties which are represented there; DP and CP.  It includes the workers; it includes the youth and the representatives of people with disabilities.  When you add all those and Presidential Nominees and NRA, you will come to 74.  But as you know, UPC and UPM did not send direct representatives.  So that already knocks off the 4.  We are left with 70.  Now, even at the voting, 6 of the 30 women voted with the multi-party supporters.  Although they came through this system, they are abusing, those hon. sisters voted with the multi-party people - 6 people.  One of the Presidential Nominees voted with multi-party supporters.  Three of the multi-party supporters who went there on the party ticket; hon. Kitariko, hon. Mulenga, hon. Nkangi, voted with the multi-partists.  And then, one worker also voted with multi-partists.  Now, that gives you 11 people and 1 youth.  That gives you 11 people who came in indirectly but voted on the side of he multiparty.  

So, when we are subtracting, we have to subtract from both sides.  So, the multi-partists would be left with just 57.  If you take away 74 from the 199 of those who opposed the Motion, you would have 125; but add that 11, because that 11 should not be counted in the 74; plus the 4 of the UPC and the UPM, we would be having 140.  So, even then, if we excluded these people, you would have 140 versus 57.  and if you calculate, then you are opposing 5 hard more than two thirds to defeat the Motion.  So, it is wrong for hon. Omara to come here and give this wrong impression.  

I would like briefly to say something about security with neighbouring countries.  Hon. Dr Byaruhanga did demand and correctly saw that, back benchers, Members of NRC, should regularly be informed about the security situation including our relationship with our neighbours.  That sometimes in the villages, people wonder whether actually the NRM may not be causing trouble in the neighbouring countries.  

This is what I would have to say.  First of all that about Sudan.  Sudan as you know, will take full responsibility for our people whose deaths they have financed in the North of this country.  The same country Sudan as you heard on the world radios, wanted to kill Mubaraka in Addis Ababa.  That was not NRM.  This same Sudan which is killing people in Northern Uganda, also wants to kill the President of Egypt.  I think that is very useful information to the villagers.  That some of these countries which are quarrelling with us are also quarrelling with other countries and Eritrea as I have been informed.  Now, but more fundamentally, hon. Members, I think we decided very well to have our Sectoral Committees and I think our first stage should always be to hold responsible, the Sectoral Committee; you the Committee on Security; what do you say?  Because they are the ones who analyse it.  So, they could go and analyse, if there is a question, they call the Minister.  The first person to attack is our Committee, as we attacked the other one on the mass Media Bill.  This is how we shall strengthen ourselves.  If there is something lacking, first point is the Sectoral Committee.  Sectoral Committee on the Economy, Sectoral Committee on Security; why are you not informing us?  If government is snot giving you information, you come and tell us.  Then when our Sectoral Committee has done its work, we can go beyond to the state.  Otherwise, our method of work is being mixed up.  

Thirdly, we pass the budget here everyday and I am glad that, we have reached a point where the books fully print the budget of defence.  And the Minister of Defence, the Secretary of Defence is always called before the relevant Sectoral Committee, even PAC.  Because from the money we should be able to say whether really with that money, defence can keep our security and at the same time be able to go and disturb other countries.  I would like us to reach a point where, when I am in the village as a Member of Parliament, because I know the function of Member of Parliament; I pass the budget, I pass law.  When I am asked even if I do not have the facts, I would tell the person that, that cannot be true,  because I am the one who passed the budget; in case it is true, we are going to find out and discipline those people.  Because if we are out there and we say, actually we also do not know we shall go and check.  This is not correct.  Because we are the Members of Parliament, we are ones who have information, we are the ones sitting on the Sectoral Committees.  It is our responsibility to fully follow these matters.  

Like I saw my elder brother hon. Atwai here, when he was complaining about a Member of Parliament who asked the Prime Minister not to send a Bill.  I am glad he clarified the information.  But what I would have expected would have been for hon. Atwai who is also Chairman of Discipline, to summon that Colleague of ours.  Yes, we must be able to discipline ourselves, because when we put here, I do not know whether we are saying it is the executive, we should call the private member or this is notice that, he is going to be called.  We want a self-regulative mechanism, even within us in the backbench.  We should be principled, if the Minister tells lies, we discipline him.  If the back bencher tells lies, we also discipline him. (Applause)  Then we are going to have really a system moving properly.  

I would like to say regarding hon. Kanyomozi that, I am really very grateful and I hope that, the Chairman will allow me to use this information to immediately carry out investigation in hon. Kanyomozi’s constituency.  For sure anybody holding guns illegally whether he supports Movement or multi-party, will go to court.  there is only one law which covers everybody. (Applause)  On the other hand if our findings also come to the conclusion that, hon. Kanyomozi did not reflect the facts properly, I do hope that hon. Atwai will help us with hon. Kanyomozi. (Laughter)  

Since time is running out, I will just address only two other little points; I am sure the hon. Minister of Finance when he comes for the general debate on the budget will be able to address many others.  The question of imbalances.  there has been complaints in the NRC and outside that there are imbalances in the country.  And I would not like to say, I disagree with the Members.  My own position which I have always clarified is that, part of the imbalance is definitely historical.  Historical was there even before NRM.  Nobody can dispute the fact that, even before NRM came to power, development was much more advanced in the South of the country as compared to the North.  That is factual.  And nobody before NRM can saw that, they took active steps to correct that imbalance.  I have heard complaints about NURP; but for me, I am happy that at least, a programme was involved to try and address that fundamental imbalance in our country.  NURP was precisely to address the imbalance between the south and the North.  To lay a foundation for development in that part of the country.  

Now, in my view, Mr Chairman, and hon. Members, some of the decisions we have taken here, if we ensure that they are properly implemented, are going to address imbalances.  Take for example the issue of decentralisation.  Only last week here, we passed votes on account.  Which are showing clearly that, Kasese is getting so much money, Masaka so much money.  So, now the thing is transparent.  We have been talking in general, now we can see.  And we can go back and examine why is Mbarara getting more than Moyo, thus be explained.  This is the right path to address the imbalances.  

On school fees, the contribution of 50 percent, it is going according to the children from a given area.  And in the CA, some Members, hon. Ndege moved a Motion that, a certain percentage of the money from government every year should go to the local authorities.  My quarrel with hon. Ndege was that, that was not going far enough, we want a formula which shows that, once that money is available, how much will each district take?  So, that it is nolonger ambiguary.  Because even if you get from the centre, then who is going to divide?  Who will decide how much goes to Iganga?  Who will decide how much goes to Kamuli?  And we are going to re-visit this question in the CA.  So, I accept that, the imbalances are there, they are historical; this government has tried to address some of these imbalances.  Some of the decisions we have taken if well implemented, will correct imbalances.  So, I think what we should do hon. Members, is each time to observe something serious.  We should not just complain about it.  We should put in a resolution.  I feel a bit frustrated in the back bench because you know to organise in the back bench is very difficult.  You would have a good case you want to move it and people fear.  there was a case of a manager who had been sacked.  We were trying to organise people that we call government, people feared.  Yes, you remember there was such a case here.  But at least, there, the government was aware that there was something and they stopped.  But we could have gone further as back benchers.  Sometimes Members came here and talk about their constituents who have been chased from jobs and it ends there.  Our people feel unprotected.  If there is something serious, we substantiate and take a resolution as NRC -(Applause)- so that we protect our people.  The people can know that, once a matter is in the NRC, government will have to take action.  But if we just come and complain like the people on the streets, it will not help our people.  So, we use our Committees if something is serious, we pass a resolution to bring the government to book.                      


Finally, as I said other matters will be addressed, it is my observation that the people are very confident now.  The population of Uganda are very confident.  What the foreigners had expected, those who are supporting multi-partists was that, when the CA starts and there is a quarrel about multi-party and there is a walk-out, that there were going to be demonstrations on the streets.  And when you see these missions of inciting, they are hoing that the population could start demonstrating.  But our people are confident and they know what they want.  

On the night we voted on the historical article of 94, people were very apprehensive all over the country.  When I went home, I found my voters had collected beer and soda that we celebrate.  I said what are we celebrating?  We said the way we heard the debate going on, it seems as if you are taking us back to multi-party.  The people there in the village; here in Kampala, people were celebrating on that night I am surprised, the press did not pick this.  People were celebrating in the bars.  In some parts of Buganda, people were telling CA delegates, ‘mukulike, mukulike’. (Laughter)  Meaning really you are on a situation where you could have lost your life, and they are congratulating you for survival.  

So, one should not assume that, when our people are not demonstrating, when they are not reacting negatively, that this is in support or that they are ignorant.  No, they know what they want.  For as long as you are taking a correct decision, they will be quiet.  If you make a mistake, you will see them.  Absolutely, so this is why we suspect now being on the political side.  I suspect that, the trouble causes at Nansana, are trying to imitate.  Because they were in Natete, no reaction.  They were in Katwe, no reaction.  Then what will they tell their masters?  Because they appeal to the UN, that the UN should call us to order. (Laughter)  

So, Mr Chairman, I would like to thank you very much and I request my hon. Colleagues to support the Motion.  Thank you very much. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Order.  I now put the question that thanks of the National Resistance council be recorded for the clear and precise exposition of Government Policy contained in the communication from the Chair made by His Excellency the President to this Council on Tuesday the 13th June, 1995.  With those in favour of the Motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)


THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  With that we come to the end of today’s session we adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.


(The Council rose at 5.00 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 13 1995 at 2.30 p.m.)

