
Tuesday 13th July 1993

The he Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice-Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair).

The Council was called to order.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT RESISTANCE COUNCILS BILL, 1993

THE MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr. Bidandi Ssali):  Mr. Chairman, Sir, I beg to move that a Bill entitled: ‘The Local Government Resistance Councils Bill, 1993’ be read a First time.  

BILLS
SECOND READING.

THE CONSTITUTION AMENDMENT BILL, 1993

(Debate continues).

MR. KASAJJA G.P (Bulamogi County, Kamuli):  Mr. Chairman, I stand up here to strongly support this Motion. (Applause)  I am going to base my support on principles not just on a matter of giving haphazard points.  One, I will just base on unity.  If you recall, before the abolition of these cultural institutions, the culture that had been created among the people of Uganda was of high class and if you relate that culture with the development that we had at that time, you will find that we are registering positive development.  I would therefore on that point like to state that a well-cultured society is also a developmental society and I want to add on this.  In developed countries like Britain, you will find they have got a culture whereby if for example, you go to line up for something, somebody just comes and he knows that you do not need to go in front.  But for us who normally come this way from African countries - I did it one day and I got ashamed.  They will look at you and you yourself will really get out of place.  

So, if we can institutionalise this culture whereby we make people grow up with the culture that respects the people and brings unity, development will be created.  I would also like to base my support on - I think this one is basically to request the presenter of the Bill to consider - I think when he is winding up, that the Bill was not properly drafted because the leaders, the way they have been given the powers here, it seems they have been scrapped naked, because if you say a cultural leader is not going to have an administrative capacity of administrative ability over his clients, then this one means that this person actually is a monumental person, he is just there as a statue.  We should at least have somebody who is going to be a leader, and he should also have some administrative capacity over his people.  For example, get a situation - even though some people or hon. Members were saying that if these institutions are instituted, the leader will be involved in things like say, okwabya enyimbe, things like may be organising clans and so on.  Suppose somebody misbehaves at the okwabya olumbe what will now happen?  Will he not be having powers to say now what you have done is wrong and therefore, I will not like you to continue doing this?  If he does so, he is actually doing administration because he can discipline and if he disciplines, definitely, he is doing something prohibited. So, I would like some administrative powers to be given to these leaders otherwise it will be something monumental.  

One other thing which I have found with the Bill is that it seems to be half-hearted because if we are going to create cultural institutions which are going to forge unity, which are going to culturalise our young citizens, then it is going to be difficult when it comes to say, arbitration if there is any conflict for law courts to decide over these cases.  Now, what I am trying to say is, how are you going to decide that politics ends here and culture begins here?  That is not being clear in my mind and we might end up creating a law, which is going to remain in books like - if I may quote this law on - we passed here a law on sectarianism.  This sectarian law has been difficult for law courts actually to execute.  Then another law that has been difficult has been the defilement.  We passed here a law that if a person defiles a girl below 14 years, that person has to be hanged, he has to be killed.  But all the cases that I am reading though they are becoming monotonous these days, the lawyers prefer to use the Penal Code instead of this law which we passed here.  

So, I am not prepared again to have a law that does not delineate functions; delineate say where the culture now here is going to begin and where politics is going to end.  On the aspect of paying tax - because here we are saying that the presenter of the Bill is saying that the leaders should not be allowed to pay tax.  I think in a situation like this in Uganda where we are trying to look around for broad based tax collection, it is going to defeat the purpose of collecting revenue for the Ministry of Finance.  If we are going to exempt a very big property owned by those cultural institutions not to pay tax like we hear or what we have here is that the Kabaka is going to have 350 square -(Interruption)

CAPT BABU:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that when somebody says tax, you might get a different impression.  What is in the Bill is personal tax and the hon. Member who is a Director of Uganda Revenue Authority, I want to tell him, this particular case is part of the Restitution.  So, I would like to make it very clear that we are not talking about general tax.  We are talking about personal tax.  Thank you.

MR. KASAJJA:  Mr. Chairman, I do not seem to understand that logic because when we are talking of tax, it is tax whether it is personal, whether it is impersonal, it is still tax.  So for me what I am talking about is the actual amount that is going to be generated for the nation and I am not prepared to see very big property being exempted.  That is what I am trying to say.  So, saying personal or impersonal does not arise actually in this aspect.  I would like to still say especially when it comes to the actual Bill. Now, we are looking at reforming a Constitution.  Now, there are some Members, who have brought up a point that a case like this should be left for the Constituent Assembly.  Now, I would like to reply this by saying that if we pass a Bill of this nature, it does snot pre-empt the work of the Constituent Assembly because the Constituent Assembly itself is going to have a particular task and what we are doing now is to amend a Constitution of 1967 which is going to be one of the subjects which is going to be discussed in the Constituent Assembly.  

So, it will be the Constituent Assembly if they want to reaffirm what we pass here, they can re-affirm it.  If they find that they want to leave it out, they can leave it out.  So, I think it does not, in my thinking, pre-empt the work of the Constituent Assembly.  So, I would like to appeal to Members that let them support this Bill while the bearing in mind that this thing can still be debated in the Constituent Assembly.  I thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

DR. BYARUHANGA (Kitagwenda County, Kabarole):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support the spirit of this Bill. (Applause)  But I am still wondering why we are going through the rigors of changing the Constitution over this matter because the way I see it, what we call cultural institutions can no longer be.  Colonialism was cultural.  It changed our methods of production, and it changed our manners of dress, our manners of eating, and even our sexual habits. (Laughter) 

Furthermore, our conversion to Christianity completed the colonisation of the African.  We are actually Europeans in black skins because, when you look at for example the Buganda Institution, when the Bazungu came here, first of all, we had the 1900 agreement.  The 1900 agreement created a feudal system whereas formerly, the Buganda Kabakaship was not really a feudal system.  They created landowners. This was not part of Buganda Culture.  Then the Missionaries came in and created super clans - the clan of the Protestants, the clan of the Catholics and the clan of the Moslems and then they told the Baganda that the Kabaka must always belong to the Protestants super class.  

Now, the Kabaka who used to be the head of the Baganda clans and virtually was neutral in the affairs, found himself having a side.  Now, this did not stop there.  The assault on Buganda culture or on the Buganda traditions continued.  We had the 1955 agreement, we had the 1961 Constitutional Conference and then the 1966 crisis and even this one, and this 1993 Bill is actually an assault on Buganda Culture. (Laughter)

However, the Buganda thing, when I look at it, is quite good because right from the beginning, the Buganda culture was assimilative.  I am told they started with eight clans and now have more than fifty clans and these new ones are formed by people who were conquered during the 19th century and I have also observed one thing among the Baganda as a people, that they are very feudal and when a King talks, they may listen.  

So, I believe that the Kabakaship can play a role in the economic development of Buganda since if he tells them to do something -(Laughter)- and mainly I support the Baganda in getting ebyaffe.  But then, Mr. Chairman, the situation in the other Kingdoms of Uganda was very, very much different.  We heard of conquering clans and then not assimilating them but really loading over them as rulers.  And to make it even worse, what we know for example, as I am foreign, what we know as Toro is actually a creation of the British.  For example, when you take Ankole, the present Ankole plus former Igara Kingdom, former Buhweju Kingdom and even South Mpororo Kingdom.  In the case of Toro, by the time the Muzungu came here, it did not exist.  The Toro sectionist, the Toro separatists had been defeated by Kabalega and Omukama Kamurasi was here in the Palace of Buganda.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Why?

DR. BYARUHANGA: The Bazungu got hold of him, took him down to Toro and put him on top of Toro, Mwenge; gave him Kyaaka, gave Kitagwenda, which formerly were counties of Bunyoro.  And all throughout the British rule, these people, the Kings really never tried to be fair to their subjects.  In the case of Toro, the Bakonjo, the Bamba and the Batagwenda were oppressed and taken to be sort of second-class citizens.  And, therefore, re-institution of what we call a cultural head, in a situation that is not really culturally cohesive may not be proper in the perspective that I have talked about.  When I asked the Batagwenda about this Bill, they regretted that the highest office in the land had started the debate about this subject.  But the said that although they would not wish to stop those who wish to have Kings, they shall not have a King and nobody will impose a King on them. (Applause)  So, Mr. Chairman, I am led to favour -(Interruption)

MR. BITAMAZIRE:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, Sir, is the hon. Member in order to imply secession because this august House makes laws for the entire nation.  Is he in order to imply secession?  Can one county be above the law we are going to make here?  Is he in order, Mr. Chairman?

THE CHAIRMAN:  He is quite in order to express his views.  Continue please.

DR. BYARUHANGA:  Mr. Chairman, I am therefore led to support the Bill but with the following recommendations; that the King should not rule over a geographical entity but over a tribe or a clan that wishes to have him. (Applause)  Two, that acceptance which is alluded to in the Bill should be tested by a referendum and this referendum, should be among these people who claims to pay allegiance to him.  For example, in Ankole, hon. Barigye could try to claim the ‘Abahinda’ clan or he can claim the whole of Banyankore. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

MR. BARIGYE:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, first of all, before I give my information, it is needless to say that you know my interest in this matter and the hon. Members.  So, I declare my interests before hand.  Now, may I inform the hon. Member who has just been speaking that the Bahinda Kings of Ankole actually, are quite a mixture?  The first King of Bahinda clan - Ruhinda Empire, his mother was a Mwiru of Ankore.  The Bairu are a sub-tribe in Ankole.  Now, the Kings - Bahinda Kings of Ankore over the years, have been mixtures of the ruling families of the Mpororo, the ruling families of Igara and even the ruling families of Buhweju.  As for myself, Mr. Chairman, since the hon. member referred to me, I am actually a mixture.  Part of me, I am from Mpororo, part of me, I am Igara blood, part of me, I have Buhweju blood, part of me -(Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

MR. BARIGYE:  Part of me, Mr. Chairman, I have Bairu blood, part of me, I have Bachwezi blood.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.  Hon. Byaruhanga, try to wind up please.

DR. BYARUHANGA:  I am trying to be very fair because, if you say, declared a general referendum in the old Toro Kingdom, I do not see the King winning the referendum.  But if you give him a chance to test his popularity among those people he thinks really support him, then, he may have support. Thirdly, I would wish to recommend that we lay down a procedure of how subjects can constitutionally remove the King or the institution if they cease to like it.

Finally, traditional institutions that were destroyed at the time of colonialism should be given a chance to revive themselves if the people so desire.  I am talking of the so-called Kingdom of Mpororo, Igara and so forth.  Before I wind up, allow me to say that I believe we are developing a truly Ugandan and a truly African culture and these efforts should not be destroyed by our inward looking; because in the final analysis, a Batagwenda culture is no longer possible, even an African or Ugandan culture is not sustainable.  We are actually moving towards the human culture.  Thank you very much.

MR. BASOGA NSADHU (Busiki County, Iganga):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for this opportunity.  Last time when this Bill was being introduced here, I had decided to acquaint myself with the culture of these Traditional Rulers and the circumstances that led to their abolition.  So, I almost burst with laughter here, when I saw the Learned Attorney General propounding his support for the institution of Traditional Rulers.  I was amused, and I had to temporarily run out so that I laugh in the corridors.  

During the debate that transpired at that time, the learned Attorney General was one of the people who were very, very opposed to the maintenance of the institution of Traditional Rulers and I looked at the Hansard, ironically the people who supported the - who spoke against the abolition were a few lonely voices from the North, like that one of hon. Oda.  Then, as if that was not sufficient, he took the bull by the horns and went out to write in the local press and on March 29th of 1958, he wrote a very beautiful article in the Uganda Argus - I am talking of the Attorney General of today hon. Abu Mayanja. (Laughter)  So, I do not know whether he was forced by Government, because he is a learned Attorney General by appointment, to come and defend it here or whether he had changes his - whether he is a transformed man.  Thank you very much.

MR. ABU MAYANJA:  I am grateful that he has given way Mr. Chairman and I would like to inform him and the House.  First of all, he has created a sequence; I wrote the article, which I am proud of and which has found its way in the history of this country - history books of this country - when I was a student at the University of Cambridge in 1957 or 58.  Two; in that letter, I was advocating an evolving monarchy.  The monarchy from an arbitrary ruler to a constitutional dispensation.  If the hon. Basoga Nsadhu can read the letter carefully, he will find out that that is exactly what it says.  Three; when the 1967 Draft Constitution was introduced to this House, I spoke again the abolition of the kingdoms and the Kings and I spoke for three whole days.  He will find out and he will find in my speech, there is nothing that I supported the abolition of these institutions.  On the contrary, I opposed their abolition most vehemently.  Fourthly; I did so in an article in transition, hon. Basoga Nsadhu can go and consult all these publications.

MR. PULKOL:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, for us who care to do research, I have here a copy of Parliamentary Debates, Hansard second series Volume 77 of the National Assembly as Official Report of the Second Session 1967-1968 and there is a list of people - of Parliamentarians then who voted in favour of 1967 Constitution, and hon. Abu Mayanja - among the names of those who voted aye, is the hon. Mayanja Abubaker and he was also one of the tellers for aye, together with Mr. Okurut. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order.

MR. BASOGA NSADHU:  Hon. Chairman, I thank the hon. learned Attorney General for the information and I thank the super learned hon. Deputy Minister for that wonderful information.  Now, I do not know who is telling what lie, but I will waive it for this country to judge.  Nevertheless, hon. Chairman, I just wanted to enlighten the hon. Members here, by giving them a few extracts of what the Learned Attorney General at that time said and quoted when he wrote on the 29th of March, -(Interjection)

MR. KATEREGA:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Member holding the Floor, to divert this House from debating the Bill and penalise the Attorney General?  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please, continue please.

MR. BASOGA NSADHU:  Thank you very much, but to allay the fears of my hon. Friends here, I do support what we are talking about and I think we should discuss it in a historical context so that the people presenting themselves as the champions for the return of the very institution, it should be made clear that history has not forgotten their historical instrumental role in the demolition of what they are trying to champion for today. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

MR. ABUBAKER MAYANJA:  Mr. Chairman, it is not good or Parliamentary or fair to mislead, what I said in this House regarding the abolition of kingdoms is on record.  It is in the Hansard.  The hon. Pulkol or any other hon. Member can go and find if that Hansard can be found - mine were looted and read and may be in reply I will look it up and quote.  There is one thing he should remember first of all that we were in these organisations and one thing for the Constitution as a whole, because the Constitution had been brought and it was one thing - when you say you supported the Constitution from (a), including human rights, the President and so on, they were these bad things and if you vote this the first time, when you have voted for a Motion on which you have reservations, but the record of what I said with regard to the abolition of kingdoms is there and if hon. Pulkol or hon. Nsadhu have got courage, I challenge them to read it to the House.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Nsadhu, try to wind up please.

MR. BASOGA NSADHU:  Mr. Chairman, I have not spoken but, I was making a small remark then I will go to the major contribution and I thought the Members are entitled to this information, so that they know, and I want to read this small extract.  In his writing he said, ‘I have crossed the rupicol; I have set my face firmly against any autocracy whether it be foreign or imperialist from native and feudal.  I stake my future and dedicate my life to the realisation’. This is the kind of stuff we have here and in one paragraph he says that, he was doing some very straight talking to the reactionary elements in Uganda who seem to imagine that somehow Buganda can contract out of the 20th century and revert to a system of administration where the inefficiency of guns is used to be tested on human beings.  This is the kind of rhetoric.  Now, Mr. Chairman, I wanted to relate that one -(Interjection)

MR. NEKYON:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor through you and the House that, that letter was written at a time when there was a very big conflict here in Uganda between the kingdom of Buganda and the political parties that were campaigning for Independence.  The situation then, was exactly what is happening now in South Africa, where you have the Zulu Kingdom and the ANC - the Zulu kingdom on one hand, and the ANC and PAC on the other.  So, this was the crisis at hat time, the Royal family and the die-hards in Buganda did not want the political parties here and Abu Mayanja as the first Secretary General of the UNC - he was campaigning for Independence and so, it was written during a time when there was a big struggle.  So it should be looked at in that respect, and I want you to know that if we are to debate this Bill, we should forget the attitudes of those who were there because, we can only pass this Bill if people have changed their minds.  But if we are trying to open old wounds and think we can win by that method, then we are doomed to fail.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Turn to the Bill straightaway.

MR. BASOGA NSADHU:  Mr. Chairman, let me now turn to the provisions of the Constitution about whether this House has got the powers to amend in order to provide the establishment of Traditional Rulers.  The Constitution which we are using of 67, article 3 says, that subject to the provisions of this article, Parliament may alter any of the provisions of the Constitution, and in sub-Section 3 of the same Article, there are exemptions which are made of certain sections which would require a two thirds majority -(Interruption)

MR. ONGOM:  Point of information.  I would like, Mr. Chairman, to inform the Member on the Floor that, that very Section - Article of the Constitution he is referring to, was suspended in 1987 by the NRC.  And therefore, it does not apply now.

MR. BASOGA NSADHU:  I looked at the provisions of the Legal Notice that he is quoting, and it excludes Section 3.  It excludes it very clearly, it is in the Appendix, and you can look at it.  The only provision that I am talking about is that in amending Chapter 3 -(Interruption)

MR. KAVUMA:  Point of information.  I thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, Sir, I would like to inform the hon. member holding the Floor that, he is proceeding on the arguments which are likely to mislead this House on points of law and as far as the Constitution is concerned.  When Article 3 that he is quoting of the 1967 Constitution was suspended by Legal Notice No. 1 of 86, that same Legal Notice went ahead to vest powers of Parliament, as it was known then into this august House called the NRC.  Among the powers this body exercises as a legislature is to amend the Constitution because they only do it through legislation through acts of Parliament or Statutes as we stand today.  The supremacy of this House in matters of legislature to this nation is unquestionable.  It cannot do anything in this country except perhaps to change a man biologically into a woman or vice versa. (Laughter)  

I wanted to guide the Member so that he leaves the intricate provisions of the Constitution if he has not reconciled them and in any case, we are here as the supreme political organ.  We are exercising our functions as a political organ, let us debate and pass a law we think is correct at this time, if matters of interpretation come out, then there is another arm of the State called the Judiciary that will take care or the arguments he is trying to advance.  I thank you, Sir.

MR. BASOGA NSADHU:  Mr. Chairman, the initial argument we had was the advice we received from the learned Attorney General that it was not necessary even to refer this matter to Parliament he advanced that it was okay at that time he did advocate for the Traditional Rulers to be re-instated without referring even to this supreme body which we have come to.  When later on those steps were withdrawn, and then it was finally agreed that we come to this House, I was also trying to follow the law as laid down so that we can interpret it and this country gets convinced that what we are really doing is legitimate.  Otherwise we should not have wasted our time doing something which will go to Judicial Commission et cetera, et cetera.  I may leave the legal arguments but I hope they will not come up again, and then we find ourselves in trouble. 

Finally, I have no objection to people who enjoy ekitobero to eat it, to those who enjoy atapa to eat it, without forcing others to eat it.  In short, I am saying, those who want to have their Traditional Rulers, can have them provided they agree that he should be there and they have the means and the capacity to support him. Those other sections of the country, even if they have Traditional Rulers, if there be need not necessarily re-instate them today, they should be given the benefit of doubt and leave them.  But since here, our friend the Baganda are keen and they are set, I do not see any objection why we should stop them.  Thank you very much.  

MR. MATEKE (Bufumbira County, Kisoro):  Mr. Chairman, I would like to start with a question posed by His Excellency the President when we had a seminar at Makerere in December 1989, when there was a controversy about traditional institutions.  A question was addressed specifically to I think all of us but directly to hon. Barigye.  Where he said, I quote; ‘Mr. Barigye did I go to the bush to come and make you a King?’  I think hon. Members who were there can recall that that was the President’s remarks.  I leave it to that.  I respect traditions, beliefs and values of our societies.  Most of these beliefs and traditions and values were destroyed by colonialism.  And I believe that attempts must be made to revise some of the positive aspects of our traditional culture. (Applause)  Mr. Chairman, we have got very many clan heads all over the country.  We have got clan heads in Mbale, I hear, who organise, supervise the circumcision of women and men -(Laughter and Applause)- and Sebei.

MRS. MASABA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, Sir, permit me through you Sir, to inform the hon. speaker holding the Floor that in Mbale that is Bugisu Bamasaba, we do not circumcise women but men. (Laughter)

MR. MATEKE:  Mr. Chairman, we have reached a crucial stage in our Constitution making process.  Personally, I do not see the hurry of trying to amend the Constitution at this stage.  I think there is need for us to wait for the formation of the Constituent Assembly to examine this important issue.  And I feel also that those people who want their traditional institutions, the government can organise a referendum because I do not know how many people have really sought after the restoration of some of these Traditional Rulers.  I do not know.  Because in our part of the world, we have been historically republicans -(Interruption)

MR. OBWANGOR:  Point of information. I think through you, Mr. Chairman, my Colleagues are aware in September 1989 we went through the interim period in which we - you know, honestly voted to extend the NRM or the life of the NRM and the NRC, National Resistance Council, which we are.  You see, It was in honesty, to carry out programmes that were different to us.  Among them first of all, was the making of a New National Constitution.  So, in this respect we should debate this Motion thrown back onto our shoulders by the resolution of authority developed in 1993.  The responsibility to ensure there is peace in Uganda, in the light of what the army advised us - where the body politics, the highest in Uganda, where the highest body politics in Uganda Army threw to us, as a legislator, to adjust the essence of Article 118.  

Therefore, we should be reasonable.  We should not create here what has been our history we should not create here.  We should be levelheaded hon. Men and Women so that whatever law we make will be correct.  What we should now pray and ask the Learned hon. Attorney General and his Colleagues the Minister for Finance since they are lawyers and Dr. Semogerere who support this -(Laughter)- so that we should intelligently and then there is nobody’s possible opportunity to influence them that these -(Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please, order please, I will give you a chance to contribute just give your information and stop there.

MR. OBWANGOR:  Alright thank you. (Laughter)

MR. BIDANDI SSALI:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the Member holding the Floor through you, and also some other Members who have or who are referring to this issue of hurry that one of the aspects that should be considered especially by them is the fact that in essence, Buganda was not party to the 1967 Constitution.  Buganda or the people of Buganda were correct, they did not react, they did not go to the bush, they waited for an opportunity for the same government to sit as the hon. Member said, across the table and renegotiate the traditions.  We are already embarked on the Constitution making or a document, a Constitution that should ensure unity, stability for this country.  It is very unfortunate if the people of Buganda came in the exercise of making this Constitution in a few months time with nothing but the restoration of their cultural head.  The essence of what we are doing now is to allow the people of Buganda to participate fully in the Constitution making exercise of the nation Uganda by giving them access to that table.  

Otherwise, I repeat, it will be very unfortunate if those who will be coming from Buganda to participate in the CA will come with only one thing re-instatement of their or our cultural institution.  Let us start on the same ground, that is, any person coming from Buganda to be thinking Uganda not Buganda. (Applause)

MR. MATEKE:  I thank the Minister for his educative information.  But I would like to point out, Mr. Chairman, that this Constitutional Amendment Bill does not really create an effective Traditional Ruler.  Because if you create an institution and it is not able to sustain it, what are you trying to drive at?  Who is going to finance the running of these traditional institutions?  Because the Kabaka is not or the Traditional Ruler is not allowed to levy any tax.

MRS. MPANGA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member Mr. Mateke from Kisoro that the financing of the institution should be the concern of the people who want it.  And if they do not - if they cannot finance it, they will still have their own institution.  I went to Bukoba sometime back and I found the traditional leader whom they endear so much, when I asked what I could see here?   They told me ‘Oh! you come and see our King’.  But he was in a house that I would have thought looks like Gombolola Chiefs.  But they still respected him because he was their King.

MR. MATEKE: I thank you for that information.  Mr. Chairman, the Bill does not determine the form of punishment in case some subjects refuse to voluntarily contribute towards the up-keep of the country. (Laughter)  Another pertinent question I would like to ask, who is going to determine the boundaries of these kingdoms.  Now, I would like to appeal to some of the clan men of these institutions which we are trying to restore here, that they should not use the existence of these institutions to promote their own political ends.  Or to use these institutions to discriminate against others. (Applause)  

For those in Buganda, I think you know your history better.  I have got another pertinent question, are we trying to create a traditional or a modern ruler.  Because traditionally for instance, here in Buganda, a Kabaka does not work.  I do not know whether it is true.

MR. MULONDO:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, I wanted to give the hon. Member hon. Mateke and to the hon. House here information that the Kabaka of Buganda works. He has a Schedule of duties.  Some of his duties are very fundamental and I would have suggested that this House should be informed of what Members know rather than coming here and saying I hear, he does not work, but Kabaka works.  Today as I speak, he has even his own firm, he has an office and he is occupied fully.  And if the hon. Mateke wanted to see him, he will definitely have to make an appointment because the Kabaka is hidden. (Laughter)

MR. MATEKE: I am glad to hear that, Mr. Chairman, that the Kabaka works because we do not believe in Traditional Rulers who would like to live on the sweat of the Bakopi, that would terrible.  So, a Traditional Ruler has really to actively participate in the development of his Kingdom.  Now another question is when to ensure that these Traditional Rulers are not going to enter into alliances with Central Government.  Because from our history, this is what really destroyed traditional institutions in Uganda. The Traditional Rulers were drawn to the main stream of our national politics.  And some of these Traditional Rulers connived with some of the politicians to undermine and I think they were trying t attempt to over throw the Central authority.  So, I appeal to those champions -(Interjection)

MR. KIWAGAMA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. speaker on the Floor that, actually what he is saying that these Traditional Rulers were entering into alliance with Central Government, it is the other way round that it is the UPC that sought alliance with these traditional institutions. (Laughter)  I would also ask the hon. Member to undertake here and tell the House that even political parties will never seek support of these Traditional Rulers.

MR. MATEKE:  Mr. Chairman, I do not know whether my hon. Colleague was sleeping, and I feel should have understood that UPC was in power so -(Interjection)- yes, why?  So, all I am trying to say is that, if these Traditional Rulers want to maintain their institutions they should stop being used by those who happen to be in power.  Because this would just accelerate their demise again.  Mr. Chairman, I support this Motion -(Laughter)- with fundamental reservations which I have tried to outline, thank you.

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA (Historical Member):  Mr. Chairman, I am supporting the Motion and I am a republican with ideological outlook. I am supporting the Motion, I am not a monarchist, I am a republican by ideological outlook.  I am supporting the Bill for a number of reasons.  One, in the Bill, the institution we are trying to re-activate, is not harmful and can actually be useful if well handled.
 
Secondly, the areas where people cherished it like the Baganda - they should have it, but I hope hon. Tiberondwa who was the Mugabe’s Representative in the then Lukiko -(Laughter)- will have more to say when the question of the Ankole Kingdom is brought up, I must say in advance that I am opposed to it as a Munyankole. (Laughter)

The third reason I am supporting the Bill is in accordance with NRM Culture of tolerance and accommodation.  Uganda has divergent cultures, beliefs and sometimes emotions, and we must find a way of accommodating one another.  For those who are religious, if you read the Romans in Chapter 10, there is where the Book talks of tolerance - those who eat meat and those who eat vegetable.  They must tolerate one another as long as they are both working for the Kingdom of Heaven.  

So, for those who will want to have their cultural heads and if this is going to help the country to develop and help us to have peace, then let us have it.  But then let them not try to enforce this culture that they cherish very much on others who do not want to do so.  I have lived in parts of Buganda for sometime, I know a lot of Baganda friends, those in the villages and the Cabinet and in this House, I have not come across any leading Muganda, and I would also like to say that when I was a student at the London School of Economics, I used to go out with Prince Mutebi then for discos and drinks and he did not give me an impression that he wanted to tear Uganda apart; and during the struggle, I went around with him right from Kasese back to Kigali and I did not get that impression.  But I have not met any Muganda who says that Uganda is part of Buganda.  they are only accepting that Buganda is part of Uganda but it has its own divergent culture which is not in conflict with other cultures and parts of Uganda.  

Therefore, we should have the ability - we who eat meat to tolerate those who eat vegetables as long as they do not push it into our mouths.  Some Members have expressed concern about limiting the powers of the institute we are trying to revive.  Yet they are the same people who talk of society being dynamic.  If I can take you back, in the last century having said that society is dynamic, the Kabaka who was the King then, in actual fact the King in my area had powers to remove eyes so that you do not have the eyes to commit sin again. That is why the place hon. Tiberondwa represents is called Igara.  Igara means ‘okwigaza amaisho’ to blinden the eyes -(Laughter).  And hon. Barigye has blood from Igara.  So, in the last century the Kabaka was an absolute Ruler - he was an absolute Ruler with powers to test a gun on a human being.  He also had spiritual powers, and he was a religious leader.  But when the Missionaries came, they took away part of his power.  The Monarchs and Kabakas go to Church, the one they were told they must belong to, and the Priests say, stand up, sit down, kneel down, come for holly communion and they are even wedded by the Clergy.  So it is not the first time that powers of Kings in Uganda and Abroad have been adjusted. (Applause)

During the 1900 Agreement, the Colonial Powers also took away the powers of the Kabaka.  For example, you could not be a Kabaka unless you belong to the Anglican Faith at that time, and your accession to the throne had to be approved by the King of England or the Queen as the case might have been.  He was limited to salary, the number of guns he could own and even the amount of land the Kabaka could own, and the Institution continued.  In 1955 the same was done and in 1962.  

So, the institution we are trying to revive is the one which carried on the positive aspects of the culture of our people and abandons the harmful ones and also takes into account that Buganda is now part of the wider society and that wider society has divergent vies and even within Buganda itself, there are people who prostrate instantly, there are those who do so after being advised and there are those who do not prostrate at all, and that should not stop them from being part and parcel of their cultural harmony of Buganda.  If this institution is going to help us mobilise the population for advancement, why not?  For example, 44 per cent of our children between the age of one and five in Uganda are stunted.  It means they are not growing properly.  I, as a Minister for Education, but not for Health, am told if the body is stunted, malnourished - the brain too is equally stunted and malnourished, and this may affect the performance in school and society.  66 per cent of our children drop out between P.1 and P.7.  In Mubende, it is worse.  According to my Friend hon. Kyaligonza, he calls that a contested territory.  The enrolment in Mubende is less than 40 per cent in the Primary cycle.  

So, if this institution can help or catapult the people in this part of Uganda to go and work, what do we lose by that?  There is a Kinyankore saying that, ‘the hare eased itself in the lake and when it was questioned why it made such a small contribution to the lake already with water in it, it replied that any contribution should be appreciated however small,’ because the lake accommodated its contribution - it did not reject it.  So, if the institution can contribute to the development of the country and we are extremely backward - this must be known, I see no harm in it the people for example, can prostrate and by that inspiration alone, he goes and grows more cassava, feeds the children better and pays the school fees, he is more useful to the society than where somebody thinks of unity goes and waste the money, the children suffer from malnutrition and no development takes place.  I have known some people who do drink because of their strength but I know others also who have abandoned alcohol after meeting the Lord and becoming saved.  Hon. Tiberondwa used to smoke then he became saved. (Laughter)  I am being very sincere. There are people in society, who do so like who become saved and stop doing things.  

So, what I am saying, if a person thinks he has not been working because the institution was abolished, and by re-instating it he works from dawn to dusk - what does Uganda lose in the process?  Within we gain strength because I have seen some people in the parts of Buganda who say once the Kabaka is re-instated, there will be plenty of rain, the lakes will be cleared, the roads will be rehabilitated. (Laughter)  

Permit me finally, to say two things; this is for my own reasons.  I think we should not be mixed up about Chiefs and Culture.  You can have a culture with a Cultural Head, you can also have a culture without a Cultural Head.  The United States has a culture it has no King; France has a culture, has a Queen.  So, if -(Interruption)

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Minister holding the Floor and the House through you, that as we speak now, the United States and the rest of America are in a very deep struggle to curve out what is their real culture, and they are paying lots and lots of money to get their roots and we should learn from that in that not only the United States but all the West of Europe is trying to find where do they belong.  That is why we are even having problems in Yugoslavia and others.  Thank you.

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA:  I thank the General’s contribution but I wish he could tell us something about France.  In other words, I am saying people should not mix up the question of having a culture as if people without a culture have no King.  You can have a culture with a King and you can have a culture without a King.  So, I would like to give a word of advice to some of the extreme monarchists.  We republicans, for the sake of having tolerance and united Uganda, we are ready to rub shoulders with Sabalangilas with gentlemen like hon. Lubega who is now a born again culturalist -(Laughter)- and for he sake of advancing unity and advancement of our country.  We must tolerate one another.

Consequently, we should avoid the past arrogance of antagonising other people with different cultures and different beliefs.  As if, if they do not agree with you, they have no views of their own.  We must also respect the views of the Republicans and Republicans should also respect the views of those who want to have traditional leaders as long as we do not interfere in the work of one another.  Tolerance and acceptance of those with different beliefs is the best way in the process of harmonising the Ugandan culture.  We do not have to support this institution financially, I am sure that hon. Mateke has a culture in his family.  I do not know how many times he has come here for a stipend to support his family.  Families that work prosper; those that do not work perish.  

So, it is up to institutions to sustain themselves or work themselves out of existence.  For the unity of this country, for the culture of tolerance, and for the harmony and in search of solutions for development.  Let those who want have their cultural heads.  Any reform we think is most modern and suiting to days of today, have it, and hence when the matter of the restoration of the King of Ankole comes for discussion, I can assure you that I shall express different views.  I thank you. 

THE MINISTER FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr. J.W. Wapakabulo):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman for giving me the opportunity also to express my views concerning this Bill.  This Bill is very straightforward and the reasons for it have been advanced in various meetings of this House in its other capacity as a political organ.  Right from the beginning I will say that I give this Bill my full support.

A bit of history here. In 1966, I was a student at Buddo.  There was a big fight in Kampala - we could hear the guns booming.  (I have been corrected, Sir, I was at King’s College Buddo).  It was in the months of April - May, and there was a big fight in Kampala and there began the problems of Uganda’s political future.  At the school we were divided - we were divided into three camps.  There was a camp of people who believed in the institution of the monarch.  They set a camp and lit a fire.  They kept vigil.  There was also another group who were totally opposed to the idea of the monarchy and were jubilating led by a fellow called, Alokor; I do not know where he is now - and they also set up a camp, and then between these two camps only few people could walk between them and to talk.  There were those of us from the East because even the Western part of Uganda was also divided.  There were those who were monarchists - we had at that time children of Omugabe with us as students.  We had relatives also of other Kings of Uganda at Buddo, and they too, joined the Kingdom camp.  Those of us from the East, particularly further East, were the link and the following day the authorities had no choice but closed the school and we were sent home for nearly three to four months.  When we came back some of us did not come back and among them was the immediate passed Governor of the Bank of Uganda, Mr. Sulaiman Kiggundu, who was at that time one of the leaders of the monarchist camp.  

The point I am making, Sir, is that whereas there was a fight among politicians here in Kampala, those of us who were supposed to be the future generations of Uganda were also being split by these unprincipled behaviour on the part of our leadership here in Kampala.  That was in fact, a serious blow to the House called Uganda, and whatever pretence we may have had from that time over the years, there was a crack which required to be healed, and I am glad, Sir, that the National Resistance Movement under its Ten Point Programme, has talked of correcting mistakes of the past.  Correcting these mistakes includes recognising mistakes made either by those in leadership or by individuals and I am glad this Bill being presented today actually seeks essentially to correct that mistake because whatever the reasoning behind the abolition of Kingdoms may have been, the truth of the matter is that a substantial part of Uganda always felt that they were being disadvantaged or that their concerns were not being fully addressed by the rest of the Nation, and however much we would have pretended, Sir, it would have remained.  And as hon. Bidandi Ssali said, I think that is a very important point.  When you are going into interviews or you are going into any exercise or even bidding for tenders, the most important thing is that the ground must be level, all of you should start from a level ground.  

What this Bill is doing is, is to let us level the ground then go into discussing our Constitution.  Because otherwise, you can imagine the politics in Buganda and such other places, for example, hon. Amanya might use the fact that he is pro-monarchist in Ankole to come back.  But people might begin hijacking the issue of monarchy and using it as a campaign point to come back here instead of addressing the serious issue ‘what is the Constitution of Uganda’.  The Constitution of Uganda is not going to be monarchism.  It is how we share a number of things, powers between the centre and the districts.  The distribution of national revenue so that there is continuous and balanced development in all parts of the country.  What sort of Government are we going to have from now on?  And indeed how are we going to organise ourselves politically?  These are more important issues and we are likely to be diverted on cultural issues instead of attending to those.  

So, this Bill really -(Applause)- this Bill seeks to level the ground, remove out of the way an issue which was brought about by a mistake in terms of opportunistic leadership and then the future of Uganda can be charted by all Ugandans from a point of quality - from point zero.  I am sure I can assure you and we say it very often, Sir, if you stopped Bagisu doing their thing every two years, they will be most bitter and no one would come back from Mbale to stand here in the Constituent Assembly unless you swore on the Bible or whatever else they use to swear on that he is going to support circumcision.  Now that circumcision may be so important for Bagisu, but is not so important for Uganda.  This is the point I am trying to say.  For instance, it would scare the Banyankole.  My brother here would -(Laughter)- so, that is my point of contribution.  

The question of the institution itself.  The Bill here seeks to protect the politics of Uganda because we realise that some elements used the institutions to divide Ugandans through manipulating the leaders in Mengo, in Mbarara and so on.  But today, we are saying, your role is very clear.  The charter has been laid - cultural activities.  You lead your people.  Then let the politics of Uganda be run by politicians and I think the provisions as they are, lend sufficient protection to our politics.  For me, this would not scare me.  Indeed the whole thing is saying that this law does not prevent the Traditional Ruler having in his own hands property personally belonging to him.  I would expect that Mutebi when he has become Kabaka, he would be able to set up a system of running business like any other person.  I do not see that we are going to be unnecessarily called upon or the people are going to be called upon to have to support him.  I could go further and urge that to some of our people, this concern now appears so big but in dues course we shall look back and say but really why did we have to waste so much time on an issue when after all everything is running smoothly.

In future, Sir, what will happen - what is Uganda in future?  Uganda is a society we are trying to build into an industrial society - a modern society.  In a modern society, Ugandans will know each other by virtue of their business links.  We shall create the class of owners.  That class of owners whether a Muganda or a Mugisu, will be most hostile to any idea that attempts to divide his market.  If he is a businessman his concern is that he wants Uganda as a market whether he is a Muganda or a Mugisu.  

So, while today people talk about ‘ebyaffe’ here and there, the truth of the matter is that Uganda is going to develop into a modern society where backward ideas of ‘this place is for us’ will be so dangerously opposed to the interests of the modern Ugandan elite who will be looking at Uganda as a market.  Indeed even right from the beginning, Sir, I was reading somewhere in 1900, the Agreement said, the land which was about 19,000 square miles should be divided as follows, they took off a bit of land for the Government then the rest was distributed between the Kabaka, the Princes, the Chiefs and so on and so forth.  What the British were doing - they were trying to create a landowning Class as they did create in their own country.  Of course in their country it took time - enclosure system and so on and so forth - traditional law there which we call common law.  

In Uganda when they created this at first they were saying that this land cannot be transferred or inherited by a foreigner.  At that time a foreigner was not defined.  In 1908, they passed a law providing for the grant of titles, survey and mailo land.  In there the definition of a native did not confine itself to Buganda.  In fact, they went beyond.  They said the land, even in Buganda, could be inherited, purchased and used by a non-Muganda as long as he was a native and the non-natives were barred from owning land except estates already received or except on the advice and approval of the Governor.  

So, right from the beginning even the Council of Buganda with Kabaka, one would have thought they would have been inward looking, but were in fact outward looking.  They were looking towards creating a Ugandan elite through ownership of land.  In fact, the only time they used the form Muganda for example, was when they are talking about a Will.  They say where a Muganda dies and his land is left, then the Kabaka will approve he heir.  Then when it comes to buying or ownership and what they used the term ‘a native’ and a native was defined to include people even from Kabirondo because that time Uganda went as far as that.  So, they were talking about natives from Kabirondo.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I want to inform the hon. Member holding Floor that, it was this arrangement of natives that my brother hon. Nekyon managed to acquire some land in Buganda. (Laughter)  

MR. NEKYON:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Minister on the Floor and the informant that, I do not own any land in Buganda, not even one acre.  Whatever land I own is in Kampala, which is an independent area in our Constitution. (Laughter)

MR. WAPAKABULO:  It would be most interesting to know how hon. Nekyon got that land because most of the land in Kampala is mailo land and if you know there is more mailo land in Kampala than there is government land actually, may be he has not been properly informed.  Sir, the point is that right from the start of the century, the highest legislative body in Buganda was broad-minded and continued that way.  Of course, mistakes were made on both sides as time went on.  Some leaders confused each other and so on, but this spirit now continues from there and these fears about people being expelled from their land, about people being harassed are just temporary not based on proper analysis because in due course, Uganda Community will change.  It is like if you go to a Scotland, he will tell you he does not like the English people.  But if you tell the owners of the Bank of Scotland that let us break, they all vote against the Scottish because they want to do business in England.  They do not want a small market and in Uganda we are going to evolve into a big country.  We shall be proud of our traditional institutions like the Kabakaship.  For me, as Minister for Tourism, I am already making very important plans -(Applause)- I shall be timing the day and the time and see if we can enter into the programme.  They say if you come to Kampala, you will arrive at the Hotel Sheraton, then you will be taken to the Palace and there you will find the Kabaka receiving his subjects and among them hopefully leading the delegation, will be hon. Kafumbe Mukasa here.  I would love my tourists to see him lying on the ground in respect. (Laughter) 

In Britain, and I came back from there only two hours ago Sir - in Britain at 11:00 O’clock Buckingham Palace is crowded by Americans.  Why?  Simply because some soldiers are handing over to another group and they pay lots of money to come from America, from all over the place to see the changing of the guard which is a very important function.  Why do we not use our culture to build our tourism? (Applause)  When you pass the ‘ebyaffe’ law, if you do - I am going to hand over Kasubi.  I do not know whether he has handed over ‘Damula Bataka’ - I can hand Kasubi over to him and then for us nevertheless Sir, even if we hand over the tombs - let me make it clear from the word go; those tombs do not belong to Buganda alone.  They are part of the national culture - the cultural wealth of Uganda because our total wealth belongs to what we all belong to and we will use that institution.  For us it will be in hands of those who own it.  They will use it for their cultural things but it will be in our register of national assets so that from time to time -(Applause)- we can come to them.  Therefore, our tourists when they come, we expect that they will also be told how to respect the Palace.  They will go there and have a look, having found hon. Kafumbe Mukasa presenting himself and then from there, we shall go to other places.  I thank you very much, Sir.  This Bill has my full support.  Thank you.   

THE MINISTER FOR PUBLIC SERVICE AND CABINET AFFAIRS (Mr. S. Ssebagereka):  Thank you Sir.  I stand here to support the Motion.  Already a number of Members have supported the Bill and have given reasons.  I have just a few points to make.  First of all, I would like to tell the world that this debate demonstrates what the ideals of the NRM are.  A few minutes ago, a Colleague of mine, hon. Amanya told us that he was a Republican and I am telling the whole House and the world that I am a monarchist.  So, to have a House where you have such people debating something amicably is a very important thing. (Applause)  So, we are on the same side and we want to be on the same side in order to make this country go forward.  

I come from Central Uganda, and I would like to remind Members that the abrupt abrogation of the 1962 Constitution was a terrible thing to the Baganda.  They have been holding that animosity over the years but they have been very careful not to fight, but they were waiting for moments like this.  So, when we come here to debate and try to restore sanity, the Baganda are looking at this debate with a lot of hope that the country will now be peaceful.  A lot of fear - the Baganda as you know have been kneeling around the Palaces and the Institutions and we must appreciate that they have been feeling bad to see that their institutions are in ruins.  Why?  Simply because somebody, some mad person came and wanted to destroy them without any real foresight.  

The second point, which is also related to the first is that, this debate is a forerunner of the Constitutional making process that we shall be having in a few months’ time.  I was rather upset when one of the Members walked out or stormed out of this House.  I wondered whether that was some wisdom.  In the coming Constitution, suppose we all storm out, simply because we want to follow our conscience as if there is a universal true conscienceless.  I wonder!  We should have been tolerant.  I cannot imagine a scenario where the Constituent Assembly will be left empty because people are just walking out of it because they do not agree.  

This debate is a forerunner that should teach us what to do about the shape of things to come.  I want to ask the hon. Members to take that point seriously and bear it in mind where we come to debate the Constitution.  It seems to me there are many people who imagine and visualise some fantastic situations that cannot materialise.  For example, when the ‘bika football’ competitions were allowed to take place, people imagined that the Baganda are going to be too arrogant, people will be so intolerant of others and they foresaw nothing but evil but when bika football exercises started, nothing happened except a jubilation and they were living happily - all the tribes in Uganda and particularly those in Kampala.  So, hon. Members, the cultural incident, which is now being debated of instituting or crowning our Kabaka - the Kabaka of Buganda is going to create such friendly atmosphere and you are hearing it from the house’s mouth because I come from Central Buganda where I know what my people like and they are definitely looking forward to this incident.  

There are worries as to what would happen if the Kabaka were to participate in politics.  This has been voiced by so many people.  I think, like most of the Baganda can tell you, that this will not be allowed because law will not follow it and the Attorney General stated it clearly and it is for us Senior citizens in this country to make sure that it does not happen in order to spoil the policy of Buganda.  Hon. Mbura-Muhindo was worried about certain things happening in his own area, Kasese and Toro.  He was telling us that the people in Kasese would take over the land that belonged to the Royal Family of Toro.  Well, I do not come from there but I know that the Batoro will not argue about it but the point I want to make here is that if the Royal Family of Toro have some land in Kasese, I do not see anything wrong with it but to say that the Kasese people will simply grab the land from the Royal Family of Toro and wished the Batoro to do the same would bring about a very dangerous precedent.  Because I do not know how the Kasese people would feel if the Baganda grabbed all the land that they own in Buganda and vice versa.  I think that shall not be creating a peaceful Uganda.  I would like to say that the whole country and the whole wide world is watching this debate with interest because we are trying to repair or give a redress to the feelings which have been going on for some 26 or 27 years and by recreation or rather by restoration of these institutions we should be creating a peaceful Uganda.  I should like to end up by quoting or just saying the few words that appear in the hands of Messiah that ‘we should rejoice because the new era is starting’.  Sir, I beg to support. (Applause)

MR. J.B. KAWANGA (Masaka Municipality, Masaka):  Mr. Chairman, I support the Motion.  I am pleased to be part of this Assembly -(Applause)- because we are doing a very important job for this country.  Some people may not have noticed it.  It may have been festering quietly without being noticed but it has been causing a problem to the development of this country.  I am so pleased that it is now quite possible to sit in this Assembly and debate this matter openly and I hope we shall be able to determine even those issues that are being raised now in this kind of atmosphere. (Applause)  So that we look at ourselves as Ugandans having different points of views on different issues but capable of living peacefully together here now and even forever. (Applause)  

That is why I am a little surprised that some people are posing questions which they should not.  There is talk of hurrying this matter.  Why is it being hurried?  Nothing is being hurried.  It is this august Assembly that commissioned the Attorney General to go and bring a law to put certain things in place. (Applause) The Attorney General is doing exactly that but in the process of doing it, he discovers that there were some anomalies that were created in the Constitution that he has to deal with.  

Hence, the requirement to amend - to make this small Amendment to the 1967 Constitution, if I may be frank.  I am sorry that some of these things were ever included in that Constitution because if they were not, then we would not have had cause to debate them here.  I will give a simple example.  He is amending Article 8(2) and it reads - I do not know why it ever became part of our Constitution.  ‘Every person in Uganda shall enjoy equal protection of the law of Uganda but no citizen of Uganda shall enjoy any special privilege status or title by virtue of this birth, descent or heredity’.  How can you deny somebody acquiring things by virtue of his birth, descent or heredity.  Surely, we all survive on the basis of our descent and heredity.  How can we include such a Clause?  Now, it is this kind of Amendments that are being brought to smoothen the way for things to be done.  

Therefore, those who are worried that we are making some Amendments - this is only a consequential Amendment to implement what we ourselves decided should be done.  When that is done, then we shall be solving other problems that will have to come up of course later on and those are the ones that some Members here are bringing.  They are talking about a monarchy with power.  Can those who want to give him power wait for the Constituent Assembly!  Because that is where all the powers shall be divided at that time.  But here we are within the law to give people back what belonged to them.  One of the corrections we are making - we are stopping this culture of confiscating people’s things. (Applause)  Why should Government confiscate people’s things?  Who can support that kind of thing?  And for those of you who do not knows this confiscating cause a lot of problems.  

Some of the people who are affected are virtually paupers by now.  They were deprived of their things and they are paupers.  Some of them have had to live in exile for a long time because they do not have any sense of belonging, and mark you, they have followers, people who depend on them.  So, everybody has been captive of this act of confiscating property and actually all this law seeks to achieve is to return what belonged to Caesar and who can opposed that.  Who can be unhappy about that kind of situation?  

Now, about some people who fear that these people will have no power - who tells you?  Culture itself has its own sanctions.  You do not have to make laws; people will obey those laws.  I do not know of any Mugisu who does not want to obey the sanctions of this culture because he knows if he does not, the sanctions are too severe for him.  So, those who are worried about the powers do not worry.  The cultures that we have shall give the necessary sanctions.  We do not have to legislate them in this law.  They exist as of now.  I wish to assure those who do not know that even in Uganda you are entitled to enforce customary laws, and the customary laws reflect those laws that our culture developed.  It is already catered for so that this should not worry those who think that the powers are not there.  The powers will be there; if more powers are needed, we shall look at that at an appropriate moment.

Now, there are some friends who talked about territorial areas -this Bill does not talk about territory.  It is talking about Communities.  So, if the Community wants something, they will have it.  It does not matter if somebody lives abroad; if he thinks he wants to subscribe to the norms of a Community, he will do that and that is all this law talks about.  It is not talking about territorial areas and in fact that is why I am sorry when a friend of mine said for property which belonged to a King is in our area, we shall not allow it to be taken away.  That is a very dangerous practice, because if that is done in Kasese, why should it not be done in Mawokota?  Why should it not be done in Arua?  Let every Ugandan own property in other areas.  That is where development starts.  You do not have to have people of a certain tribe having property only within their own locality.  That does not engender development.  

I wish to make one remark about a friend of ours who walked out of this Assembly.  He is entitled to this kind of behaviour but I pray that we develop that degree of tolerance which allows you the right to express your view but you should also hear other people’s views -(Applause)- and let us take a decision.  Because if you walk out of this Chamber because you do not agree with what is being done here, next time you will walk out of Uganda because you do not agree with what is happening in Uganda.  So, we must watch this kind of thing.  I think this kind of behaviour is caused by prejudice, very serious prejudice - so serious that it becomes bigotry, but as somebody said prejudice is worse than ignorance.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr. Chairman, permit me to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that, my dear friend, hon. Gasatura who walked out on us had just in the last Session pleaded to all Members to grant Ntungamo a district status and even those who were opposed to that did not walk out on him. (Laughter)  

MR. KAWANGA:  Thank you very much for the information.  I hope hon. Members will develop that degree of tolerance.  We need it if we are to build this country.  We belong to different tribes, with different cultures, and we even marry differently.  Unfortunately, fate has designed that we shall all live in this country.  Let us find ways that unite us.  We do not have to be uniform to be united.  We shall be united in our diversity but let us make sure that we build a country, we shall all be happy to live in.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi):  Mr. Chairman, you have heard if not seen the - shall I say the welcome I have received, when I stood up to speak.  I suppose Sir, that some people have been wondering why is this hon. Member sitting there quiet saying nothing.  The answer is quite simple.  I knew if I stood up they would know which side of the Bill I will be speaking for.  Actually, I am pleased to see this Bill came up.  Why?  Because, it has got some basic principles for the development of Uganda.  Our mission in this country of Uganda must be to pacify Ugandans -(Applause).  That is the principle of statesmanship.  Pacify Uganda for Iteso, Pacify Uganda for Kitgum, pacify Uganda within Buganda or elsewhere.  In this House, in 1966/67, the ebyaffe for some, it is a term of the usual, for others it means a lot.  The ebyaffe was taken away from a section of the people of Uganda.  They were more than 2 million.  A big section of the population of Uganda.  This was done - this created a sense of outrage, in those people.  A sense of bitterness in those people, that I cannot say, in fact, that I cannot improve on the statement of hon. Minister for Education and that time -1966- I was around.  I was the centre of this outrage but it is wonderful now to see this same Chamber of Ugandans themselves canceling what was done here.  

Now, this is a very important statement.  It is a very important turn-round in the history of our country by the new generation.  The principle of mutual acceptance, the principle of tolerance, the principle of recognising what we are.  We in Buganda for instance, we belong to 52 different clans, don’t you believe it, we may all be Baganda.  But when the Omutima people like myself want to interfere in the clan of emporogoma, the lion, we just cannot do it.  Because if we do it, there will be problems among the Baganda, they can even fight about it.  So, here we have a country now, a Parliament, a national Parliament, coming forward to say, ‘it was done wrongly in 1966, now we come forward to put things right’.  I would like to say that the NRM Government and its leadership, I have seen five Governments since 1966 - five governments in this country, none of them ever came forward to put right what went wrong.  So, I would like o say to them, thank you.  Then the principle of constitutionalism - this Bill, simple as it is, small as it is, short as it is, it is really putting forward an important principle of government in this country.  The principle of constitutionalism.  

In 1966, part of the confrontation was, ‘can one man or few people in here contravene the provisions of the 1962 Constitution, the Independence Constitution, a Constitution of the people which ushered in the Independent Uganda?’  One person did it or a group did it.  Now we are saying it is not right whether you are what, whether you are strong, it is not right for you to abrogate a Constitution of a country without going through Constitutional processes.  Now, ebyaffe as far as I can know, we are taking note in a constitutional way.  So, I am now saying, we are going back on the Constitution, the new one being abrogated in a way the Independence Constitution as abrogated.

Again there is another principle I see again - the issue of this Bill - there has to be justice in the government of this country. Justice in the government of this country and, therefore, we must redress what was wrongfully taken away where people were deprived.  

So, what am I saying?  It is part of our Independence, part of our responsibility in government now, part of the responsibility of the people legislating for this country that we must remove any seeds of discontent.  And I want to say this, that walking past the Palace for instance, seeing the houses of former Ministers of the Kabaka’s Government in ashes some people feel very bad about it.  And here we see now the new Uganda coming forward to say, it was wrong, let us put it right.  And I think now we are going to start moving forward in a spirit of unity.  And this is very important, unity in diversity and this is important for us to do -(Interjection)

Now, I am going to finish.  I am sorry to say this again.  Some people are worried about the exclusiveness of the institution of the monarchy.  I want to say this, the Baganda started with around - about three to five clans and most or the oldest is Abendiga - of the lamb clan, is not in a way sort of a monotypic society; we have other people in as a part of us.  And I want to say this that in Mengo we used to have people representing Abanubi as we call them, Nubians, in this Parliament here, we had a great friend of ours who was an Acholi, the late David Ocheng, he was elected to Parliament from Buganda there by Baganda by blood; he was elected to come here.  We had an Asian here, Visiram, some people wanted to stand, Abenkima, whatever, Baganda, but they were left behind, Visiram came.  What am I saying?  I am saying this - that this society of the people of Buganda is not exclusive, all that they are saying is, we are part of Uganda, please be fair to us and we shall also be fair to other people.  I am glad to say that this Bill is coming forward and that it will really serve to redress I think injustice, it has been with us for about 25 years.  Thank you so much, Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Paul Ssemogerere, please.  But try to be brief.

THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER, MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr. Paul Kawanga Ssemogerere):  Mr. Chairman, I will be very, very brief.  Thank you for the opportunity.  I come to give my full support to this Motion and to express my appreciation to those who have supported this so far and to point out that during my presence at least this afternoon, I have heard nobody really opposing the Bill in substance.  It is my hope that this House will send a good message to the people in Buganda and elsewhere who wish the monarchy in modern Uganda well.  I think the challenge really is a simple one.  We have to recognise that there are these cultural institutions in those countries and in other countries in Africa.  And they can be an asset; I do not have to repeat what has been said before but only recently we were in Benin with the President attending the Global Coalition for Africa; and we delayed our return from there by a day because the President of Benin, President Soglo, pleaded with our President to delay the departure to enable him to visit a typical Benoir village with all the cultural symbols there and cultural heads who were there and I was happy to have been able to go there also.  And we found that that place is a kind of Mecca in Benin there are more visitors who go there than those who visit the capital.  And this can be put to very good use in this country just like the Minister for Tourism has just said.

Now, we have these cultural institutions in our country, it is for us whether to make use of them for the good of all or to ignore them or to put them away, but they are there.  And what this Bill is trying to do is to have these institutions under a law that is transparent.  I think it is a progressive step than pretending that they are not there.  What is important is to have the necessary adjustment in a modern state.  Those who were around in the 1950s and 1960s in this country must have found that even within Buganda t that time, the debate was on how do you adjust the monarchy in Buganda in a modern democratic state.  And now we have an opportunity to do that, and the Baganda are looking to there friends from outside Buganda to assist in this exercise so that we have an institution which is innocent, free for all, healthy and progressive   

Secondly, I think, we should appreciate that we are lucky with this good spirit in the House, in the government and also with the incumbent.  The person we are talking about to be the Kabaka under law, under this Bill I think those of you who follow what he does, what he says, those who know him intimately should appreciate him as a progressive person as good enough to return the monarchy to him.  We are just fortunate, then he can be a good example.

It is not going backwards to have to bring back our monarchy here, we will not he the first one.  Spain did not have a King for about 40 years and they amended their constitution to bring back the monarchy and they are not regretting it and he has been very useful.  Some time under very difficult times, he has been the very symbol for unity and for progress and we could do that with whatever we have in this country in Buganda, in Lango, in Bunyoro, whatever.  It is a question of what we want to get out of this institution and we are in position to influence that.  And I can tell you that I believe that the Baganda you have today who are taking some responsibilities in this matter, I think they are fairly progressive.  We have examples to look to besides Spain, many of our colleagues here are familiar with Scandinavian countries and several of them to have the monarchy very well adjusted to a modern democratic state.  Why can we not emulate them?  I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  The Rt. hon. Prime Minister, please.

THE Rt. HON. PRIME MINISTER (Mr. Cosmos Adyebo):  Mr. Chairman, by our Constitution, that is the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda - whenever we are concluding very serious business, be it Prayer, we conclude by saying ‘FOR GOD AND MY COUNTRY’.  We, here, should be reminded by that statement, that it is a serious commitment between us the Ugandans as a nation and God the Creator.  We have now, therefore, to emulate that statement by saying, give to God what is for God, and to Katikiro what is for Katikiro, and to Buganda what belongs to the Baganda; only if you have to do that democratically and that is why we are here. (Applause)  

We are here in the verge of giving the Baganda what belongs to them, and we are here on the verge of giving the Banyankore what belongs to them if they so wish. We are also here to give to the Batoro, Banyoro, and Basoga what belongs to them if they so wish, we are here and ready to give the Republicans what may belong to them and so forth and so on. The only problem is that sometimes we fear taking decision.  Sometimes our problem in management is that we fear to take decisions even if we are right.  As I stand here, the whole country is listening, and is following. Some Republicans, for example, are fearing to make decisions, because what will they tell their people back home there?  Rightfully they are doing so because they may fear what they want to be.  But fear is not the answer.  Let us take a rational decision for the betterment of this country. (Applause)  

As you are aware, these people who are about four million, the Baganda call them - have been bitter for what happened on the 8th of September 1967.  Some of us were here, and some of us were not here.  But since that time over two decades plus, new generations have come, these generations were being told the tales of the day of 1966 what happened, what happened in 1967.  Even if they have been very quiet, but they have been very bitter, they have been quiet with a lot of bitterness, a lot of bitterness that sometimes turns into hatred, hatred that turns into disunity, disunity that turns into chaos, chaos that turns into destruction, and destruction that we have come to correct.  And for the last seven years, this government has been trying to adjust that.  

I, therefore, stand before you in this respected House to democratically and do together here what was done some 26 years ago, as I said, at that time needless to repeat, these institutions in the name of kings, call them heads of districts or whatever name, called at that time, were abolished.  We have been studying as to how best they can be returned to those who cherished them.  Since that time, Government had been approached systematically and through constructive engagements including meetings of highly placed Ugandans in our society.  We came to resolve that, let us resolve this thing democratically.  And you hon. Members have now to mark the beginning of the end of that exercise by soberly and squarely solving the political and democratic equations whose anxious will lie nowhere else except in the values of humility, truth, honesty and respect for human rights to life and property (Hear, hear!)  

You hon. Members, therefore, should explicitly be identified with the solutions to those equations, and therefore, form the basis for the human persons through dignity where you automatically become the guardians of freedom for the people not only of Buganda but for the entire Uganda.  You are, therefore, to be taken as the granter of this common good.  

Hon. Members, you will recall that if we had to address the problem of permanent democracy here, we must address the problem or we must identify first of all the source of democracy.  What is the source of democracy?  The source of democracy lies in the will of the people.  It lies in the will of the people.  Since time immemorial in this country, the Baganda have been having the will to have their cultural institutions in place.  And anybody who will fall short of that will is just going to cause his own problems.  A lot has been said, how they were before the abolition of their institution that we would like to be re-instated, because hearing and seeing it, they need it.  I would not imagine that they, my brothers, ancestors or Buganda, would repeat that relationship of the Arab, and Camel and the Tent.  I do not think they will repeat it.  If they do repeat -(Laughter)- Yes!  Maybe for emphasis, I am talking about the relationship between the Arab and Camel and the Tent.  What happened?  I think some of you do not know.  The relationship was that the Camel had just wanted its nose to go into the tent, it was allowed, then it asked for the head to go into the tent, it was allowed, then the chest, it was allowed until the whole thing was kicked and torn. (Laughter)  I do not think my brothers and sisters are willing any more to apply that kind of relationship of which they had been accused.

We as government have consistently been fulfilling the conditions that were given to us by this august House.  They told us to do such things that will end up in handling this matter legally, and we have done just that.  The last step was to prepare a Bill which has been presented to you and which you have generously discussed.  

My intention, therefore, is not to go any more into a long discussion about the Bill.  I am only pleading to you as legislators, as the highest body of the country, that whereas some of you have been democratically sent here, whereas some of you have been elected, you are the vanguard of democracy in this country and your action is going to go into the historical test in as far as we in Uganda are concerned.  Some of you, because you are arguing that, you see, last time, they denied us to handle this ebyaffe issues and so on, but you as legislators, will always have a task to perform and this is just one of them.  And I am glad that it has come at the right time before the Constituent Assembly is enacted and I would just like you to carry on with this mighty job but please do not shy away from participation.  Participate and let you be registered democratically that once you were a representative of the people at such and such a time, your contribution was that as it may appear in the Hansard.  

I, for one, I am here to tell you nothing but the truth and stand on behalf of government to just witness our agreement on the return of ebyaffe to, first, the people of Buganda whom we are staring with.  You know, some people are scared, Mr. Chairman, they do not know how to debate but as far as I can recollect, this traditional leadership in Buganda is very useful, it is very useful in uniting the country.   I am saying that this traditional leadership of Buganda is very crucial in as far as unity of the country is concerned.  I was here sometime back as a student in Buganda and the best people around me at that time were the Baganda.  I used to travel a lot even at the moment, my closest friends are Baganda and you may find that - (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Proceed please.  Order please, take you seat.  Proceed please.

MR. C. ADYEBO:  And over the years, Mr. Chairman and hon. Members, I am convinced that these people as a community are a disciplined community - are a disciplined community because in as far as I am concerned and the hon. Members here gathered will recall that even their relatives were well taken care of by the people of Buganda in the past including my own father who enjoyed staying here in the past except that it was politics that came and interfered with management of some of these institutions which we now think that it is actually the core of our problem.  It is not true, it may be part but it may not be true.  

I would, therefore, say that let them also, the Baganda, learn from what happened.  If in the past they made a mistake, let them be reminded of that mistake.  If some of us also made a mistake, let us all be reminded.  We are giving everybody a second chance so that in future you cannot just say that we were left alone.  I am therefore urging you to honourably consider the return of the cultural sites to those what cherished them starting with Buganda.  

And in conclusion, I would like to ask my Colleagues, the hon. Members, that you have to push history and move it forward.  History does not go in a straight line Mr. Chairman, with due respect; history does not go in a straight line.  It is you the leaders that can guide the history of any given country.  And so long as you are doing it democratically, even that history will stand the test of time and we have to adjust to that.  This will go a long way to leave behind a united Uganda, a Uganda where the animosity between the North and then the South is bridged.  Where the former prejudices are going to be forgotten, where we are going to have a review of this cultural institution to copy from in as far as the unity of Uganda is concerned.  And in this regard, I would ask you to call upon the Attorney General to wind up the debate. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Prime Minister you are out of order. (Laughter) Order please, order please.

MR. C. ADYEBO:  I would propose that with due respect, Mr. Chairman, I would propose that, if anything today, we could consider finishing this matter, because we have so many related important national issues and yet we have very little time. (Laughter)  I thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Steven Kavuma please.

MR. STEVEN KAVUMA (Kyadondo, Mpigi):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for allowing me to contribute to this historical debate in our country.  It has been the committed policy of the National Resistance Movement, not only to correct the past errors but also to facilitate an atmosphere of tolerance and reconciliation among the different peoples of this small country.  In this debate, we are doing exactly that.  This is not a time for opening old wounds, but the people of Buganda have lived in agony for the last 27 or so years.  They are now happy to listen and hear the national legislature coming out to solve this problem under the leadership of the National Resistance Movement.  Mr. Chairman, nobody should be -(Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, hon. Kavuma.  With that we have come to the end of today’s Session.  We adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.  Thank you.

ADJOURNMENT

(The Council rose at 5.30 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday 14th July, 1993 at 2.30 p.m).
 

                                                                                           

