Thursday, 10 July 2003
Parliament met at 2.18 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Today we have visitors in the strangers gallery. These are the students of Mukono Parents’ Secondary School, in Mukono North constituency. You are welcome to the Parliament of Uganda.

I know there is a programme of something going on at the International Conference Centre, but this should not stop us from proceeding with our business here.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the first week when we resumed sitting, I drew the attention of the House to an article whereby the Minister of Finance was supposed to have signed a loan agreement. The Minister of Finance promised to report to the House on the status of this case in two weeks, but during the second week I was not around. 

Today, again there is a newspaper article about that loan agreement and that there is a threat that the same may be rejected by Parliament. I am begging for your indulgence, since I have already contributed substantially to the debate, could the Minister clarify this matter? It really impinges directly on the budget.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, what I can say is that I consulted with my senior colleague and what I was told was that there was no loan agreement signed. The signature of that particular loan will await the approval of the committee, and Parliament. Thank you very much.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2003

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that a bill entitled, “The Customs Management (Amendment) Bill, 2003” be read a first time.

THE SPEAKER: The bill stands committed to the – but did you bring the certificate?

MR MWESIGWA: Mr Speaker, I obliged and laid the bill on the Table because it was on the Order Paper. Otherwise, our approach was that all these bills - because they are several of them - constitute the Finance Bill. But since this particular bill has been tabled for specific reading, I pray that the Order Paper be amended so that all the three, which we originally thought constituted the Finance Bill, also be read separately. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: My question was whether you have the Certificate of Financial Implications in respect of the bill that you tabled, and which you intend to submit. If you do not, then I will decline accepting them until the certificate is produced. This is what we have decided. So, maybe you may bring them next time the House is sitting.

MR MWESIGWA: Well, the Certificate of Financial Implications is contained in the –(Interruption)


THE SPEAKER: No, I want the document. 


MR MWESIGWA: Well, then I withdraw this bill until I come up with a formal certificate.

THE SPEAKER: Good, thank you.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

i) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2002/03

ii) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2003/04 ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE.

(Debate continued.)

MR PHILIP NTACYOTUGIRA (Bufumbira County North, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are told that the highest priority of the Government in the medium-term remains that of achieving accelerated economic growth that is adequate to eradicate mass poverty.

I wish to thank the Government for this untiring effort to eradicate poverty, which is quite rampant amongst our people, especially the rural people. But what I note is that money trickles down to the districts right from the centre through the policy of decentralisation. These funds are for the rehabilitation of feeder roads, putting up classrooms - under the School Facility Grant (SFG), for buying medicines for hospitals and health centres, and for rural water development and so on.

In spite of all these facilities given, I do find that poverty is too much amongst our citizens. Our rural people simply do not have money to buy the necessary goods and services, which actually now surround them. They are available but they do not have the capacity to purchase them. They need solid cash. Government, okay, is providing other infrastructure, but people cannot use it without having money in their pockets.

Our people lack money to buy soap, salt, paraffin, and medicine. You very well know that these days when you do not have money, you cannot buy good medicine. In hospitals and health centres, you find simple medicines. Chloroquine no longer works and this is why even many people are dying of malarial fever. Here in Kampala, people have got some money and they can purchase drugs, which are a bit expensive, and they survive but not the rural people. 

Mr Speaker, how do we get to know that our people are very poor? How do we detect this? First and foremost, we Members of Parliament do interact with them. We visit them right at the grassroots level. Furthermore, this begging syndrome: when we go to our constituencies, very early in the morning about 20 or 30 people are in your sitting room trying to request for some help, trying to request for money to buy clothes. They even come to request for food! That is an indication that people are very poor. Many people seek help from us for food, clothing and even building materials. 

This NRM Government has been in power for the last 17 years. I do agree that it has achieved quite a lot, which I do not have to mention here. However, what lacks most is the purchasing power amongst our people. Solid cash is not there. We need to financially empower our people so that they can have cash on themselves. 

Mr Speaker, allow me to suggest some measures. One, I do suggest that we should establish the rightful manpower right at the district levels. Yes, they may be there, but there is urgent need for efficient, knowledgeable, well-facilitated and motivated manpower to interact with our rural people right at the grassroots. I repeat, efficient, knowledgeable, well-facilitated and motivated manpower. 

Why should I say this? We have some graduate agricultural officers who are supposed to work at sub-county level. But are they working? Once in a while I see them riding motorcycles within the towns. When I go to the rural area, and I ask about their whereabouts, I am told that they never appear. And when I go to ask them why, they say they are not well facilitated. 

The other measure I want to suggest is education. If we have to empower our people financially, our people should be educated in terms of production. They should acquire skills, which will enable them to produce crops and then be able to sell them. Mr Speaker, our people are not being educated in terms of production -(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Dr Kisamba Mugerwa): Thank you for giving way. I would like to inform the honourable member that one of the constraints to any extension in the production sector would be means of transport. But if his people in Kisoro are riding motorcycles in town, what else are we going to facilitate them with? Perhaps they are not supervised and extension is one of the decentralised functions where the leadership in the district should really take charge.

MR NTACYOTUGIRA: Thank you, honourable minister. Actually, I was moving on to supervision mechanisms Here I want to say that our rural people, those who want to produce, are not properly educated. Why are they not well educated? Just because these officials are not well facilitated, go and interact with them. Why is it that they are not well facilitated? They say there is no money given to them. 

The CAOs are supposed to supervise them. What I note is that the Chief Administrative Officers are involved in the accountability for the money that is sent down to the districts. They are very concerned with that activity. They do not have time to go and supervise other officers. Local councillors do not supervise them at all. They just only go for meetings; you will never see them supervise.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have now taken over ten minutes. You are supposed to take five.

MR NTACYOTUGIRA: In a summarised form, I am saying number 4 is availability of inputs. Actually our people do not know where these inputs are. Honourable minister, they do not know where to get them from. Where are they? Could you avail them to our people? 

Finally, the role of Members of Parliament is to identify economic projects suitable for the provision of employment and increase of household incomes. Mr Speaker, why can’t the Government think of a constituency development fund? If we could get about Shs 20 - 30 million, we could just go to our constituencies and help our people eradicate poverty and eventually increase their income. I thank you for offering me this opportunity to air my views. Thank you.

MRS HARRIET KAGABA (Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to commend the Government’s efforts to improve the tea sub-sector in this country. On page 6, paragraph 18, I am happy to learn what the Ministry has done in order to uplift the production of tea in this country. 

He mentioned having imported the improved clones, the farmers to whom the clones have been distributed, and all the people who have been trained. I am glad to report that we have had this in Kyenjojo. But then I would have loved to hear a mention of the research centre in Rwebitaba, Kyenjojo District, which was once a research centre for East Africa before the East African Community was phased out. 

Instead of importing the 300,000 clones, we would have used the Rwebitaba Tea Research Centre in order to provide even more for this country. So, I would have loved, in this Budget Speech, to see something mentioned about rehabilitating the research centre of Rwebitaba in Kyenjojo District.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, FISHERIES (Dr Fabius Byaruhanga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to refer the member to our ministry’s policy statement for this financial year. Rwebitaba is well covered and actually it is being rehabilitated under NARO. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: What the Minister is saying is that there are certain things that should be addressed when you go to the committees dealing with the respective policy statements. But you can go on honourable member.

MRS KAGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Minister for that information. 

I would also have loved to hear a mention of the rehabilitation of tea factories in this country. For example, in Kyenjojo, we have a tea factory that is pending for rehabilitation and completion. I wanted to hear a mention of that, so that my fears are allayed that all the high production, which is going to be put in place soon, will be catered for when other factories are built. 

In Kyenjojo, we have a factory, which is due to be completed. There is one in Mityana and another in Buhweju. I would be very glad to hear from the Minister whether anything has been covered about the rehabilitation of these factories.

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr Speaker, to cut the long story short, it is better that I give the full information on the tea industry so that the honourable member leaves the tea issue. 

The Government has earmarked the tea industry as one for strategic export. We have gone into importing clones, which have been given to various factories to establish nurseries, so that they can distribute to the farmers in their respective areas. 

Secondly, there is rehabilitation of the tea estates that had been abandoned. We have facilitated this and only a few are remaining, of the absentee landlords. I have reported that before here. 

Thirdly, regarding the seedlings, we have put in money to purchase them and they are distributed. 

Fourthly, when it comes to factories, we came here with bills so that we could remove the encumbrances and have the private sector invest in these factories to have them completed. As of now, nobody can take up such a factory. It is not under privatisation, it is a project, until the statute has been amended. It is in the process, but we have a problem. When this is completed, it will be able to attract investors. There are potential investors, especially for Kyenjojo, because that one was nearing completion. 

For the research, as the Minister earlier reported, we have earmarked funds. NARO has identified already that in Rwebitaba Research Station there are 80 varieties of tea, and some of them may be what we have been importing. So, in future, we may not need to import them. We shall multiply and increase the tea production in the country.

MRS KAGABA: I thank you, Mr Minister. I would be very happy if the procedure of the Statute is put in place hurriedly, so that we achieve it as soon as possible. 

I would also like to mention that in Kyenjojo we have a population of 346,000 people, and it is unfortunate that we do not have any hospital catering for it. No wonder we have a high infant and maternal mortality rate. 

Mr Speaker, we have the Health Centre IVs, which got completed in 1999. Since then, they have not been operational simply because there is no electricity and water. And it seems there is nothing mentioned here about it. In Kyenjojo we have only Health Centre IVs; we do not have a district hospital. 

I wanted to hear a mention of how these Health Centre IVs, especially in districts that have no hospitals, will be upgraded to district hospitals; and how these redundant health centres will be made operational.

Mr Speaker, I would like to commend the Government for the work it has done on the remaining stretch of Kyegegwa-Kyenjojo road. I would like to thank the government that the works have already started and we are now comfortable. But then we would like to access this highway. In as far as the market for our produce is concerned, Kyenjojo has no access roads. For that matter I request the government to give us a full road unit. 

We would like to thank you for the grader, which was given to us, but then a grader without a bulldozer cannot open up any access roads. We want the Government to think about us so that we can access this highway fully.

I would like to wind up. Year after a year, we have passed budgets here and it seems the budget performance, when they report it to us in this House, has been static. What was reported in 2001/2002 is what is reported in 2002/2003. It seems there is something wrong. I request that the implementers of this budget really go down and internalise exactly what is happening so that we can have a budget performance, which is really moving further rather than being static. So, we must really consider how the budget performance is operating. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

CAPT. DAVID MATOVU (Kooki County, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me this chance, and I rise to support the motion. I am going to put my emphasis on point No. 2 of the Budget Speech; that is, ensuring security and good governance in this country. 

As leaders, we offer solutions to the problems in the country, especially as Parliamentarians. We should work in partnership with the Government to ensure that there is peace. And, Mr Speaker, I alarmed by the Kony war. This war has been on for the last 17 years. In fact, I am worried it has become normal. It is about to become part of life. I want to make this contribution. It may not be palatable, but I think I am trying to be a nationalistic Ugandan, and we need to offer a solution to this war. 

First of all, war is not bad; no, as long as it is fought on its principle reasons. Like the development of mankind, I think all of you know we had wars. There were struggles between man and man, and it has led to the development from where we were up to now.  

THE SPEAKER: Are you saying that war is not bad or that it may be inevitable?

CAPT. MATOVU: Yes, it brings development, Mr Speaker. Like in the villages you find some boys quarrel and in that way one respects the other and they continue. 

But this war has really put everybody at a loss.  Government is almost at a loss, our people are dying, the Army is dying and people are in camps. Mr Speaker, the Government and the leaders in that place have explained to us the genesis of this war. But we are still stuck! Are we talking of a political solution? Are we talking of a military solution, an economic solution or a social solution? There is really misery! 

I have recently been to Pabo. About 60,000 people are crammed there; the young ones are dying and are buried around there. The situation is very bad and desperate. Mr Speaker, I have some hard questions, as we move towards looking for a solution to the Kony war. I am wondering: has Kony got supporters? How does he do his surveillance? How does he move from point A to point B, at times unnoticed? How does he get some of these delicate supplies, the ammunition, and the uniforms? These are some of the hard questions; the co-ordination!

For example, if Kony won tomorrow - God forbid! – Don’t you think that at Kololo he would even award medals to some people and acknowledge them for what they contributed to the struggle? Mr Speaker, I want to request all of us Ugandans and leaders that for the 17 years we have been giving Kony Panadol. If it is in terms of treatment, what we have been giving Kony has been Panadol. I think we need to go a little further and now prescribe – I can see the NPC is listening attentively - we need to prescribe antibiotics -(Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the honourable member for giving way. I just want to seek clarification from him as to what he means by “for the last 17 years we have been giving Kony Panadol”. I know that for the last 17 years this Parliament has passed colossal sums of money for fighting Kony. It has also taken the entire head of state to shift camp to Northern Ugandan. Would that still be Panadol, according to your evaluation?

THE SPEAKER: When you give somebody Panadol, the intention is to cure. So, if you are giving Kony Panadol, it could be curing him. You perhaps should give him poison? (Laughter). There is a difference between giving him Panadol and poison.

MR ONEK: Thank you for giving way. I think the member is right. He wants us to find a prescription for this case. The Panadol that has been given is not working, in fact the situation is becoming worse. The Panadol is in fact expanding the sickness. So, I agree with you, I think that is correct.

CAPT. MATOVU: Mr Speaker, let me proceed. The Minister of Defence will answer part of it, otherwise we need to come up very strongly. Let us avoid driving in the middle of the road; you are either this side or that side. This is the only way we are going to finish Kony. You are either with the Government and the UPDF, or you support Kony -because there is also nothing wrong withy supporting Kony. Yes, if Kony is for example fighting for a cause, let us look at his literature. 

I would not mind. If he has any cause he is advancing, let him say, “Ladies and gentlemen, Ugandans, we are ready to perish as long as the following are not addressed”. Let us look at his literature -(Interruption)

MRS KAFIIRE RAINER: Thank you, honourable member for giving way. I am seeking clarification from hon. Capt. Matovu. Has he got people who are on one side, who are not with the UPDF but are pretending to be with the UPDF? Could he give us some names? Pointing out that we should be clear and who is where is very serious. If you know of people who are pretending to be in the UPDF but are not, please, inform this House.

CAPT. MATOVU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the member. The good thing is that the member has been part of the medical field. Could it be that there is a bad doctor and we need to change the doctor instead of the medicine?

BRIG. JIM MUHWEZI: Could the speaker be implying or meaning people who are not condemning the acts of Kony?

CAPT. MATOVU: Mr Speaker, I think I should be allowed more time because the problem in Uganda is now security. As I was saying, let us be very clear. As leaders let us not be shy. I have seen at times that there is a tendency for people to give as many reasons why things should not improve. You find somebody is swimming - he is swimming about, his statements are not very clear. We want sentences and statements with a full stop to address the northern war. But you cannot swim and say, “you know, you see, you know” - let us have clear sentences! (Applause)

For example, I have told you gentlemen, I am so open and clear. One of the solutions we should try to look at, which could help us, are the grants to Northern Uganda. With due respect, we need to review this, Prime Minister. There is a war situation in the North. I want to see those people in the camps fed, given drugs, and given water. But you find some of these funds - even the attention of Government, its monitoring and accountability is lacking. In fact this CAO of Gulu, I am told he was either arrested or he is about to be arrested, but I thank him for eating that money. What do you expect in a war situation?

He is supposed to be monitoring water and security! Let us have all this money put under the pool for disaster preparedness, address the giving of relief, drugs, and water; the rest is mobilisation. The Chairman LC V, Councillors, RDCs, all of us, let us mobilise and have that war out of the way.

Mr Speaker, we need to also appreciate the Army’s contribution. If the Army makes mistakes, no problem, let us criticise it. But it cannot be from Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, one month, three months. Then also politicians, let us separate politics from this war. If you are opposed to the Movement, no problem, you are entitled to that. But you find some people mixing up their differences - ideological of course - with the Movement, then with the war. They say, “you know, there is imbalance, this and that”. No, let us have our reasons well packaged and address them to the government. 

I am ready to join any group that is there to go and bench in the North. Let us go, say with the AMANI Forum, bench and mobilise, and have this war out of the way. The North has a lot of potential for development, if only they could get out of this mess!

My last one, Mr Speaker, I want to appeal to the NPC and the government that very soon some of us are going to change our method of work and the way we have been relating to Government - especially those who support the Movement. Some of our issues are not given due attention. You find some people who for example use the press and threaten to go on strike, their issues are given due attention more than some of us who support the Movement 100 percent. 

I have a problem of water and mosquitoes in Kooki. We ask the government, through the Prime Minister’s Office, to bring a bill that ensures Lake Victoria a free trade zone so that we get a “Dubai” in ­Rakai. That bill has been with somebody, and there is no answer - nothing! But if I went to Rakai and said, “let us demonstrate”, you would hear the phones ring, “Captain, hello, why are you demonstrating?” So, we are going to change our method of work while we also fight for our things in Rakai. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR WADRI KASSIANO (Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to first of all thank the Minister for Finance for the Budget Speech that he presented to us. I have a few observations to make.  

I would like to first make observations on administration of justice, law and order. Last Friday, Mr Speaker and honourable members, I was entertained to a bizarre situation in Gulu. A contingent of UPDF officers came in a double cabin Toyota Hilux, registration No. UAD 586M, white in colour, commanded by one Lt Col Charles Otema. The UPDF officers were carrying various assortments of weapons, and I could witness that there were AK47 assault riffles, LMGs, and others carrying pistols. What were they going for? The whole town came to a standstill. They had stormed the office of the Resident State Attorney and they roughed him up, arrested him, threw him into the back of this double cabin Pick-Up and they condemned him that he was a rebel collaborator. 

This brought ridicule to the Judiciary as an institution. And yet the fact of the matter, which lay behind it all, was something else. The previous day the Resident State Attorney had received clear instructions to the effect that certain suspects on treason charges, who had been transferred from Kigo Remand Prison to Luzira and finally taken back to Gulu, were to be released on bail. It was a constitutional matter but to our greatest dismay, a UPDF officer, who is not even an officer of court, and whose mandate is not to arrest any person suspected to have committed a crime of that nature, was involved in such an act. 

Yet, of late, the Judiciary has regained the image that it deserves. Of late we have seen the Judiciary rendering justice to people brought before its attention without fear or favour. I think we need to have checks and balances on the behaviour of our errant public officers.

Mr Speaker, this morning we heard a news item on the BBC that two Police officers are now being tried in the United States of America because they roughed up a black American in the course of arrest. With what has happened in Gulu, what will it imply? This Resident State Attorney had to after all - because of the intervention of the Director of Public Prosecutions - be released. What if he takes the Government to court for unlawful arrest and having been beaten up? I am not a judge but at the end of the day, Government will pay very colossal sums of money.  

It would be proper in future that where a public officer goes out of his way to misconduct himself and bring ridicule to the Government, and bring expenses to be incurred by Government, should be tried. I pray that in future such kind of errant officers should be proceeded against as individuals so that it is not the Government committed in terms of payment when such matters are taken to court.

In the Budget Speech, we have also alluded to the enormous contribution made by the ICT sector. In this particular sector I am looking at the contribution of the mobile phones. To many people, mobile phones in this country are synonymous with development. But at the same time, I think that the use of mobile phones is a disservice to many of our members of the community. In the western world, you find that there are stringent laws regulating the use of mobile phones. But many accidents on our highways are committed or are caused because of motorists driving and at the same time talking on their mobile phones. 

Even those who ride motorcycles are culprits. You know very well that both hands have to be engaged in order to either clutch or brake, but you find somebody is talking on a mobile phone and he is riding on the highway. Could we, as a government, think about coming up with laws to regulate the use of mobile phones, especially by motorists when they are on highways? I can see the Minister is up. I do not know whether he has information to give me or he has got something to clarify. I will take that as long as my time will be compensated. (Laughter).

THE MINISTER OF STATE, COMMUNICATIONS (Mr Michael Werikhe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for giving way. Under the review of the Road Safety and Traffic Act, we have a provision whereby you are not supposed to attend to a mobile phone while you are driving. You are supposed to stop, finish that business if you so wish, then proceed. There is that provision in the Traffic Act.

MR KASSIANO: Thank you very much for that very important information but at the same time, let it not be a sleeping law. Let the law enforcing organs enforce it because these days I have seen Traffic Police back on the roads. They even now have the mandate to fine and charge a driver there and then. I wish that they could also be able to invoke that law, so that we really save our road users. 

Mr Speaker, when we also look at the Budget Speech, it says a lot of contributions have been injected by the private sector. However, we seem to have a situation in Uganda where foreign investors are treated with kid gloves. We are more interested in economic growth than economic development. We have our workers whose welfare is not taken into consideration. The issue of uniting workers in unions, so that they are able to act in unison to demand fair working conditions, is important. 

Last week there was yet another sad occurrence. A worker was assaulted by an expatriate in Picfare Industries in Jinja. This worker lodged his complaint and the expatriate was taken to court and convicted. What did he get at the end of the day? As soon as the Asian paid the Shs 150,000 fine, he sacked this worker. Surely, is this the Uganda that belongs to all of us? Where in the world will you find a foreigner being rated far higher than the citizen of the land? I think we need, as a country, to come up with the appropriate programmes and policies so that the welfare and interests of our workers are taken into consideration.  

Sir, I would also like to comment a little on the issue of commitment control and reduction of arrears. By the time this policy came into being, I was a vote controller in a ministry. The fact on the ground is that much as we put these stringent conditions, they are not going to be easy to abide by. There are institutions under the direct control of ministries. Look at prisons, look at the remand institutions; here are human beings for whom you have budgeted for example Shs 20 million in a financial year for food. Are you going to say, “Because we are operating under a commitment control system and the Shs 20 million has run out, therefore the hunger should also run out or wait”? I think we must also be able to make provisions, which reflect the reality on the ground.

Last but not least, a lot has been said about insecurity in this country, more so about Kony. This time I am not going to talk about Kony. I am going to talk about the various insecurities in this country. Today we are talking about Kony but we are at the same time breeding more Joseph Konys. We have retrenched very many officers and men, right from Uganda Army, UNLA to the UPDF, who are in the countryside. These people have not been paid their gratuity; they are still demanding for money from us; they are a frustrated lot! 

While we are focusing attention on Kony, there are many Konys in our homes. You think a person who is disgruntled, whose services have not been appreciated, and is just sent home without any package will not readily join Kony? If Kony came around and he looks at that as the only option, what does he do? The relevant ministry for defense matters, should be able to take that into account. 

Furthermore, last week I was reading about a situation where one of the Generals was in Soroti Public Grounds - that was not Gen. Mukula, it was Gen. Jeje Odongo - who came out with figures of thousands of guns to be issued to various sub-counties so that the members can be able to defend themselves if Kony ever struck. Of course, I am also reliably informed that Kony is still in Amuria County. I have in my house refugees who fled from there. 

Having said that, do we have machinery with which we can track down these guns? If the gun is given to Wadri in self-defence at the end of the day he should be able to return it to the armoury. Many times you give guns to the people, but those who now handle the guns use them as instruments of survival because you do not pay them. At the end of the day, you do not collect these guns. So, somehow, as a government, we are fuelling the insecurity in this country. I think we need to check that –(Interruption) 

MR ONEK: Information.

THE SPEAKER: No, please, let him wind up because I see a problem coming up. 

MR KASSIANO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for that very considerate decision. (Laughter).

There is yet another issue that I would like to talk about. It is the issue of revenue roadblocks. Do we harmonise our policies? Here is a policy that has come out of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. At the same time we have, under the Local Government Act, empowered districts to use their discretion, whether with a by-law or unilateral decision, to design means of raising revenue. 

I say this because last week I was in hon. Kefa Sempangi’s constituency. Right at his door there is a roadblock from where they are collecting revenue. And as if that is not enough, on the 4th of this month His Excellency the Vice President received a memorandum from the Fisheries Exporters’ Association about how they have been harassed. Do we ever harmonise our policies so that whatever the Ministry of Finance says or whatever one ministry says, applies across the board? Unless we do that, we are still going to have problems Districts will continue mounting roadblocks in order to raise revenue. At the same time I appeal, Mr Speaker –(Interjection)- (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana rose_).

THE SPEAKER: No, he has taken over 12 minutes. He is supposed to take five minutes. No, you will come in later.
  
MR KASSIANO: In order to wind up, therefore, I would like to urge the Government to come up with meaningful programmes, as it has committed itself to, especially under social development. I have seen in the write up that social development seems to be a phased up approach. If you are going to talk about social development, it should be across the board. You are not going to achieve social development in a country like Uganda if you are going to zone it according to regions and districts. 

There is much more to talk about, but Mr Speaker, thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Please, we have many members who want to make contributions, and the Business Committee decided that it would give you five minutes so that we can serve as many of you as possible. We have limited time. If you are given five minutes and then you take up 14, it makes my work impossible. Therefore, I request those who are going to make their contributions from now on, please, stick to five minutes; not more than six minutes.

MR LOUIS OPANGE (Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Finance for presenting this Budget Speech. 

The growth and development of this country depends on a proper budgeting process and good policies, which are put forward to focus on the rural community. Mr Speaker, in the previous budget the increase in fuel prices and motor vehicle road license fees from Shs 110,000 to Shs 200,000 was just a disaster. The after effects directly result in the increase in the cost of production. 

As we talk now, the prices of essential items, which are necessary for the people, have gone up. For example, the price of soap have gone up from Shs 800 to Shs 1,200, the price of sugar has gone up to Shs 1,700, and the prices of all the essential commodities have gone up. This is as a result of the high production costs and the transportation costs for the essential products. Mr Speaker, this House should look at possibilities of restraining the Ministry of Finance from increasing the motor vehicle road licenses by 100 percent. In a proper budgeting process, it could have gone up by 10 percent so that the prices could be harmonised.  

Then the other thing is poverty. Government has tried all possible ways of putting in place good policies for fighting poverty but the problem is that a lot of money has been released on capacity utilization. Mr Speaker, poverty, just like AIDS, should be declared a disaster in this country. When you talk about poverty, the money that the Ministry of Finance releases remains in the districts for workshops, training and what have you. Why can’t the Ministry have proper policies such that we tackle the poverty at the grassroots? 

Furthermore, as far as programmes are concerned, the Tirinyi–Pallisa-Kumi road has been on a ten-year plan for tarmacking. According to reliable information from the African Development Bank, the Government of Uganda presented a study with all the designs of this road. However - according to the officers of the African Development Bank - these designs are now outdated. We actually request the Government to reconsider prioritising this road. The African Development Bank is ready to fund this road and see that business there is improved.

So many honourable members of this House have talked about modernization of agriculture. But I want to bring up our perspective as the people of Pallisa District, and Pallisa County. The Government should utilise this money budgeted for modernization of agriculture to issue out to the small-scale industries to add value to the agricultural products, which the community is producing. Mr Speaker, everybody in this august House is aware that five years down the road, billions of money have been used for planning for the modernization of agriculture. But you go to the ground, and there is no impact.

There is nobody who knows where this money is, and there is nobody who understands what modernisation of agriculture is. For example, Entadikwa came. Many years down the road, a lot of money was spent but no community person benefited from this. Now there is NUSURP. We are hearing of workshops; I am worried that all this money is going to be used in workshops. When is NUSURP going to be implemented?  

As far as the war is concerned, I take this opportunity to thank all the former Uganda Army officers and all the people of Teso for showing the country that they have to come up openly and say no to rebel activities. I urge the rest of the districts to come out openly and flash Kony out of the country, and all those who feel they can fight the Government. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

REV. DR KEFA SSEMPANGI (Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Mr Speaker, I will be brief. I have only three points to make. 

The first one is about land, which was alluded to yesterday by hon. Mukasa Muruli. Mr Speaker, before I came to this Parliament I used to attend to the speeches made by the President on the television, discouraging land fragmentation. But I am very disappointed that in all the speeches of the President on the State of the Nation and the budget, there is no mention of any policy of how he can fight land fragmentation. Land is a very precious commodity but somehow it is very misused. How are you going to plan for commercial agriculture when you have no land for development? 

There is no land and we have these Articles in the Constitution. What do they say? That everybody is free to reside and settle wherever he feels like. That is a give-away, because the Government does not have any control to reserve land. You may be surprised that even in so-called Mabira Forest, areas like Kinoni, are all being inhabited. You pass a piece of land today, which is empty, but six months later you find the whole place filled up with houses everywhere. So, where can we have development? Where is land management, even for the future?

We are talking about tea and sugar plantation. Can you do that anymore? Now you find squatters everywhere. Where could you find land for development? Some of these provisions in the Constitution need to be re-visited.  

Mr Speaker, in Central Buganda area and other tribes, we have what is called ancestral land. Somebody could die in Mukono but he is taken to Masaka for burial or vice-versa. Today the opposite is true because people say, “you are free to reside and settle anywhere”. Now you settle anywhere and anyhow. I have a case in mind. 

When I was in Mubende, Nabyengola sub-county, some people buried a dead person somewhere. Then the indigenous people, who had their burial ground there, made a complaint, but the illegal squatters brought out pangas and sticks. I will not say which tribe this was but there was a big fight, and this is total anarchy. Why do we not have respect even for ancestral land?

I think we need –(Interruption)

DR KASIRIVU: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Ssempangi for giving way. I want to inform my friend, hon. Sempangi, that there is a provision of the Constitution, which says that people should settle anywhere; “anyhow” applies to people going to Kibaale. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: But I think the provision has something pertinent. You settle anywhere so long as you settle lawfully. You do not settle wherever you want without following the law.

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA: I wish to inform the honourable member that there is no way you can legislate against fragmentation. Studies indicate that the best way of handling fragmentation is through the land market, which is catching up. Good enough now, there is an open land market.

Secondly, a land use plan is coming up through the responsible ministry. This will help us earmark certain parts as specifically agricultural land or residential land. Even in countries like Britain, which have bigger populations than ours, there is still land earmarked for agriculture. You cannot do anything else other than agricultural enterprises.

REV.  DR KEFA SSEMPANGI: Mr Speaker, I hope what the minister is saying will really take place, because this idea of settling anywhere, anyhow is not – land seems to be for settlement and not for development. I think we need to take note of that.

Mr Speaker, I want to thank the Ministry of Agriculture for distributing over 46,000,000 coffee seedlings. My constituency, Ntenjeru South, was one of the beneficiaries. We got over 300,000 coffee seedlings. I personally distributed over 120 coffee seedlings. Twenty of them were distributed at a place called Katikanyonyi, which borders the River Nile, but they were all scorched by the sun. How could that happen when that area borders River Nile? 

I approached the South Africa Embassy. They are willing to give us irrigation pumps, but we are not allowed to touch that river. When are we going to have these colonial treaties taken off our law books so that we can utilize the water that borders our constituencies and is on our land? We have no right. I do not know which ministry deals with treaties, but this is a treaty that must be taken care of.  

Finally, Mr Speaker, I want to talk about the Uganda Export Promotion Board. When I was in England recently, I met an exporter who was really stranded. He told me that Uganda has about twenty exporters but five of them are active, and Kenya has over five hundred exporters. That is why Kenya is monopolising our pineapples and passion fruit in the area that I represent. 

You mentioned that today traders cannot afford but when we had Uganda Airlines, cargo charges were reasonable. Today, with the present airlines we have, including British Airways, cargo and export fares are unaffordable. What is Uganda Export Promotion Board doing to assist our exporters and traders? These exporters used to take passion fruit to London. In UK, a kilo of unprocessed passion fruit is four pounds. 

The Kenya exporters are buying a whole basket of passion fruits and even pineapples for peanuts from Kayunga! Mr Speaker, I ask that the government helps us so that we can actually ease on the problem of export promotion, so that we can also participate in trade effectively. I thank you. 

MR IGNATIUS BESISIRA (Buyaga County, Kibaale): Thank you very much Mr Speaker. I support the motion, and I would like to thank the Minister for the budget speech. This is the third budget speech in His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni’s second-term reign. 

Mr Speaker, when he was looking for votes, he came up with a manifesto, which I believe is what in my local language I would call, “an agreement between him and the people of this country and the people who voted him.” Some are saying “everybody”, because after he has won it is for everybody. I have said this is the third budget, and I believe that there are only two more and then there should be another President. 

I am also aware, Mr Speaker, that when the President appoints a Cabinet, they are supposed to implement this manifesto. So, three years down the road, – I am saying three because you are reading the third budget - when we look back at the Manifesto, is there proof that what was promised to the people will be completed in these two remaining years? Will people be told that these are the successes for these five years? Do we see that? 

I believe that when we are looking for votes, we tell the people what we are going to be able to do in five years. So, this is the question I want to ask the frontbench, three years down the road – (Interruption)

MR MULENGANI: Thank you very much for giving way.  Mr Speaker, I would like the honourable member to substantiate what he is implying about the manifesto and what is not implemented now. In which respect exactly are you talking about when you say that there are still pending issues in the manifesto? It would be right for you to highlight. For me in Bugiri, I would have to say that Muterere – Bugiri Road is not yet worked on – (Laughter).  So, kindly can you substantiate and help the house to really know what you imply. Thank you.

MR BESISIRA: I am actually very grateful to the informer because he is enriching my argument. He has got something that has not been accomplished!  I was actually getting there. Mr Speaker, there are so many things. Since we started this general debate, every member who stands up says “my road”; roads have been promised. 

My fear is that we shall come to a time when everybody will be saying “my road”, because I believe that there is no government that is in power that wants to leave power. I do not know, because it might not be Museveni tomorrow but it will still be a movement something. So, if we have got to continue, we must prepare for that time (Interruption).  

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the speaker for giving way on a serious matter. The clarification I am seeking is very fundamental. The Constitution of Uganda, Article 1, says that all power belongs to the people. In an atmosphere where even the Movement has accepted that the time is now to open up political space, is it proper for you to assume that even if President Museveni did not come back, whoever comes back must necessarily be a movementist? What about us? (Laughter)

MR BESISIRA: Thank you very much, my colleague. I think that means that now you have really got to prepare extra hard, since you know that the people in the Movement, who include myself, are determined to come back. So, you should know that we are determined to come back and you should be working extra hard to ensure that you are the ones who will take over. That is why I am very concerned, because I am sure that we are coming back after 2006. That is why I would like to ask my friends to ensure that the things we promised this country, in education, health, production, are really achieved. 

People have been complaining about so many things; they have talked about the roads that are not there. The people in Hoima were on the streets; they came here and they were thrown out. I was told I was getting a road from Kyenjojo through Kagadi, through Hoima and Masindi. It is not coming. Will it come in 2005? I was promised electricity, but it has not come. I was promised schools, the schools are not coming and the land fund is not coming. When is it coming? (Interruption)

DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank hon. Besisira for giving way. For the people of Kibaale, and more so Bugangaizi, the issue of the operationalisation of the land fund is not only a promise but also a condition, and do not take it jokingly. The issue of the implementation of the land fund in Kibaale is now becoming a condition and whoever is responsible should take serious note. I thank you.

MS WINNIE BYANYIMA: I wish to thank you, Mr Speaker, and to thank the honourable member for giving way. I want to inform my colleague from Kibaale that if he is truly disappointed with the false promises of the Movement, he is most welcome to the Reform Agenda. (Laughter) We shall implement that programme as soon as we take power in 2006.

MR BESISIRA: I am sure you can see what we are going to do when it comes to that time. Mr Speaker, the ministers have given us a lot of information, which has not worked out. 

All these promises have been made. On education, they have told us that they are going to put up a secondary school in each sub-county in this country. Many years down the road, I have not seen another one added in Buyaga. In Buyaga, there could be one. I have got eight sub-counties but only four have secondary schools. Now, am I going to get? I am waiting (Interruption).

THE MINISTER OF STATE, PRIMARY EDUCATION (Mrs Namirembe Bitamazire): Thank you very much my colleague for giving way. Mr Speaker, I would like to inform my colleague that Government is working very actively on that pledge. This financial year more than ten seed schools are going to be constructed in those sub-counties, which do not have public secondary schools. 

Our preliminary survey indicated that about 400 sub-counties did not have a government secondary school. We have already grant-aided and constructed more than 100 secondary schools in different sub-counties. This was not a project to be taken on in one or two years. It is going to be spread out in phases. So, the idea is that somehow, some day each sub-county will get a secondary school. Thank you very much.

MR BESISIRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the Minister. Even with those seed schools, which have been constructed, the Ministry of Education has failed to employ teachers to teach in those schools. I wanted to give you that information. There is one of those seed schools in my constituency, it is there in name but it has no teachers; nothing except the buildings. So, Mr Speaker, at that rate of 10 schools, I just wonder; if we are remaining with 300 sub-counties, that means we need another 30 years to achieve this, assuming that there will not be new sub-counties created along the way.

Mr Speaker, so many promises have been made, but my only appeal to the frontbench -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  Please, wind up.

MR BESISIRA: I am winding up, Mr Speaker. My only appeal to the frontbench is that as they prepare these budgets, they should put into serious consideration the manifesto of the appointing authority. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  

MR FRED OMACH (Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The theme of this year’s budget, to increase production or increase exports and eradication of absolute poverty, is in the right direction. But there are some contradictions in the key elements of achieving this. 

One, we have been told that the population of Uganda is now growing at 3.4 percent, from 2.5 percent. Kenya’s population was growing at 2.3 percent and Tanzania at 2.9 percent. Mr Speaker, is this sustainable? Will this not move more people to absolute poverty, which we are trying to eradicate? Isn’t there something that we can do to address this issue? As if that is not enough, Mr Speaker, this 3.4 percent growth rate is said to be provisional, and the confirmed position will be availed to this nation after one and half years. Can we afford to continue to plan on provisional figures?  

Two, I would like to discuss the issue of the GDP growth rate. Last financial year, the GDP grew at 4.9 percent, which was very good, and this financial year it is being projected at 5.6 percent.; excellent, if we can achieve and sustain it. 

Mr Speaker, it is also projected that if the war in the North, and in any other part of this country, were brought to its conclusion, there would be an additional one percent plus growth rate in the Gross Domestic Product (GDP). Can the Minister of Finance end this war so that we benefit from this additional one percent GDP growth rate and also stop any further injection of funds in looking after this war? Are these not contradictions, Mr Speaker?

The third issue, which is a contradiction, is the issue of growth being private sector led. The private sector will lead growth if there is heavy investment, and the private sector will have heavy investment if domestic borrowing is attractive.

Mr Speaker, in January 2003, commercial bank lending to Government outweighed lending to the private sector. The total lending to Government was Shs 889.5 billion vis-à-vis lending to the private sector of Shs 798.4 billion. Now, if the private sector is to lead, then more investment, more borrowing should be geared towards the private sector. Are these not contradictions? Can the Minister address this?

As if this is not enough, we privatised Uganda Commercial Bank and one of the reasons was that its privatisation would bring down interest rates.  Now, in a country where interest rates are high, domestic borrowing will be discouraged, and therefore, the private sector investment will be discouraged.  

When the new owners of Uganda Commercial Bank took over, indeed prime rates came down to 12 percent and that was very good. As I talk now, prime rates in commercial banks have gone up to 20 percent. Interest rates payable on Treasury Bills at that time came down to about six percent and now they are at 20 percent. Mr Speaker, these are very heavy contradictions that the Minister must address if the theme of this year’s budget is to stand.

Five years ago, the cost of funds on Treasury Bills and other areas that are used for helping to boost and sustain the economy were about Shs 30 billion. In the year that is ending, we have spent Shs 150 billion trying to sell Treasury Bills to try to make sure that the inflation is at a halt. This financial year I will not be surprised if we spend in excess of Shs 226 billion as cost of funds alone. These are very heavy contradictions that the Minister of Finance should address if the theme of this year is to really stand.

Mr Speaker, the cost of soft loans: most of the soft loans that we are taking are for 40 years plus, with a grace period of about 10 years. If we took soft loans in the year 1986/1987, when one dollar was at 60 shillings, and we are to pay back this year, instead of paying that dollar at 60 Ugandan shillings we would now have to pay it at 2,000 Uganda shillings.  

Mr Speaker, can’t the Minister do something to ensure that we improve on our domestic savings? Can’t he ensure that we have enough money for borrowing from the domestic industry rather than externally? Now the cost of borrowing externally is much higher; instead of paying Shs 60, we now have to pay Shs 2,000. Can the Minister address these contradictions vis-à-vis the theme of this year?

Mr Speaker, we are supposed to be having export led growth. Now export-led growth presupposes that we should do something about the Uganda Export Promotions Board. It is now three years since the talk that Uganda Export Promotions Board, the Uganda Investment Authority and the Uganda Tourist Board would be merged. The budget that is being given now is being given as if these three have already merged. 

But as you heard hon. Kefa Sempangi saying, we need support from our Export Promotions Board in order to be able to ensure that we are competitive in the exports sector. Can this be done so that we know what should be given to them as an entity? Otherwise these are contradictions, Minister of Finance. Can the Uganda Export Promotions Board be given a budget that they can sustain, to ensure that our exports are effectively promoted?

Mr Speaker, I want to comment on the issue of employment. This budget does address the issue of employment very effectively. But it does not tell us what the meaning of employment is in this country and what the employment policy is.

Finally, on the country sovereign rating, what is the problem? Why doesn’t Uganda have a sovereign country rating so that when we go out to borrow, we borrow with our heads high? I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MR NYOMBI THEMBO (Kassanda County South, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to join my colleagues in thanking the Minister of Finance for a well presented budget speech.  

First, I note with a lot of happiness that of recent Uganda is able to support the bulk of its budget from its internally generated resources. With this we have to thank Government, and of course the Ugandan taxpayer who is making this happen.  

Mr Speaker, I also join the Minister to thank the Uganda Revenue Authority for having been able to hit a 100 percent target. You know how difficult collecting tax in this country is. But I do not know why the Minister was a bit shy to talk about the Special Revenue Protection Services. I know they must have played a very important role in making this happen. On that point, I would like to ask the Minister when is he bringing the law to regularise the operations of the Special Revenue Protection Services. I have had the opportunity to work closely with these people and I know they play a very important role in revenue collection in this country.

Mr Speaker, I have about four areas where I will need some clarifications from the Minister. First, the issue of industrial zones or export processing zones. This is a wonderful initiative. All countries that partake export promotion strategies must have these export processing zones. 

Knowing some of the investors we get, we are not sure whether the Minister has put up an elaborate mechanism to ensure that the products from these zones would not flood the market, and in a way kill the local substituting industries. The Minister must assure us that mechanisms have been put in place to protect the local industries, which have actually taken very strong root in this country.

The second point, Mr Speaker, is the introduction of excise duty on locally produced inputs for beer - Citizen and Eagle, for some of you who know these brands. We had encouraged our farmers and assured them of a particular price, which was very attractive. The Minister has put up this tax one year after we have been encouraging these farmers to start involving themselves in this sorghum. We are not sure whether the whole of this burden of 20 per cent is not going to be passed over in terms of lower prices thereby discouraging them from growing this sorghum. We did not know what mechanism we would have in place to ensure that prices do not go down to the extent of discouraging farmers. 

Mr Speaker, I also do not know - I am a bit uncomfortable, why is the minister becoming friendly, year after year, to these cigarette smokers? I would be comfortable to see him targeting these murderous smokers killing us day after day other than taxing the sorghum growers.  So, we do not know whether the minister has the logic for that; let us share the logic of not taxing these murderous smokers and all the time increasing taxes to our farmers.  

The third point, Mr Speaker, is the issue of roadblocks. I do not know - before we ban roadblocks of local authorities, did anybody make a study to know what impact this will have on the revenue generating capacity of local governments?  If not, we have to be very considerate. As you know, Mr Speaker, our local governments are suffering, especially sub-counties, because of graduated tax which was tampered with by national politics. Local governments can hardly buy stationary. You know how it is difficult to collect taxes in this country. When you ban roadblocks –(Interruption)

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: I thank the member on the Floor for giving way. Mr Speaker, that issue has been raised by a number of people, and I want to clarify that before we decided to remove roadblocks, a study was carried out and it was discovered that there was interference in the flow of goods. Besides that, there was no value being added by those roadblocks. As far as we are concerned, from the 12th day of June 2003 when the budget was read, any roadblock imposed by any authority is illegal.

THE SPEAKER:  No, I think the question now is, did you enforce it? 

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA:  Well, Mr Speaker, we took it that with pronouncement, the roadblocks would be removed. And if they were not removed, people would be vigilant enough to remove them.  I am repeating it here that those roadblocks are illegal, and we are going to put in place a mechanism to ensure that we deal with the people who are imposing those roadblocks because they are illegal.

PROF. KABWEGYERE:  Mr Speaker, in addition to what my colleague has said, the circular has actually been sent to the district bringing it to the attention that those roadblocks are not acceptable; they are illegal and we hope that the districts would take note of that and stop using that method of collecting taxes.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, I am just wondering whether Government is aware that the revenues of local governments have dwindled quite considerably, especially after announcing the Shs 3,000 graduated tax for the poor. The word ‘poor’ not being defined everybody has come on board as being poor.  Therefore, I do not know whether Government is aware of the impact the removal of these roadblocks, which have helped in a certain way, will have on the revenues of local governments.  Thank you.

MR NYOMBI:  Thank you very much, for that clarification. I am happy to hear from the minister that they made a study and they found out that the impact would be negligible. But, I hope you have also noted that local governments are in a terrible situation as far as revenue generation is concerned.  

My last point concerns public transport in this country, the minister has made ownership of cars in this country very, very, expensive. At the same time the operating costs of vehicles in this country are also rising at a terrific speed. You know very well that investment in transport in this country is no longer lucrative. 

I think if we bother to make some investigations, you will find that people who have been investing in public transport, in taxis carrying 14 passengers (P.S.V), are now very reluctant to invest in that area. Are we taking public transport for granted? I think public transport in this country has been managed on the goodwill of the private investors who have been investing in Kamunyes and Pick Ups, but now it is becoming very, very, expensive. What plan does the Government have with regard to public transport in this country? 

We have heard of people who are saying that they are going to invest in buses, because we cannot own vehicles. It is becoming expensive; it is not lucrative to invest in transport. That means Government must be having a plan in place, maybe at one time, to invest heavily in public transport. Because, as you know, a vibrating economy must have vibrant public transport, and any Government which wants a vibrant economy must ensure that investment in public transport is not taken for granted.  Thank you very much.

MR HARRY KASIGWA (Jinja Municipality West, Jinja):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The success of any budget squarely depends on the vision that it represents.  Yes, yesterday the Minister of Finance said that the Vision 2020 that appears in the Budget Speech was a typing error.  

However, Mr Speaker, the President while concluding his State of Nation Address, did say that he would not agree to belong to any political grouping that does not have the shared vision. In 1999, I participated in the formulation of the Vision 2025, and the President said, “For the first time in the history of Uganda the citizens have participated in determining what their economic future would be.”  

This budget that we are about to pass is grossly not premised on the Vision 2025.  So, I believe the minister should come out clearly and tell us what is the vision of Uganda.

Mr Speaker, in the Budget speech, the minister did mention that he was confident that the interventions Government has embarked on are going to boost the exports of this country. The area that tickled me was textile. It seems we have inter-changing words, the textile industry and the Government industry. I am raising this in specific reference to Apparels Tri Star, and I want the minister to clarify to me. Since when did governments begin to support ancillary industries?  What backward linkage does a Government industry have in this economy as opposed to the textile industry, which is basic infrastructure?  

Mr Speaker, I want to inform this House that the government industry is basically briefcase business. For as long as there is no business in Uganda, this person is going to wind up his sewing machines and take them away. But the textile industry is there to create a backward and forward linkage for the economy and hence development. Automatically we will have so many Government industries springing around where textile industries exist.  

The second clarification I want from the minister is what criteria was used to choose Apparels Tri Star for intervention, and not Eladam Enterprise Limited, which has been in this market for the last 17 years. Has Government ever considered why Apparels Tri Star were relocated from Botswana to Uganda? What is the role of External Security Services in this country? Why don’t we bother finding out the kind of business that we are dealing in, for heaven’s sake, Mr Speaker?  

Mr Speaker, another clarification that I want from the Minister is that when we come to the end of the transitional period of AGOA, which is October 2004, do we expect Apparels Tri Star to still be in Uganda? Considering that the source of these raw materials, which is China, offers between 9 to 12 per cent cash subsidies on export of fabric; I envisage a situation, come next year, we will not have Apparels Tri Star in Uganda. So, my worry here is, what is the criterion that we are using to create interventions?

Furthermore, in the Budget Speech there is somewhere I read that minerals are going to contribute close to US$60 million this financial year, and in the State of Nation Address, the President told us that Uganda is going to build a gold refinery at Entebbe. But I would want to inform this House, Mr Speaker - because this came out of a discussion between the President and a businessman - I want to give some three scenarios where businessmen go; businessmen go where they are going to invest and make profit. They also go where they can collude with well-positioned people to make money; they also go where they can tower everybody to the extent of taking them for a ride. On this note, Mr Speaker, it is my humble prayer that Uganda does not go into a Kenyan style gold scandal. 

Finally, Mr Speaker, the President is an ardent proponent of the rural urban migration. I represent an urban constituency.  However, I am wondering why a municipality like Jinja, which is supposed to receive migrants from rural areas to relieve pressure on agricultural land, is receiving a 54 per cent budget cut. If you look at the budget, how much has been budgeted for the infrastructure in urban areas, Mr Speaker? Thank you very much.

MR OTHMAN ALONGA  (Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the minister for the good speech. It is a good speech, which shares the same theme with the last year’s Budget speech. But I think that last year’s speech was more elaborate and more analytical than this one; that one was more focused.  So, I thank him for that, anyway.

I also wish to appreciate the growth in our exports, more so the non-traditional crops. But when I was talking with one businessman, he told me that you cannot develop this country by exporting flowers; that, although the coffee prices are going down, we need to produce more. I am not an economist, but this is what he said. This is a prominent businessman in Kampala. 

He said, “Yes, the coffee prices are going down, but we need to double our production so that we can develop this country”. I think that is why we need to concentrate on traditional cash crops like cotton. It is unfortunate that we did not mention cotton in this Budget speech. Last year it was mentioned that about 150,000 metric tones of cotton was expected, but this year we do not know how much was expected, or how much was produced. We just want to concentrate on non-traditional ones on the expense of this traditional one.  We were told that there is now market –(Interruption)  

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  I thank you for giving way.  I rise to give information, because this has been repeated by a number of honourable members of Parliament. That cotton and livestock were not mentioned in the Budget Speech, when actually all these are included under the strategic intervention. Cotton is one of the farm enterprises.

MR ALONGA: Thank you for that information. Mr Speaker, I also want to thank the President for identifying new crops for export. This time around we are told okra is also one of them, but we need to concretise these markets before we can tell people that now there is market for okra. But I thank the Minister of Agriculture for warning us, yesterday, that we should not mobilise people to grow certain crops before there is a market for them.  

I also wish to appreciate reduction in reliance on donor support for our budget, which is good, but unless that is supported with very stringent financial discipline, we may not sustain it. We may not even lower it further. 

On water and sanitation, we are happy that National Water and Sewerage Corporation has done a very good job in urban areas. But I think we need to focus more on the rural poor where the impact will be felt. Yes, I am aware that there is increment in the budget for rural water, but some of our districts were allocated only four boreholes a year for almost 250 people. That is not really enough. We need to do more so that we can impact on the rural population who need such services.

On peace and security, Mr Speaker, I wish to appreciate Government’s efforts to bring peace in Northern Uganda, which has really resulted in the suffering of the people directly or indirectly.  But I think part of the money that is apportioned for peace in Northern Uganda should go for socio-economic welfare of the people who are directly affected in the Acholi sub-region, and those who are indirectly affected like people of West Nile and other parts of Uganda. 

I thought some money should also be apportioned to compensate some bus owners who lost buses on that road as promised by the President sometime back.  But that one will come in the policy statements.

Now, I want to single out the peace agreement that was signed by Government and UNLF II rebels in Yumbe. That agreement had financial implications of about Shs4.2 billion; the donors collected about Shs1.2 billion. But when I was perusing through the Ministry of Internal Affairs policy statement, I did not see anything under Amnesty Commission to cater for it.  

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way.  Mr Speaker, it may not be that the entire Shs4.2 billion will be provided for. But I wish to inform this House that there is a provision for handling the financial implications of that settlement in this budget. It is there and disbursements will soon start. 

MR ALONGA: I thank you very much for that information, and I am happy. That is why I was going to say, perhaps that is imbedded in the classified expenditure of the Ministry of Defence.  

Mr Speaker, Police in the new districts have no vehicles, and in such areas where there is insurgency and insecurity, we really need to strengthen the Police. I hope the little amount of the money that was allotted for vehicles should be increased instead of training more 500 policemen. I would suggest that, that money be used for purchasing more vehicles and equipment for Police to take care of our peace.

On education, I am happy with the Government’s deliberate programme of hard-to-reach areas, which was supported in the last financial year. But, I think it should not only be hard-to-reach, but also hard-to-live. The problem here is, I do not know what criteria we are using to identify some of these hard–to-reach areas. I think some few areas like Karamoja should give more so that they benefit more on this programme.  

Finally, on health, last year some money was allocated for upgrading health III centres, and one of the health centres was in my area, that is Midigo Health Centre.  I understand it was supposed to be under ADB, but up to now that has not been undertaken. I am not sure whether this year it will be undertaken since it is also in the budget. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR STEVEN BAMWANGA (Ndorwa County West, Kabale):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to contribute on the Budget speech. I would like to hail the Government for a good job done on the minimum recovery programme, which led to the good micro-economic civilization, by way of controlling inflation, preparing and building new factories and rehabilitation and expansion of education infrastructure.  

Many members on the Floor have been criticising Government programmes, but most Ugandans recall that when the NRM Government took over power in 1986, the country was in ruins and it was politically ungovernable. The economy was equally in shambles; the society was dehumanised by the past dictatorships. Now anyone who pretends not to know Uganda’s economic decay, dictatorship and bad governance prior to 1986, either is suffering from incredible short memory, or he is pathetically dishonest with himself and an incredible partisan to be a credible leader. 

When you look at the minimum achievements that were put in by the NRM Government in 1986 - you look at the state of the economy, it has doubled from 3.662 from 1986 to 2002, and today our economy is going at 4.9 percent of GDP, although it is less than the projected 5.6 as of 2003/04, and of course, less than targeted 7 percent growth.  

When you compare Uganda with Kenya and Tanzania, which has been relatively stable since independence, Kenya has a growth rate, this financial year, of one percent, and Tanzania has a growth rate of 5.2 per cent. These are relatively stable countries. When you look at Uganda’s per capita income in 2003 of US $340, it contrasts very well with Kenya at US $350 and Tanzania US $300. And when you look at the previous per capita income for Uganda, in 1986 it was only US$154. At least this is an improvement from the low per capita income we had registered.  

Looking at the total GDP for Uganda, which is US $6.2 million, you cannot really blame Uganda for that low GDP when you look at Tanzania with US $9.1 million, Kenya US $11 million, Zimbabwe US $7.2 million, and Zambia US $6.2 million. Considering our past political history, and given the parameters Uganda has been operating, these micro-economic indicators are no - and it is also important to let members who maybe criticising the Government for poor performance to realise that these good micro-economic indicators have been translated gainfully in the real lives of people through poverty reducing activities like Primary Health Care, UPE, safe water and other social services. 

It is also good to know that poverty levels fell from 56 percent in 1986 to 35 percent in 2002. Poverty is not about moneylessness. If people are investing money in industries, in buildings, you will have less money to spend on luxurious drinks and dressing. So, it is very important that you look at what is happening at household level. 

More Ugandans have got radios, mattresses, bicycles in their houses; it not a question of looking at the liquidity in your pockets. In fact, in developed countries, many people do not move with money; they decided to move with credit cards. So, we need to beg the Government to pull more money from debt relief into poverty reduction programmes.

While I hail Government for the good job done on micro-economic programmes, there are things that we must ask Government to look at. Recent developments have shown a continued slow down in economic growth from the rate of 6.5 percent, which was registered for over ten years from 1987 to 1997. Now you look at today’s growth rate of 4.9 percent, which is lower than the targeted rate of 7 percent, and even less than 5.6 percent targeted for this year and we only blame it on external trade talks. 

I think there is much more that we need to do. Government should take a lead in introducing value-addition industries like the gold refineries, and also the export processing zones they are talking about. Individual investors cannot go into such big ventures without Government support.

Another issue of great concern is the rising inflation. Today the inflation rate is at 5.9 percent; compare it with 5 percent of 2001/2002. This is very important, because inflation tends to send away investors. Once you control inflation, investors will also be attracted.  

The other problem is the depreciation of the Uganda shilling. I was touched when you realised that. And this is very important because it has been raised on the Floor. I want the Minister of Finance to listen to this; I am touched by the interest rates that are going up in the commercial banking sector. 

I was one of those people who supported the privatisation of UCB on the understanding that this would reduce interest rates in this country. When Stanbic took over UCB, the base-lending rate was nine percent. Today, one year later, the base-lending rate has gone to 19 percent with Stanbic. 

The Bank of Uganda is mechanically controlling interest rates by actually looking at Treasury Bills. That is why most banks prefer to go and buy Treasury Bills instead of giving out money to borrowers, because they are more secure. 

I will give a background. On 1 November 2002, the ninety-one days Treasury Bills (TB) were going at eight percent. On 15th of January 2003, they were going at 13 percent. On 9th of March 2003, they were going at 13 percent. Today the Bank of Uganda is posting Treasury Bills at 20 percent. If the banks want to borrow money from the Bank of Uganda, they will pay 20 percent. Now, how do you expect a bank to borrow from Bank of Uganda at 20 percent and they do not lend it out at 24 percent?  

I think what the Bank of Uganda is doing is mechanically trying to give us false macro-stabilisation; it is creating instability in the lending of money to the banks. 

Mr Speaker, unfortunately, I did not contribute last time when we were debating His Excellency’s State of Nation Address. I hoped to be given more time to give a small contribution on AGOA, but I will respect your ruling. I want to make a small clarification.  Mr Speaker, (Interruption)

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Thank you, hon. Bamwanga, for giving way. The issue of raising interest rates is so important and so many members have touched on it. I want to assure the House that Government is equally concerned with the raising interest rates.  

I want to inform members that because of this concern, we have asked Bank of Uganda to put in place measures, in a very short time, to ensure that interest rates are brought down. As I talk now, that issue is pending before Cabinet. Cabinet is taking a decision because we are aware that if the situation remains as it is, it is not good for this country. 

I totally agree with the submissions of hon. Omach and hon. Bamwanga that the rates are high, but I want to inform members that we are not blind about it. Something is being done about it and in the near future, the situation will be rectified.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, hon. Bamwanga had made a very important point to which the Minister has responded. I wanted to find out whether hon. Bamwanga is satisfied that the measures being taken by Government are the correct measures. In view of the liberalisation policy, is he satisfied that the Government is now going to control the interest rates? This is important for the Minister to clarify.  

Further, is the Government not going against the constitutional provision with regard to the independence of the Bank of Uganda, to direct Bank of Uganda to look at the urgency of this matter of interest rates? Hon. Bamwanga, is the Minister really serious about this matter? Would he clarify?  

MR BAMWANGA: Mr Speaker, I was actually about to say that I am not happy with the Minister’s explanation. First of all, he will have to tell us if he wrote a letter to the Governor Bank of Uganda and lay it down on the Table.  

Secondly, Mr Speaker, this money they invest on Treasury Bills, which is mechanically controlled by the Bank of Uganda, does not create new investments in agricultural and industrial production. I have always called it false profitability and false economic sterilization.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, this continued reliance on external support for our budget deficit is very alarming. This year, it is 48 percent of our total budget, an improvement from last year’s 42 percent. Kenya has only 42 percent while Tanzania 45 per cent. 

Today, Uganda’s foreign debt stock stands at 3.99 billion dollars, compared to 1986 when the Government took over; it was only 740 million dollars.  

Mr Speaker, foreign investors fear a high debt overhang. It scares away investors, who view it as an indication of future increased taxation, and they fear for their investments or future international obligations. I think we must make sure that while we borrow, we have got to be very disciplined and be able to put the money to the best use, and for what it was intended.  

Otherwise, Mr Speaker, Government should be disciplined in its expenditure. It tends to spend too much on recurrent expenditure other than development expenditure. This year especially, recurrent expenditure was about Shs 1.78 billion compared to Shs1.3 billion for development expenditure. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

DR FRANK NABWISO (Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was very grateful to the President in March this year when he declared that the Movement is multi-ideological. So, I will give another view of the situation in Uganda, because I happen to be a liberal Movementist. One of the things we must accept is that Uganda is a neo-colonial state and we have several characteristics or indicators of neo-colonial states. One of them is that there is a low spirit of nationalism in such countries, because people tend to regard the neo-colonialist masters as more important than ordinary citizens.

The second one is that their budgets are dictated by donor countries. It is also true that investors are worshipped in a neo-colonial state; the Government becomes a government of investors, for investors and by investors.  

Also, in neo-colonial states you will have an inevitably high level of corruption because of the relationship between the multinational corporations and their compradors or agents. 

I want us to seriously examine where Uganda is today. This is one of the issues we have never discussed in the Movement caucuses and even as political leaders of this country. How do we rescue this country and lessen our dependence on donor funds?

Hon. Bamwanga has drawn us to page 21 of the Budget Speech. Here you see that the burden of debts is increasing, but there is not a single word said as to how we are going to work systematically to reduce these debts. The question is, for how long?  

In a neo-colonial state, for example, when Governor Bush the Inspector General of these colonial governments, visits Uganda, we shall praise him. But if he is visiting a country which is concerned, which is proud of its own, which has some national pride, the people will feel sorry about such a visit.  

The budgets of neo-colonial states do not necessarily address the problems of the peasants.  That is why we are having these economic hardships being imposed on our people. That is why this budget has a very funny theme: “Increased production for increased exports and the eradication of absolute poverty”. 

But how much money are we putting in the agricultural sector? There is the problem of unemployment and the type of education that we are giving to our country, which exacerbates unemployment. These issues are not being addressed.  When shall we, as Ugandan leaders, sit down and re-examine this problem of neo-colonialism instead of wanting to go and be greeted by some of these people coming here? 

Mr Speaker, many speakers here have not proposed any remedies. I think we have complained, we have mourned but mourning will not solve our problems  What are the remedies? 

I want to make some suggestions. The first one is that we must salvage agriculture, because that is where most of our people are employed. We must give it enough money to be able to increase production, increase employment and help eradicate poverty. If more of our people are employed in agricultural sector, it will help. 

The second one, Mr Speaker; I used to hear that some people went to Dar-es-salaam University in order to learn a little more about Nyerere’s approach to development. I am not pointing a finger at you, Mr Speaker. But we were told that President Nyerere was the most poorly paid President in Africa. He shunned all kinds of honour,  regalia and retinue of  different people and tried to bring into Tanzania a culture of national pride. 

I want to propose that this government begins with the reduction of salaries from the top leaders right down, even to Parliament. I would like to propose that we even re-examine some of the remunerations. (Interjections) But I only represent Kagoma County!  I want the whole of Uganda, all the leaders, not to place too many economic burdens on our people. We should be good examples, Mr Speaker.

MR WILFRED KAJEKE (Youth Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. 

The Minister, while praising the UPE programme in his speech, focused on the numbers of pupils who have joined schools. Whether it was deliberate or not, the Minister forgot to address the plight of the teachers, who are in fact the major partners in the development of UPE. I would have expected the welfare of the teachers, especially primary teachers, to be catered for by increasing their salaries.  

Mr Speaker, Grade III teachers are paid about Shs 100,000 per month. But it is very funny that these people pay Shs 100,000 in graduated tax per year - the highest amount paid by the highest public servant. Therefore, it means they work for nothing in a full month as they pay Shs 100,000.

Mr Speaker, still on taxation, I would like to be clarified whether Members of Parliament are exempted from paying graduated tax. If they are not, what is happening? Because I am very sure many of us here have – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Do you mean Members of Parliament are not paying graduated tax? Honourable member, I do not contribute, but let me tell you that I pay graduated tax to Kampala City Council and to my constituency. I pay twice.

MR KAJEKE: Thank you for that clarification. Mr Speaker, the majority of Members of Parliament do not pay graduated tax, that is why I wanted that clarification because I thought we are exempted – (Interruption)

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr Speaker, I want to inform the honourable member that at least I have a graduated tax ticket for Luwero District Local Government for July 2002/June 2003, and yet they deduct graduated tax from where I get my salary.

PROF. LATIGO OGENGA: I would like to inform my young colleague that upon joining Parliament, he became eligible to pay graduated tax although he represents the youth, many of whom do not pay graduated tax.

MR KAJEKE: Thank you for all the information, but the fact remains that many members do not pay graduated tax. (Laughter) 

THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER, GENERAL DUTIES (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The honourable member holding the Floor is making a very serious allegation against leaders of this country. Is he in order to make such a serious allegation without substantiating? He should produce those members he is alleging have not or do not pay graduated tax? Is he in order? In spite of being a Youth Member of Parliament, is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: I think he is not in order because, in the first place, paying graduated tax is a statutory requirement. Therefore, to impute that the honourable members here are breaking the law, without substantiating, is definitely out of order.

MR KAJEKE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that ruling and that clarification. Mr Speaker – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Maybe you can substantiate. If you substantiate, then you will be in order.

MR KAJEKE: Mr Speaker, I thought Members of Parliament do not pay graduated tax because I have not paid. Nobody has ever asked me for graduated tax. (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to withdraw, because you cannot substantiate?

MR KAJEKE: Even the Member of Parliament for Bugiri is saying he has not paid, so I think there are some members who have not paid. Mr Speaker – (Interruption)

MR MUSUMBA ISANGA: Mr Speaker, I do appreciate that the hon. Member for Youth, Eastern, hon. Kajeke, may not be fully conversant with the Rules of Procedure of this House. It takes some time, Sir, to gain experience in this House. However, it is also important that in the process of gaining experience in this House, one must be taught. 

You have made a ruling, and you have said he is out of order to make such an outrageous allegation that Members of Parliament do not pay graduated tax.  The proper thing would be for the honourable member to withdraw that statement and then he can proceed.  If he does not do so, Sir, I may proceed under the rules to beg that this House stops hearing him. It may be an extreme situation, but this is part of the learning experience.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, it seems from your explanation you did not have that information and you made a statement, which was wrong. As I have said, not paying graduated tax is contrary to the law and we are the lawmakers. But you did not know; now that you know, it is better for you to mend what went wrong.

MR KAJEKE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the interest of us who have not paid graduated tax, I withdraw the statement. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: No, it is not in the interest of those that have not paid graduated tax, but in the interest of those who have compiled with the law, you have to withdraw.

MR KAJEKE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the same field of education, I would have expected the Minister to emphasise the issue of providing loans to students joining higher institutions of learning. I would propose that there should be a loan scheme to give money to those students joining higher institutions of learning, so that they could pay back that money after graduating through deductions from their monthly allowances. 

This, in a way, would also re-activate Government to provide employment opportunities to the graduates. If they want the money they extended in loans to these students to be paid back, they will do this.  

I also want to comment about retirement age in Uganda. Mr Speaker, in a way of creating employment for the unemployed youth, I would propose that there would be a reduction in retirement age because life expectancy of a Ugandan is around 47 years. If one is of life expectancy age, we presume that person has died, and if that person has not died, then he should relinquish the public service job to the youth so that they can also get employed. Or else we could give these persons an allowance of 5 years, but not to the tune of 55 or 60 years.  

In matters of security and defence, I would like to call upon all Ugandans to rally behind Government to defeat all the elements that cause insecurity in this country. Mr Speaker, by the mere fact that most insecurity in Uganda is caused by unanswered political questions and other imbalances, it would be in the interest of all rightful thinking Ugandans to address these imbalances once for all, so that this country can once again become the Pearl of Africa, which has been endowed with so many resources.  

The question of insecurity is only brought about by unanswered political questions, and to answer these political questions, we should come to a round table as Ugandans and talk peace because it is this rigidity, which has brought these problems We have the Movement System of Government very high handed on one hand and the Multiparty very high handed on the other hand. Mr Speaker, not until we come to a middle level, these problems will not be solved.

As a student of law, you will agree with me that when the common law principles failed to address the grievances of the litigants, there developed the Court of Chancellery which later developed the Court of Equity with its equitable remedies to address the grievances of the litigants, which the rigid common law principles did not address. So, in the same vein, I would like  - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But that would be the situation with statutory laws and constitutional provisions.  

MR KAJEKE: Mr Speaker, when hon. Salaamu Musumba, was talking about wastage of Government resources, I got touched, and I felt she left out some of the ways in which Government resources are being wasted. If you can maintain a cabinet of 66 ministers, about 24 Presidential Advisors, about 300 Members of Parliament, about two members representing a sub-county, with due respect to all the members, I think we are not going - I am saying there are two members representing a sub-county. A division is equivalent to a sub-county. There is Lubaga South and Lubaga North; there is Makindye East and Makindye West – (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: No, I think for the purpose of information, divisions in Kampala are taken as a county. That is the arrangement. It may be wrong, but you can see Nakawa was not sub-divided although it is a county, but Lubaga was divided because of the population. That is the law, which we have been using.  

MR KAJEKE: But, Mr Speaker, there is also Samia Bugwe North and South; such divisions should be merged so that we come up with a small number of Members of Parliament – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You have a valid argument, actually, I think – (Laughter)

MR KAJEKE: Finally, according to the World Bank records, in 1981 there was a deficit  - (Interjections)- Mr Speaker, in the interest of time, I will not take the clarification – (Laughter) - the records show that in 1981 there was a deficit of US $ 169.8 million, which was transformed into a surplus of US $ 65.7 by the year 1984, two years before the Movement Government.  Today, the deficit has reached US $ 317.37 million and the minister says we should jealously guard - I do not know why we should jealously guard against this trend of deficit.   

In the meantime, Uganda Commercial Bank, Uganda Airlines, Uganda Consolidated Properties, Uganda Railways, Uganda cement industries, Nyanza textile industries, Uganda Electricity Board and other parastatals have either collapsed or been sold at a give away price, and there is nothing to show for it. The question, Mr Speaker, is what shall we tell our children and grandchildren what we did with the current US $4 billion in loans?  

It is unfortunate that some of us will be put to task to answer these questions when those in charge now will be nowhere to be seen. But, Mr Speaker, the fact remains that these answers will be needed, and we shall be tempted to ask the graves of those who managed these loans. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (Kawempe North, Kampala):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable Minister of Finance for his Budget speech. Mr Speaker, a lot has been said, and I am going to be very brief and specific.  

As regards the health sector, many colleagues have talked about it, but my major concern is going to be how the Ministry of Health should restock our referral hospitals with blood. In many hospitals, blood is a scarce commodity, and you will agree with me that when you need blood you do not have any substitute, you must get blood. We have our blood bank, but I think new strategies should be put in place to ensure that our blood bank is always full.  

Last weekend, Mr Speaker, I was at Mulago hospital in acute ward. I happen to meet a lady who came all the way from Kawolo, but when she reached Kawolo hospital the child seriously needed blood. Kawolo hospital had no blood, so the lady had to run all the way from Kawolo to Mulago hospital, and as I was still talking to her, the child past away. So, Mr Speaker, I wonder whether – I do not know how the Ministry of Health can mobilise Members of Parliament in various constituencies because blood is there, but there is no way a Member of Parliament- (Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH, PRIMARY HEALTH CARE (Dr Alex Kamugisha): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the honourable member for giving way.  The issue of blood transfusion, obviously blood is a life saving commodity and I do take note of your concerns. But, of course, as someone was whispering from the there - unlike food, which comes from the national budget, blood comes from volunteers, from me, from you, from relatives and all Members of Parliament.  

But on a happier note, I want to assure the honourable member that a lot of efforts have been made to collect as much blood - We have the blood bank in Nakasero, and we have got a very good national blood distribution system in all our hospitals, and now in the health centre IV. 

The other week, I was in Nakasongola Health Centre IV, they even had some stock of blood, which I advised them to transport back so that it can be given to other units. So, really the system is in place, the collection is done very well and so is the distribution. But, of course, you must also note that not all the blood that is collected is given to patients; you must take off a fraction of at least about - small fraction because it has been reducing over the time. It used to be over 10 per cent wastage, but now the wastage is probably about 1 or 2 per cent, which is lost because it is not fit for transfusion into a patient. Some of the blood is infested with HIV virus, and that one you have to throw away.  

But, I think on a happier note, I want to assure you that if there is an isolated incident, maybe, I must regard that as isolated. Despite all these problems, we are still proud of our blood transfusion system. But that does not stop Members of Parliament and other members of the public to come in large numbers to donate blood, and that call is always there and you are free to come and donate. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA: The blood transfusion organisation was here last year, and members donated blood. I did not donate because mine is already contaminated with age.

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you honourable ministers for that clarification. I agree that the policy is there, but my request and my humble appeal is to intensify. Because as I have said, there is no substitute for blood and we know that we are not importing it, it is within. So, the Ministry of Health should intensify so that every corner of this country gets some blood as donations from those people concerned. 

In my field of education - I am a teacher by profession, and up to now I am still in that field very busy teaching. Mr Speaker, hon. Kajeke has talked about how primary teachers pay graduated tax. This is a very important point. Many teachers approached me in my constituency complaining about the heavy-duty graduated tax they are paying.  

Sincerely speaking, the highest of us is paying Shs100,000. It does not really ring a bell that a teacher who is getting Shs 140,000 per month could also pay 100,000. If there is any way you could do it, if it means abolishing graduated tax for primary teachers in order to put more life in our UPE programme, let it be, Mr Speaker.  

Mr Speaker, concerning Poverty Eradication Action programmes, I believe that these programmes could be of greater value if they are well managed. I believe we should have long action terms in the Poverty Eradication Action Programme. But, as we talk now, our concentration is on the long term because when we talk about rehabilitating roads, constructing schools etcetera, all these are under Poverty Eradication Action Programme. 

But how will our voters at the grass root feel that indeed Government is all out to put in place short and long term programmes so that we could really get rid of poverty from our homesteads? I think, Mr Speaker, the ministry concerned should go back to the drawing table and re-examine whether PEAP has been utilized well, or whether the short term programmes for PEAP are really geared towards enhancing development.

Lastly, on taxation, in the Budget speech the minister informed us that indeed Uganda Revenue Authority has done a lot in mobilising local revenue, agreed. But what we should know is that some of the new measures, which are going to be introduced, starting with this financial year, may really act as a setback to our revenue collection.

I am going to give one example. Many Ugandans are not in position to possess big capital, and that is why when they go to Dubai they are not in position to fill a container of goods. At times they team up in a group of three to five, and then bring a 40 to 20 fleet. And others who are just beginning go to Dubai to buy kamunye and stock some imports in there, but that has been abolished and it is going to affect our revenue collection. I think it was done in Kenya. Our governments should sit together and ensure that when even those with little capital go to Dubai, instead of bringing an empty kamunye, they should load it with electrical appliances. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MRS MILIGAN LOCHIAM (Woman Representative, Moroto): Mr Speaker, as a representative from one of the poorest districts of Uganda, I start by commenting on the theme, which reads: “Increased production for increased exports and eradication of absolute poverty”.

In Moroto district we are still working on what to survive on because we have not been assisted by the Government to produce the surplus for exports. The issue of eradication of absolute poverty is a mystery, because the level of poverty is so high that we are still thinking of reduction. It may take time to reach the absolute stage. 

On modernisation of agriculture and the strategic exports programme, there are issues, which the Ministry of Agriculture has not looked into like pastoralism is partly a way of survival in Moroto district. But as long as the ministry or Government still treats it as primitive without seeing it as a problem, which needs to be tackled and get a policy, we shall remain swimming in the problem.  

So, I expect the ministry under the policy on pastoralism to look into issues, for example, beef, improvement of livestock, which I have not seen in this Budget speech. The issues of beef, for example, could be looked into seriously so that it could be for home consumption as well as exportation and eradication of absolute poverty. Then on – (Interruption) 

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Thank you for having given way.   Mr Speaker, I wish to inform the honourable member that Government recognises pastoralism as an economic activity, and that is why we are recognising communal activities. Even in land tenure, it was also recognised, communally you can even register land. 

And regarding the improvement of pasture, we have a programme for the dry lands. We do not call it pastoralism as such, we call it arid areas where we are improving pastures because this is the main problem. When you talk about water for production in the livestock sector, actually it is the cattle corridor mainly where Moroto district also falls.   Improving the breed, beef also falls under this pastoral economy. I think the problem of Moroto is insecurity because they do not get as much attention from the technical officers.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank hon. Lochiam for giving way. There is the issue of also eradicating poverty of knowledge. That is why Government has introduced mobile schools in societies of your nature, those pastoral societies. So, when you educate people, it is a great facilitator in embracing modernity.  

I had a friend called Job Lohorr. We were together at Kings College Buddo, but he was a vector of modernity whenever he went to his area, and the more people you educate the more dimensions you are going to get. Even in looking after cattle, it would be easier to modernise methods of looking after cattle. As you know, I am a farmer and a very exemplary one in eastern and southern Africa. Education assisted me to look after cattle in a modern manner. That is why we emphasise education, water for production and so forth. So, handling the pastoral person requires a multi-faceted approach, which Government has adopted. I thank you.

MRS LOCHIAM MILIGAN: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for giving that information, but still there is a lot of generalisation in putting those programmes. We need specific programmes; that is why the issues in Karamoja are well intended, but they are not moving in the way we expect. The poverty level is still as it was in the beginning, so we feel it should be reduced. Even if we talk of the existing programmes, as long as we are too general, and we do not specify them - For example pastoralism, we should a spade a spade instead of being over general so that all the people, including the rural Karimojong, are focused on the issue instead of just being too general, and the issues are swallowed up in the generality of the write-ups.  

On the issue of education, I am happy to inform the House that I am one of the people who initiated ABEC programme. I was working in Redd Barna, Norway. One of the issues that came out from the sub-county, we brought it to the head office here in Kampala where the Country Representative for Save the Children, Norway, is. After sharing with us who were working at district level, they saw it as one of the good activities. 

I believe that if the ministry could really go down to the communities and begin a bottom-up approach and listen to the pastoralists, that is when we shall move or improve the district of Moroto and Karamoja as a whole. But as long as there is a tendency of a top-bottom approach, we may not move an inch. 

I know the Government is trying its best, but I urge them to put a lot of emphasis on these programmes. Specific issues should also be looked into, instead of only handling issues from a general perspective. 

There is the issue of crop growing in areas of Karamoja like Namalu, Iriri, Labwong, Kabwong. Not all the Karimojong are pastoralists; there are those who are also serious on agriculture. So, if those ones could also be given specific attention so that in those particular areas have timely growing. Modern methods of farming could be instilled in the farmers and then we would maximize the production in Karamoja region, instead of waiting for disasters like famine to occur then we try to attend to them, which is a difficult task for the Government and all the people of the country.

I also want to comment on health. Some areas in the district have health units, but these health units lack medicines or the facilities. Most areas still lack health units, so there is a big problem in these areas. I urge the Government to at least do something in the area of medicine in the few units that are there, and also to construct in the areas where there is nothing. 

Finally, I urge the ministry staff and all other partners who are interested in helping Karamoja, or Moroto District specifically, to stop fearing that there is a lot of insecurity in Karamoja, because currently there is a spell of peace. 

I also thank the Government for bringing Col. Ogutti to look into the issue of insecurity in Karamoja. If the partners who are interested in helping the people of Karamoja or the people of Moroto District could take these intervals to put up complete strategies on peace and development activities, which will wipe out insecurity and cattle rustling, then we shall have a long lasting solution for the problems of Karamoja. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR ANTHONY MUKASA (Buikwe County South, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will restrict myself to three issues. The first one is rural electrification, the second one is national infrastructure and the third will be the magic crop that can alleviate poverty at household level.

Concerning rural electrification, when you read paragraph 60, the Minister mentioned a number of schemes that have been completed. He also went on to mention a number of schemes that are going to be embarked on. However, he forgot to mention some schemes that are already underway but they are at a standstill. 

In my constituency there is a power line, which was started in 2000, and it runs from Buikwe to Kiyindi. The poles have been laid all the way to Kiyindi landing site, but power lines have been installed up to a trading centre known as Bulele.  

After receiving the Budget Speech, I went to the Minister of Energy to find out why this power line from Buikwe to Kiyindi landing site, which is one of the landing sites that are going to be built on international standards, does not feature anywhere.  I was told by the commissioner in charge of rural electrification that there is a problem between Government and the authority in charge of electricity.  I was told Government owes some money to UEDCL and at the same time UEDCL owes Government money, and there were negotiations going between Government and UEDCL. They were telling me they are working on a swapping arrangement. So, I am calling on Government to expedite this swapping arrangement so that my people in Kiyindi get electricity. 

National Infrastructure, - (Interruption)-

MR MWESIGWA  RUKUTANA: Thank you honourable member for giving way, thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true the Government is working on a swap with UEDCL to ensure that all the projects that are ongoing are completed. The two sides have reached an agreement, and I can guarantee you that all the schemes that are partially completed will now be completed.

MR MUKASA:  Thank you, hon. Minister, for that information. Now I want to address myself to national infrastructure, which is under paragraph 27. The Minister told us that the national road sector programme had been updated, and then he went on to mention a number of roads that are going to be worked on up to the year 2010. When I looked through that list, the road from Kyetume to Kisoga, to Nkonkojeru, to Ngogwe, to Buikwe, to Njeru, which the President has twice promised to bituminise, does not feature anywhere.  

These roads, which are mentioned in the budget speech, are the same roads which feature in the Presidential Manifesto, which was written before the President went out to look for votes. But when he went out to look for votes and the going become hard, he was obliged to commit himself to the demands of the people. 

My people in Buikwe County South want to hear from Government when bituminisation works of this road will begin. This road is not serving Buikwe South only; it serves Mukono South, Buikwe South and Buikwe North. Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MS WINNIE BYANYIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank you honourable member for giving way. I wanted to give the honourable member information that actually, I sympathise with him, first of all for his frustration at the unfulfilled promises from the election times. However, the President, in his wisdom, has appointed someone in his office who is in charge of implementation of the manifesto. That man is called Mr Ngoma Ngime, and I advise him to contact him in his office to see that his road is expeditiously worked upon. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR MUKASA: Thank you, honourable member, for that piece of information. But since the Prime Minister who is the Leader of Government Business is here and he gets time to meet the President, it is the President who made this pledge and promised twice in 1996 and 2001; as I think of exploring that avenue, I am urging him to assist my people in Buikwe South so that this pledge is fulfilled.

MR WERIKHE: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank your colleague for giving way.  I would like to inform my colleague that all the presidential pledges regarding roads or other projects have been identified and listed. The process has begun and we are looking around for funds to implement those pledges. Some have actually already been implemented, and rest we are assured are going to be handled including your case. That is the information I wanted to give you.

MR MUKASA:  Thank you for that information. I will keep knocking at your door so that the commitment is fulfilled. Mr Speaker and honourable members, I want to address myself on the last issue. On this magic crop, which can alleviate poverty in the short term, nearly all members who have contributed to this Budget speech have talked of poverty in their constituencies and poverty in nearly all households in Uganda, but in my constituency Buikwe County south, there is a magic crop. This magic crop is vanilla.  

Vanilla takes 18 months to grow, if properly looked after it can yield between three to 45 kilogrammes a single plant. We have just concluded harvesting vanilla. Those people who harvested first sold a kilogramme at Shs 30,000. You pick and sell right at your doorsteps; you do not need drying as we do with coffee. Now those who have harvested, as I speak now, a kilogramme of vanilla goes at Shs120,000.  Vanilla can grow in almost all soils in Uganda wherever there is any tree shade. And it is a crop that can be inter-cropped with other crops, where there are bananas vanilla does well; where there is coffee, vanilla does well; where there is tree cover, vanilla does well.  

So, I am calling upon the Minister of Agriculture together with the Minister of Finance to get funds and intervene directly as you have intervened with coffee and tea. Get vanilla vines -(Applause)- give them to farmers on loan. I am not requesting that you give farmers free vanilla. Give them vanilla vines on loan, within 18 months you will be assured of the repayments. If we can give investors a tax holiday of 10 years, why can’t we sacrifice little and give our farmers vanilla vines; we sacrifice little and give them a tax holiday of 18 months.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members.  Now I think we are coming to the end of this debate. On the backbench we still have hon. Ruth Tuma, hon. Margaret Zziwa, hon. Tom Kayongo, hon. Ndawula Kaweesi, hon. Lydia Balemezi, hon. Nsubuga Nsambu, and hon. Kagimu. There were two members who had been listed for today, hon. Jessica Eriyo and hon. Pajobo, but they did not turn up. 

We shall also have ministers to make brief responses in respect of the queries raised by members about their ministries. And finally the Prime Minister will make his contribution, and then the Minister of Finance will definitely wind up by giving us a comprehensive response to matters that have been raised since we started this debate. Since we started a bit early, I think this is convenient time to end our contribution of today. The House is adjourned to Tuesday 2.00 p.m. and I wish you a good welcome of the President of United States of America whom you were informed is coming here tomorrow.  

(The House rose at 5.28 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 17 July 2003 at 2.00 p.m.)









