Tuesday, 12 July 1994

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament Building, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Chairman, Mr Ekemu, in the Chair.)

The Council was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, it is with deepest sadness and regret that I have to inform you that our Colleague hon. Tom Apila, a nominated Member of the Council died yesterday, Monday, the 11th July, 1994 at Lacor Hospital in Gulu.  Arrangements for his burial will be brought to your attention as soon as they have been finalised.  The Council and the country at large will miss his very valuable contribution to this country both in this House and outside it.  Let us now stand up and observe a moment of silence in his memory.

THE PAPERS WERE LAID ON THE TABLE

MOTION

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Mr Kafumbe Mukasa): Mr Chairman, the Minister for Finance and Economic Planning moved the Motion that the National Resistance Council do resolve itself into a Committee of Supply for the consideration and approval of:

1.  The Revised Revenue and Expenditure Estimates for the Fiscal Year 1993/94 and the Budgetary proposals for the Fiscal Year 1994/95 Estimates of the Revenue and Expenditure.  Since the Minister gave a Budget Speech, I do not need to go into details of his Speech, which is available to every Member.  I beg to move and leave the Seconder to continue, Sir.  Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR WORKS, TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS (Mr John Nasasira):  Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  I stand to second the Motion which was moved by the Minister for Finance and Economic Planning on the 16th of June 1994.  On seconding the Motion, I want to take this opportunity to congratulate the Ministry and indeed the Minister for Finance and Economic Planning for this Financial Year’s Budget Speech and the Budget as a whole which has been found less controversial than last year’s.  I say controversial because of how the business community and the manufacturing sector reacted on last Financial Year’s Budget Speech and this I base on Press reports and other sources.  

Last year, the Uganda Manufacturers Association had very few nice words for the budget speech but this year, I have not heard any complaints from the manufacturers association.  Secondly, I want to talk about how the budget was reported in the Press.  On the 16th of June, a few hours before the budget was read, the New Vision had the following heading and I quote: Budget fever grips Kampala. I have not heard any report about this fever from New Vision and I am assuming that the fever was cured by the 17th of June.  On the 17th of June, the Monitor had this report and I quote: ‘Nkangi started humorously saying many people understandably would not like Budget Day but we need to put a finger on the pulse to see how to move forward.  He said his budget proposals were aimed at maintaining stability and promoting development and his figures were not harsh.  The spirit of Nkangi’s 1994 Budget must be praised; for once concessions were made to the concerns of the manufacturers.’  And finally, the Topic had the following heading on the 17th; I quote: ‘NRM makes peace with the taxpayers.’  

So, it is on that basis that I think the budget was received well by the country.  Before I move to make a few comments on the 1994/95 Budget. I want to look at the performance of the 1993/94 Budget. The 1993/94 Budget was kicking off the medium term structural adjustment programme which covers the period 1993/94 to 1995/96 and I would want to base its performance on what were the targets for the micro-economic targets that were envisaged in that medium term structural adjustment programme.  The programme was aiming at a GDP growth of 5 per cent and what was achieved was 4 per cent. It was aiming at developing the economies export base and the Economy export base grew at 37 per cent.  It was aiming at overall balance of payments and, for the first time, we had a surplus of 31.2 million dollars.  There was also growth on manufacturing of 15 per cent.  

So, on the whole, I think the achievements or the targets, the micro-economic targets as aimed for in this structural adjustment programme were achieved.  However, the target for achieving inflation, a reduction of rate of inflation at 7 one and half per cent was not achieved and I will comment on it later.  Because as the Minister said, the rate of inflation was at 16 per cent.  But there are reasons for that and again I refer to them later in my remarks.  

So, based on what was planned and seeing what was achieved, I would again like to congratulate the Minister for Finance and Economic Development and also thank them for regularly providing us with information on industrial production and key economic indicators.  

The main reason given for inflation or failing to achieve the rate of inflation of 7 per cent was the drought. What is also worrying is the very low growth of the agricultural sector. Uganda is said to be an agricultural country.  If we have drought and certainly the rate of inflation shoots up 16 per cent below two figures and our very low rate of agricultural growth at 1.7 per cent, what do we do as leaders in this country to make sure that we change this? I think it is the duty of us all from RC.1 to this Parliament and then to the government to change this trend of low rate of growth of agriculture.  Otherwise we cannot expect the economic development we envisage in this country.  

Let me now turn to the 1994/95 Budget. As I said earlier, the Minister’s Budget Speech was received well. In summary, the Budget was aiming at a number of sectors or policies.  One was stable and low inflation.  But again my question is that suppose the drought continues, how do we make sure that we have a stable and low inflation? It was aiming at full liberalisation of interest rates.  It is my hope that as the interest rates are liberalised, our banking sector will not take advantage of this liberalisation and will through competition be able also to lower their interest rates so that our people are able to get loans mainly for agricultural development. 

The development of agriculture has been difficult because of high interest rates but it is my hope that now that the interest rates are liberalized, the banking industry will not be selfish in determining their interest rates and I hope there will be enough competition within the banks; that now banks will be calling us to get loans than taking us around on cash flows, security and what, whole year trying to get a loan.  

The Budget was also intended to improve the production of cotton. Cotton as you well know, is to be one of our major export earners.  In fact, I find cotton in my own opinion even more useful than coffee.  I always ask myself a question, suppose the outside world decided to change from their habits of drinking coffee, where would we put the coffee? But even if cotton was rejected, we cannot convert it to our industries for textile and oil production.  If is therefore, important that this budget has addressed the improvement of production of cotton and with a new policy, I am hoping that the leaders of unions actually will not frustrate the efforts of the cotton farmers in respect to crop financing since now that sector is liberalised.  

The budget also aims at reduction in reliance on external financing. There have been a lot of complaints about development projects in different areas of the country but we have to realise that as long as we are depending on external financing, then we have got to fulfill the conditions of the financiers; however desperately you would want a project in your area.  Whatever amount of expressions you make a or whatever pressure you raise - I was carefully avoiding using the word noise, but I want Members to know that whatever noise you make, you will not get these projects if the conditions for financing are not correct or acceptable.  

However politically justified, the project is seen in your area and in this respect, I am referring mainly to the improvement of roads which has been a big issue in this country.  Most roads are funded from external financing and unless we fulfill the conditions of the donors, we shall not get these roads tarmacked.  So, how do we reduce the dependence on external financing?  Again it is production, our own internal production but if the agricultural - the rate of agricultural production is going to go at the rate of 1.7 per cent, then we shall continue waiting for a very long time however, politically justified projects are.  

The Budget also refers on the development of capital market.  And more it refers on the restructuring of UCB. I have only one message to give to the Uganda Commercial Bank.  It was very painful for those areas where the branches of Uganda Commercial Bank were phased out.  It was extremely painful.  But the argument for UCB phasing out these branches - and I happen to be a victim also.  The branch in Kazo was phased out in my own Constituency - was that the money that was being banked by those branches would not justify.  In other words, the deposits in those branches could not justify the existence of the staff of UCB there.  Therefore, phased the branches out, turned them in agencies and serve the people weekly.  It is understood from the economic sense, from the business sense -(Interruption)

JAMES MWANDHA: Point of information. Mr Chairman, I wish to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that the deposits which were collected in many of these rural branches of UCB were used to lend to people in urban areas and people in the rural areas were not getting any loans.  Therefore, they saw no cause to continue depositing in the rural branches when in fact they were not going to get any loans.  Therefore, people preferred  -(Interruptions)- customers preferred to go to the nearest urban branches and deposit there rather than deposit in the rural branches. That is why the rural branches were not getting enough deposit and I think it was not fair to close these rural branches Mr Chairman.

MR ADAM: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, the point I am trying to put across is that loans are given according to the demands of the customers, according to what you want to do with that loan.  If the rural people come up with projects, which are properly written and are viable economically. I do not see the reason why the banks will refuse to give them loans.  They are giving to urban people because they have written documents.  That is why they have been given loans. So, if the urban people can be advised to utilise these loans properly, I think they deserve it. Thank you very much.

MR OPIO: Point of information.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  This may not be directly information to the Deputy Minister but to clarify the situation, which has been raised by hon. Mwandha to the effect that the closure of some of the branches is due to the fact that would-be depositors have refused to deposit because they have not been given the loans or facility to borrow money. I would like to state that I think it is the problem of setting of the target by the UCB with regard to how much should be deposited in some of these branches which has led to problems; because if you go to a rural area and you set a target of 200 million shillings or 100 million shillings, you find that this is not realistic and at he end we are closing banks because we set unrealistic target and I would like to say that people are crying that they should review the targets and avail some facilities to the people in the rural areas.

MR KALULE SENGO: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I am also disturbed by those targets which were set by the UCB because if a target is not realised then you choose to close the branch, now when will it be ever realised?  Will those targets be realised when you close the branches?  Or you should be patient, set the target and then allow people to get more educated into the idea of banking so that eventually, you get your targets.  

The information or the request I want to make is that UCB should re-consider some of the decisions they took because there are certain counties like Gomba County where there is a lot of money amongst the population.  The problem is that the population is not very well acquainted with banking.  They needed a bit of time to be sensitised on banking.  Even the two that they had started constructing were never completed and this question of closing the branches has actually overtaken the whole idea of putting up these branches.  

Now what will happen when all the branches have been closed?  Does it mean that in a county like Gomba, a bank will never be seen or a UCB branch will never be there until Christ returns Mr Chairman?  This is the question I am trying to raise.  Thank you very much.

MR NASASIRA: Mr Chairman, there have been many information but I just wanted to comment on one information from hon. Mwandha; about people coming to deposit their money in urban branches and leaving the rural areas.  first of all, in these small branches in the rural areas, if you applied for a loan, you will still have to apply through your branch before even the loan is approve at the headquarters.  

Secondly, I think it is still our role to direct or guide our people that you are in danger of losing your branch if you keep your account in town. I hope hon. Mwandha will not be taken by surprise again and I want hon. Mwandha to join me in this mobilisation exercise of our people to challenge UCB; you closed the branch because we did not have 100 million. Now, we have it, we want the branch back. (Interruption)

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the Deputy Minister of Works and Communications that hon. James Mwandha is a Director of Bank of Baroda.  So, I hope he has freedom to use this Bank to open a branch in his home area. (Laughter)

MR NASASIRA: I thank you very much for that information hon. Deputy Minister of Finance -(Interruption)

PROF. KAGONYERA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I wish to inform the hon. Member on the Floor, who is a Member of Government that when we were debating, I forget which Bill, the name - the particular name, but I am going to explain.  In connection with setting up of banks, many of us violently opposed the minimum amount of money that was necessary to set up a bank and the reason why we opposed this, we foresaw what is happening today, because if tomorrow, banks could be allowed to be set up, they would serve the rural areas.  We made sure they could not be set up and exactly what is happening is the result of Government policy.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I remember this hot Debate and hon. Kagonyera’s great concern about small banking.  In that law, it still provision and we said we would bring here a law to amend the corporative Banking Act; so that where smaller people can get together, they can put up a Savings and Credit societies, because they will be dealing with people who are known; not members of the general public whose money you can take, tomorrow you disappear.  So, I think in the next stage of trying to tap savings at low levels, the Corporative Act is being proposed to be amended to provide for this small kind of credit and saving societies.

MR NASASIRA: So, as I was saying, since UCB uses economic reason for phasing out these banks, I would want to appeal to my own Colleagues hon. Members, that let us go and challenge UCB by mobilising deposits.  We can mobilise these deposits in several ways.  First in the income earned by the farmers within our areas.  

Secondly, in my own opinion is that, payments should pass through these branches of teachers for example, we should aim at having a campaign that all the salaries of our teachers go through our branches and eventually we shall in the long run get the deposits. (Interruption)

MR BAKABULINDI:  Point of clarification.  I would like to seek some clarification from the hon. Deputy Minister.  I am the hope that before those branches were being established, the banks must have done some research, to find out that in such an area, the branch is needed and if so, then it should be the responsibility of that bank to know what conditions have made those people fail to raise whatever the amount they had raised and instead, they would have concentrated on improving on those conditions.

THE CHAIRMAN: Please, allow hon. Minister to finish up, because he is seconding the Motion. Go ahead, please.  Order, order, please.

MR NASASIRA: I would like to inform the Member that a bank also is a business speculator.  You open a business making mere assumptions on your cattle and over heads and if you find that business does not work, then you close it and start another business; whatever market research you do, there is a degree of speculation where you are doing a market research.  But I am still saying that, banking or banks in rural areas are necessary for the economic development of those rural areas.  

Now that UCB has become business-like, and I think hon. Members we have all approved the politics, the economic policies of this Government.  How do we deal with UCB in order to make sure that it brings its branches there?  Most branches that were closed, agencies were left there and the challenge is that, this agency will be once a week - if you are depositing twice a week and eventually when you have deposited to reach what we want of 200 million or 100 million, I do not remember, then you will get your branch back.  So, why do we not take on the challenge?  

My only comment and my only worry on the UCB performance on agencies, is if they have chosen a day in a week, they should be at that agency early in the morning up to the closure of time.  The complaints coming on from the field is that these UCB officials or banking officers are not coming on time or sometimes not at all on the scheduled days and I will request our UCB friends to efficiently run the agencies and on time.  That is my only query at the moment.  

The Budget refers to a number of other issues that it is targeting which include: maintaining low tax rates, encourage compliance and investment, simplifying tax legislation, and improve tax administration and the continuation of the rehabilitation and expansion and maintenance of the economic infrastructure. Having said that Mr Chairman, I now want to touch on two issues: one is the drought.

One of the reasons why our inflation rate remained at 16 per cent higher than expected, was because of the drought.  We do not control rain, but what do we do?  If one looks at the rainfall records for the last 20 years there is a steady fall reduction in annual rainfall, except I think around 1987 or 88, and I think 1991.  The rainfall in Uganda has been going to remain depending on agriculture and the rainfall is getting less and less, and also very unpredictable.  Farmers prepare their fields and the rainfall as expected in August comes in October; it rains for one week, they plant and suddenly it stops.  

So, the question that I am putting hon. Members, is that what do we do?  One way is irrigation, but the other one is dams. Rainfall does not only affect crops; it is also affecting the production of animals, mainly livestock.  What is happening is that, it rains, water flows and when it dries up, the cattle farmers follow the water where it has gone.  i think it is high time we started storing this water; following the water where it has gone, is like somebody with a corrugated iron-roof house, who waits for rain and after it has rained, he picks a jerrycan and goes to the river to fetch water.  Let us tap this water.

MR KARUHANGA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the Minister is talking about a matter, which concerns me very much.  At the moment, half of my population is on the move looking for water and has invaded other areas which are also equally dry; like the Minister’s Constituency has already been invaded by my people, others have gone to Mubende, others have gone to Lwemiyaga, where there is no similar assistance.  Now, I think really, this is the time that I should bring this to the attention of the Members of this House and to the Government.  We need dams in those areas which have got a problem from Bukanga, where hon. Rwakatonda comes from, Isingiro, Nyabushozi, Kazo, Gomba, Mawogola, Sembabule, Lwemiyaga, and of course Karamoja. 

These areas have escaped the attention of NRM, because we are talking about agriculture, agriculture, but in Uganda there are two groups of people who live here.  They are agriculturalists and they are cattle keepers; now we are talking about agriculture problem, because there has been a drought.  

So, talk about organising how to get rain; this is the only you remember, but of course you could also in agriculture, use irrigation.  I have never heard a Government Minister standing up here and saying there is a programme in Uganda for irrigation.   In Egypt, which gets water from here, is the leading country in Africa in irrigation; as a result, they feed themselves and they are even now exporting food.  Why can we not do the same?  And they are consuming our water. What is the programme we have for irrigation?  This is a very important about water; this is serious.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

DR TIBERONDWA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Minister on the Floor and also to use the opportunity to inform the hon. Member who has just informed him that, in Nyabushozi and Kazo, even if there is water, the people who live there are very nomadic; they can never settle in one place. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please, order, hon. Members.

MR NASASIRA:  Mr Chairman, hon. Tiberondwa is still continuing to live in the past, because people are no longer nomadic; because they have nowhere to go.  They have their land, it is not free land, people only move if there is no water, to look for water; pasture is not a serious problem if there is water - but of course hon. Tiberondwa is still thinking of the 60s and the 50s; because even before people in Igara were nomadic until land run out and they run out of cows and they started having two acres or 10 acres of land.  You cannot go nomadic when you are just going around - running around with two cows; you just tie them with ropes and -(interruption)

MR NASASIRA:  This problem of drought - I am, therefore, happy to note that in the Minister’s speech, on page 3, the Minister says, and I quote:  ‘In view of the problems of the drought in this past year, we need to consider options for reducing instability in food production.  Government will investigate possibilities of promoting cost effective irrigation; including the development of valley dams, irrigation schemes.’ 

The other problem we have received from drought, Mr Chairman, is famine.  At the moment, there are areas in 17 districts, which are receiving food.  But, I am personally disturbed by having famine in 17 districts and food in the remaining 21.  What are my views about people dying of hunger?  First of all, it is a very big shame, to stand and we say that people are dying of hunger. What has disturbed me is that some leaders have tried to use this to blame the Government along.  Famine is a disaster. (Interruption)

MR CHEBROT:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I think some Members from some districts are justified to blame Government.  I do agree that Cabinet did approve some money to buy enough food for 17 districts, but the way the officials of the Ministry of Rehabilitation distributes this food leaves a lot to be desired.  

As of now, last week, Kapchorwa received only 150 bags of maize while some districts like; Apac received almost 2000; now what is the rationale for distributing this food? This is a very serious matter.  I have met the Minister on more than five occasions; so Members are justified to complain that the food is not properly distributed to those districts, which are supposed to get, and we are very concerned about this problem.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order.

MR NASASIRA: Mr Chairman, I am sorry about that distribution, but -(Interruption)

MRS KIRYAMPAWO:  Point of information.  I am sure the number of bags which are going to the districts it depends on the population suffering of famine the other information I want to give the Deputy Minister for Works, is that we should not be surprised of people dying of famine, because all of us, especially the executive, we are sure that we do not have food policy; whereby if we had it, they would know that this year, there is food in this area and there is shortage of food in another area; so that they plan accordingly to take food to those areas where there is less food and secondly, or thirdly, it is the poverty.  You may find that in those very areas where there was famine, there was food, but because our people know that the food which is in the granary is his food, so the food in the shops, you need to have money in the pocket to buy that food, the moment you do not have money, definitely your family is under famine.  So it is distribution of wealth.  Thank you.

MR KARUSOKE: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, a number of hon. Members raised complaints here on the Floor of this House about the manner in which relief food has been distributed in those famine stricken areas and today, on the Floor of the same House, a Member of Government has confirmed this complaint.  Is it therefore, in order that the Minister responsible for distributing relief food maintains silence as this serious -is it not in order that he comes and explains to this House as to how food has been distributed?  

THE CHAIRMAN: I cannot rule when the hon. Minister is not there; but we shall do our best to get the Minister here.

MR NEKYON: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform you and the House that although the Minister for Local Government claims that Apac is getting too much as compared to what Sebei is getting, the major part of Maruzi and Kwania was struck by famine.  As these counties lie on Lake Kyoga and everybody knows - the lake and the region as whole have been badly hit by famine and I was one of the first Member of Parliament to write a letter to the ministry responsible for rehabilitation about the famine; much earlier before this noise about famine started.  

So, to confirm the information the Lady has given that the distribution depends on the number of people who are suffering from famine.  A survey is first carried out to find out how many people have been affected before distribution in turn.  I want to know, Sir, if Sebei is only a county, and which was a county of Bugisu and the population has remained that of a county as compared to a county in Apac and no more. (Laughter)

MR ELYAU:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, may I inform the Deputy Minister holding the Floor and to the Members that it is really shocking if the Minister can stand here and say that it is a shame that people are dying of famine.  In the last two weeks, three people died in Kaberamaido, where you come from for famine.  People took for them some milk and a man died in the process of being fed with milk.  

Secondly, the Minister of Agriculture is blaming the Minister of Relief. You can see how the disorganised the government members are concerned! So, it means there is something wrong in the government so that they let people die intentionally and say that it is a shame of people starving.  Can the Minister tell when he was in Soroti last? Or this is terrible!

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, please, finish your point so that Members can reply properly.

MR NASASIRA:  I think if hon. Elyau had waited for me to finish. Of course, I was saying it is a shame; because it is sad.  I was saying shame here that some people are dying in this district while other people have food.  I was coming to the distribution and going back to policy.  Food Security Policy in my own opinion starts from the home.  It starts from the hon. Storage must start from the granary - the family granary because if you remember in the old days, there were by-laws; which are still there that you must have a granary of millet, of sorghum, of dry cassava - any granary at home.  Or I can call it granary in the garden.  Grow perennial corps.  Have cassava, have potatoes and so on.

But hon. Members, I want to appeal to you that it seems as we democratised and gave powers to the people, we did not utilise that power ourselves to make sure that our people have stored enough food for a dry day.  The first challenge goes back to us.  I was saying that famine is a disaster but it is totally different from say - earthquake disaster.  You watch it coming.  So, it gives you a warning.  Now, that warning should be received and acted on by us all.  If you start having no food in your village, what do you do?  You should organise your traders, organise your leaders, do your market survey and find where the food is and get it and I think we should first of all in my own opinion - the disaster has happened -(Interjection) Organise your people and find food. Why I am saying this is, suppose there is no RC III in your Gombolola and something happens, will people sit down to wait for the chairman RC III?  

Secondly, I have seen countries where famine has come and governments have started handing over food.  I am not saying there should be no emergency for food relief - I see some people misunderstanding me.  They should be there, but I am seeing a danger in future.  The moment people start getting used to relief handouts, we will have to be careful as leaders.  They start thinking about preparing for these disasters.  Much as the disaster has happened, let us use this disaster as a warning - organise, mobilise for people to produce and also do not encourage the independence syndrome in our people. 

What worries me most is when I look at the 17 districts.  Most of the districts are in the North and the North East.  I have been asking myself - is part of the famine caused by the insurgency more than the drought? Drought to me plus insurgency is equal to famine; because people do not have time to grow enough food.  They do not have time to get food from other areas.  The traders, some of them fear to go in these areas -(Interruption)

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is the hon. Deputy Minister holding the floor of the House, in order to mislead the House so as to deflect the attention of the House on the point of ignorance of the government; particularly, if you look at this Page 48 - For example, wrong provisions were made for the following to produce - plant crop protection and farm schemes - if you read this page here - produced by Sectoral Economist by us ourselves.  So -(Interruption) (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.  Order, hon. Members.

MR OBWANGOR:  Mr Chairman, is it, therefore, in order to repeat misleading the House when the House is – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: The hon. Minister is making general comments in response to the Motion.  He is quite in order.  Those are his opinions.  Please, can you wind up hon. Minister so that the Debate can move?

MR OKURUT: Point of order. To clap here as if he is in CA. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.  The hon. Member was carried over by his traditional instincts and he has apologised to the House.  Go ahead.

MR NASASIRA:  Mr Chairman, I think it is important that we analyze the causes of famine.  If we do not analyze the causes of famine, we might not be able to solve the famine problem in future.  What hon. Obwangor talked about is another cause.  As expected, some hon. members might have expected that I would have spent more time talking about the policy of our ministry, and this was deliberately left out because I was second in the Budget Speech and an appropriate time will come but I want to say one thing and thank the Ministry of Finance that for the first time the Ministry has provided adequate financing for road maintenance.  (Applause) 


Now that we have got adequate finance, I want to assure you that the Ministry of Works, Transport and Communications is going to start serious maintenance of our national road net work; which roads are under our ministry.  We will definitely have no time for doing work on other roads that are under our Ministry, and I beg Members not request assistance from our ministry since all our equipment will be busy throughout the Financial Year. (Interruption)

MR RWABITA: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I beg clarification from Deputy Minister of finance; about externally funded projects.  Hon. Nasasira talked about it but briefly.  My question is - what system do we use to attract attention of the donors to such projects?  The donors - either roads, electricity, water, name it.  I thought our ministries have got the capacity of making analogical analysis of the project and sell it for funding but how come that after doing that, then these foreign donors come and put their own demand and strings attached?  

Because, in case of a road - for example, take Fort Portal Road.  Who cannot see the economic importance of that road?  It does not need to be economic really but you people think that you must first develop the area before you put the road.  How?  You should do the reverse.  The road should encourage development, not vice-versa.  (Applause) 

It is like saying that, I will not give you electricity until you have started industries.  How? It is difficult but if you bring electricity to an area that has got the capacity to develop, definitely industries will start coming up.  So, I think there is a weakness in the government.  I do not know whether you put enough pressure to these donors so that we well our own projects rather than accepting what they want -(Interruption)

MR NASASIRA: Mr Chairman, just to clarify that point.  (Interjection) Of course, politically all projects are required and if we had the money we would carry out all the projects yesterday - but the question is that if you are going to borrow money from me then I must make sure that you will be able to pay me that money.  What will be the point even if the banks were kind and naive and gave us all the money and we tarmacked all the roads and built all the factories and what we earn annually - and the Minister of Finance comes and he says our debt servicing is more than we can manage.  Do you borrow again to pay debts? So, we have to go step by step.  We must swallow what we have chewed. 

Finally, I want to talk slightly on the comment, which has gone on, about poverty, and I finish. (Interruption)

MR MARWAS: Point of order. Mr Chairman, I am asking, is it in order that priority of these roads change at every government and when another government is in power the priority on these roads has to change? 

THE CHAIRMAN: That is the matter of policy, hon. Member. Please go ahead.

MR NASASIRA: Mr Chairman, as far as I am concerned, the priority of roads in the NRM Government has not changed.  We started with rehabilitation, we have finished most of it; and we are heading for development.  Priority has not changed.

I just wanted to touch on poverty.  Because we keep talking about people are getting poor and poor.  I do not think our people have ever been rich.  What was there is that there was government subsidy.  I have also lived in this country for over 40 years and I have traveled most of it.  People have never been rich.  Most of our peasants in the villages have been poor but -(Interjection)- they had become poorer because they could not get medical services, because there was no communication, because they used to take days to come from their villages to the capital.  Now, that these things are getting better, the people will get richer.  You know, being poor does not mean only not having money; it is also not having services. 

Finally, I appeal to all my colleagues that the only way we can get richer is that we must mobilise for production.  We must mobilise for peace, unity and stability; all of us; and that you must mobilise for war against poverty and dependence on foreign donors Mr Chairman, with those few words, I beg to support.

MR KABUUBI: Thank you, Mr Chairman, for giving me this chance so as to talk about the Budget.  I would first thank the Minister of Finance for having given us a good budget, which at least has not aroused a lot of controversy: because even ourselves, we have not had problems from people asking us about this budget, what implications ever since it was read - so which means that the general public is happy.  This is not coming out of nothing.  This Budget has been like this because we made a lot of noise last year and we were very clear.  We told government that the budget of last year was really very cumbersome and government would not achieve its objectives.  In fact, what has been achieved was through seek and say.  

Otherwise, the government would not even have fared so well to that level.  But because the budget last year was ill conceived, people did not do their homework properly, they raised so much taxes and then the rates of taxes were so high.  They discouraged consumption and the result - that is why you find today the budget for 94/95 is trying now to pull the consumers so that they give more money. So, this is a change from the last year’s Budget; but that also came from out of our cries from here.  So, I thank the Minister at least to have responded favourably to our suggestions.  

I would like to touch on the problem of rural development because the hon. Minister who seconded this Motion was talking about UCB and I wanted to give him information but because there were so many, I said I would reserve it until you give me this opportune time.  I would like to inform the hon. Minister - much as he may not be aware of what is taking place, because UCB -(Interruption)

MR BUTAGIRA: Point of clarification.  Thank you for allowing me to make this remark.  We have started General Debate on the Budget but we do not have the books.  The estimates of recurrent and development and to make meaningful Debate, we have to have reference to these materials.  I am wondering, Mr Chairman, whether the Deputy minister of Finance who is seated there, has made an effort to bring these books or can he clarify to the House - otherwise, we are debating in vacuum.

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of information. Could the hon. Member holding the Floor of the House - that debating blindly the format and essence of the Budget - that is to say is to deny the hon. House not to have the information except what we are debating in the Motion: so as to show us the whole view of the economy by having each department before us.  Why should you bring us here just to be blind as if we do not know how read.  We should read.  We should have all the information so that we really make a debate for increased production and even ministers to have  -(Interruption)

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr Chairman, this matter has been raised by an old parliamentarian whom I respect very well hon. Francis Butagira.  But also incidentally another one whom I was lucky to see later on - hon. Obwangor.  When we approve the Vote on Account here, we go into printing 300 copies - one for each Member. You may have seen on that list that the number of votes because decentralisation has almost doubled.  So, the amount of work you need to go through the government printer to print at least 500 copies properly.  It is a very big job and our officers spent most of their time, day and night at the printery.  Now, that is why the provisions allow working six days to have a General Debate on the Budget - based in the Budget Speech. (Interjection) Yes, let me say so because it happened and it will continue to happen.  

That, Sir, gives government time to circulate the information that would go into detailed debate under the Sector Committee because at the Sectoral Committee, you consider that sector only and you get all the details relevant to that sector.  Here we are having a General Debate moving from UCB to famine, to what not - and this is what we call traditionally, General Debate on the Budget and then in the past, if I may also inform Members - where we have now Sectoral Committees, in the past when these books came out the Parliamentarians chose which 8 ministries they would have wished to debate in details but that on Floor of the whole House now it is in the Sectoral Committees.  

So, I want to assure hon. Butagira that the books are being carefully and correctly printed on a 24 hour basis and on Friday, hon. Members will get the book and be ready to read these thick volumes which will give you time to go with them on the weekend; work on them early next week and go to Sectoral Committee when you are armed with all the information.

MR KABUUBI:  Mr Chairman, I thank you for all those information and clarifications.  I was talking about rural development and this time I wanted to highlight on the UCB’s position.  Uganda Commercial Bank is expected to make profit.  Now, it is a government policy that all these parastatals must make profit. If they cannot make profit, they should be round up or be sold.  So, UCB is also answering the call of government by being profit-oriented and that is why it is not economical to run a branch that is not profit-oriented.  

Therefore, since it was a government policy - I was wondering as to how a Minister, a Deputy Minister who seconded this Motion, does not even know why these branches were closed.  They were closed surely because UCB was incurring losses.  If government is so much interested to please the people, it has to subsidise the overhead costs for UCB; then UCB will be able to give the services to the rural people.  This is a simple thing.  This is a government policy of liberalisation and which we are following.

MR NASASIRA:  I wanted to inform hon. Kabuubi that I exactly know what I talked know what I talked about and he is in fact repeating exactly what I said.  Maybe, he did not hear what I said.

MR KABUUBI: Mr Chairman, I wanted to inform our Colleagues and the country - people should not waste time wasting our policy of government, we are liberalising.  So, if an organisation is not making profit, it has to be crossed.

So, this is a policy any government person who is a minister should highlight; should tell the people so that the people are not dodged about; that which policy we are following and that is why you find that these structural adjustment policies have got a lot of effect on the people.  That is why it affects the people.  The rural people are suffering. Those who used to get banking services in the rural areas are affected because here is the World Bank, and IMF is saying if you want my money you must follow ABC.  

So, these are things, which we have faced - the reality.  There is no reason why UCB should be blamed, there is no reason why personnel should be blamed for failure to deliver but they have done their job; and I am very, pleased to say as a Member of Public Parastatal Accounts Committee.  I am pleased to inform this House that Uganda Commercial Bank, I think it has done a very, very good job for us.  (Interruption)

MR OPIO: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform the speaker on the Floor that if he is going to close every parastatal, every organization that is making losses, then he has a big job to do because UCB as a whole is now making losses.  So it means you should close it.  In any case, I would like to say that in business you look for ways of improving by not closing.  Thank you very much.

MR KABUUBI:  Mr Chairman, I thank that information.  But I have a lot of reservation about it because here is a situation which Government is following - we are following a liberalization whereby every organization even the President himself, our President has no several occasions emphasized this to us and we know, therefore, there is no reason why should people in the rural area should go on their MPs that such and such has been closed.  It is the Policy of Government.  So, this is why you find that this problem is also coming up with famine.  

The rural area people are very poor but now who should come to their aid?  It is Government. If Government cannot have the infrastructure, put in place, how do you expect those people to come out of that poverty, there are no roads, rural feeder roads are bad, badly off people cannot move their produce, are you going to blame an MP is he the one who is going to grade one road, maybe 10 miles road, it is impossible! 

Now, how do you say that an MP has failed to deliver? Because Government is supposed to start this exercise of developing the rural area of subsidizing some of these rural people so that they can also make more money.  Then when they make money they can bank that money then they create business activity, then they can pay more taxes, but if government has not got money to help the rural people and as far as I am concerned, the Government the policy of this government is only to work around urban areas. Because, Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

MR ELYAU: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, if I have informed the hon. Member holding the Floor that last three years  -(Interjection)- thank you, that is very important when we are welcoming our Chairman. Now, in the last three years I stated in this House about assisting the farmer at different levels or bank for that matter.  UCB is a Commercial Bank, it has operations within the commercial whims but this country has given deaf ear to our demand about a bank, which would help farmers, and which would be given a special consideration on farmers; not all farmers.  

In the last three years, a Minister of the Budget, by the name of Dr Kiyonga gave us a promise that there was going to be a farmers’ bank. What has happened?  I am asking the Government, what has happened so that up to now we have no bank, this is a deliberate act to allow the farmer to remain floating.  Until there is a bank for farmers I do not see an argument at all here if we succeed. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: You have put your point of information, please.

MR KABUUBI:  So, really what I was trying to say, Mr Chairman, was that the plan of this government put all their effort to develop the infrastructure of urban areas, forgetting the rural areas; and let 90 per cent of our population live in rural areas. So, you can see how bankrupt their economic planning is. (Laughter) Because, when we go to ask for loans from the World Bank they tell us that if you want to put that road say Apac to Masindi it is not viable we want about 200 vehicles every hour to pass on this road, and then that loan will be shifted to another areas say - Masaka - Mbarara Road instead of going to say Kafu - Pakwach so that the planning system itself is only geared, -(Interjection)- so this is the problem, Mr Chairman.  Now, unless we are going to change -(Interruption)

MR KASAIJJA:  Mr Chairman, I wish to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that whereas we maybe right to blame the Ministry of Planning for the bad planning I think we as a House we should not exonerate ourselves, because the Minister of Planning comes here with his own policies, and then for us we have given him the go ahead.  For example liberalization everybody knows here that even the developed countries there is nowhere they have gone wholesale on liberalization.  For example in Europe they are busy protecting their farmers but for us here we come here because we want to attract investors then we accept and after accepting when we blame planning.  So, I think we should not exonerate ourselves; we should come up openly and say this thing will help our nation and we refuse it.  That is all.

MR KABUUBI: Mr Chairman, so unless as I was saying, Mr Chairman, that our Government can change the way of looking at the economic situation by at least trying to change and push more resources to the rural areas, then we can increase the domestic product of our people.  But by leaving it only to rural areas.  So, there will be people coming from rural areas, coming filling all these places like Kampala and putting up all their buildings here and then the rural area is not developed.  This is a danger and I do not think it is of any use for any leader of Government to blame the NRC that they have not mobilized because this, I have found it on several leaders here, especially people from the Front Bench.  They try to put the blame to the NRC people because we are the people on the grassroots, but it is not - we need the logistical support.  We need also the roads, Government should put up roads, Government should repair, put electricity in place then we can mobilise our people. (Interruption)

MR KAYONDE: Point of information.  Mr Chairman I would not have like to interrupt the speaker, but I think at this stage it is necessary, the Government policy now is to decentralize and the resources are coming from the centre to go to the districts.  But there are also resources that are at the districts and there are certain functions, which must be done at the districts.  There are roads, which are supposed to be constructed by the local authorities. 

So, I think here we need to make a distinction which roads are for the centre and which roads for the local authorities.   I thought this is - and similarly on the question of UCB, the policy is that you do not close a branch just for the sake of closing, but the policy is that there is a minimum deposits that, that branch must have to justify its existence hand the paying of the salaries and wages of the workers.  I thank you.

MR KABUUBI:  Mr Chairman, I thank that inform that as far as I know when you look at the money which is given for feeder roads say which goes through the Ministry of Local Government.  I have not got the statistic here but I am very sure that my district Masindi for example, I think in one financial year they only got twice but the amount of money cannot exceed even Shs 40, 000,000/=; and you know why I have been talking this point is when we were waiting for CA campaigns, the people were asking us that my friend this road is not done.  Now, they expect you to put up that road.  Where do you get the money?  The money sometimes is given out by Ministry of Finance when it goes to Ministry of Local Government it is embezzled there; and it cannot reach the beneficiaries. (Interruption)

DR CHEBROT: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  The hon. Delegate is making a very serious allegation. (Interruption and Laughter)

 THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.

DR CHEBROT: Hon. Members you must forgive me that I a high bride of both Houses.  The hon. Member is making a very serious allegation.  First of all in when he started he said that he did not have the figures and then he went further to allege that his district Masindi has only received money twice when he does not have figures.  

Now, the policy is this, in Local Government, we release money on a monthly basis 50 per cent contribution towards maintenance of roads.  The local authority themselves are also supposed to contribute 50 per cent. What has happened is that Masindi is not contributing the other 50 per cent.  It gets our 50 per cent and pockets, it does nothing, it is not therefore, correct for him to say that Ministry of Local Government is embezzling the funds.  We merely act like a post office; we do not take even one cent; and this money which we sent to the districts is accounted for; and I would like to request the hon. Member should withdraw that statement.  

MR KABUUBI:  Mr Chairman, I thank the information of the hon. Minister. But I want also to much as I appreciate his information I would like to ask the hon. Minister since he is representing his Minister, he is a Deputy Minister of Local Government but I want this thing to be noted seriously that whenever there is that release of money by the Minister of Local Government to district councils or district authorities the NRC Members should be given information.  You should have the courtesy of informing us so that we can follow up.  (Interruption)

MRS RHODA KALEMA: Point of information. Thank you Mr Chairman. The hon. Member is raising a very important point. Actually I know that, at least, two years ago this system was being used; Ministry of Local Government used to inform, at least, I sued to get the information in writing when the money was sent there that quarter, that was sent to each districts.  So, I did not get this information last year, but I managed to get it, to get the information when I went with the DRC meeting of the district.  I do not know whether they have stopped.  They started now it should be up to the Deputy Minister to tell this House whether they are still sending this information.  

At the same time, I cannot plead for the Ministry all together because it is possible that since I was at first only one NRC Member there then we are two.  We were getting these letters, but I do not know whether all the districts where they have seven or eight or nine Members; whether they get the information.  

It is quite important that we should know because there is a little truth of what the hon. Member is saying before we could know the money did not - was not really putting to the right use.  The fact is that, there is little truth there and at the same time I think the Ministry has been doing its best - level best to correct it.

MR KABUUBI:  Mr Chairman, I am going to do the needful.  So, that is the point I have talked about.  Now, I am touching on taxing the rich.  On this point I was very impressed by the Budget Speech.  At least they have tried to address that one, because here is a situation where they are going to ask people who can afford to buy cars to pay more taxes.  This is very good procedure because I was wondering why people who can even afford to buy a car cannot pay extra tax.  This is how tax should be done. Taxation should be carried out.  Should tax the rich so as to subsidize the poor.  (Interruption)

CAPT. GASATURA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, it is alleged in today’s papers that many Members here particularly the Front Benchers get away with graduated tax; and it is even alleged that some very senior Government officials get away with a tax ticket of six or seven thousand shillings when some of us have to feet a bill of Shs 80, 000.  I think it is important that Members work on themselves before the enforcement Police gets on them.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I like to inform the House that, that story as far as Ministers are concerned is totally untrue because Ministers are paid net of the deductions to graduated tax; and it is the employer, the Government who issues such tickets so they have no way they can cheat on graduated tax.  But since I know Capt. Gasatura does not bring in rumours he does also believe in this one.

MR KABUUBI:  There is also another Shs 6, 000,000,000 which has been earmarked for rural projects, so I would suggest, Mr Chairman, that this money should be at least dished out on county basis so that each county can get its share, if say it is Shs 500, 000/- per county that means at least that money can rehabilitate some schools in that county and then there is, at least because, I have got a fear that this money will be diverted to another purpose, but here, is at all that money can be allocated to a county, then we shall see what has been done on the ground and then we shall even get praised from our people,  they will at least say that this Government has done, you see the problem we have.  

Formally, in the previous governments, say the political government, there was money was allocated for every constituency but what do you see to day?  A Member of Parliament is not supported and yet you are singing the songs of the Government, you are on the Government’s struggle, if the Government changes you also face it. (Laughter) you see there is no way.  So, people should not shy away and say because I am an MP. That if things go wrong, I will be excluded. (Interruption)

MR WOGWAWABI GWAIVU:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the point the hon. Member is labouring is very important.  These days in addition to that, there is the embarrassment, all of us here. TV, say do you want to increase your income, talk to your NRC Representative, and it improves further embarrassing.

MR KASAIJA KABUUBI: Mr Chairman, I want to add only on point and I beg your permission to allow me to say it, so I would appeal that Government do come in and support their Members of Parliament, they should not divide us, they should not think that we are different people, we are all supporting the Movement.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, do not repeat yourself too much.

MR KASAIJA KABUUBI:  Last point, Mr Chairman, which I want to strength, is regarding exemptions. You know, I have been wondering in fear even last financial year, I talked about this exemption, I am happy the Minister has tried to address it, but this is a serious issue where Government is losing a lot of revenue by excepting so many vehicles, you find so many vehicles do not pay any road license, just because they have either NGO or something, anybody is trying to create an NGO, he gets a tax exemption.  

So, I think Government should come out and make sure that they seal - this loophole whereby everyone is exempted.  If you are wife of a Minister you apply, that you will be exempted; no we do not want to preferential treatment, we want everyone to be treated equally.  Because, There is a fear that if this exemption continue, it will be abused.  So, Mr Chairman, with those remarks I thank you indeed and support the Motion.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please, order hon. Tiberondwa, the hon. Member has already finished his Contribution now.

SEBAANA KIZITO (Makindye Division, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for this opportunity to talk about the Budget.  I want to thank the Minister of Finance for his Budget, but I have got a few points to make.  One of the most prominent features of this Budget Speech and also of the President concerned the increase in GDP, saying that the economy is doing very well, the shilling is very strong against the dollar, therefore Uganda is better of economically.  Do you really believe that the Uganda shilling is stronger than the dollar?  The dollar, which we have in this country, is either borrowed money to make a living as a reach man?  This is the tragedy of our economy.  Production has not improved that much, therefore, we should stop bragging about the economy having grown, the Uganda shilling having gained strength against dollar, because all these are borrowed funds which do not belong to us at all, Mr Chairman  -(Interruption)

MR MUKASA KAFUMBE:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, hon. Sebaana Kizito would have been the last man for me to try to interrupt his speech, but for a long time, this country has depended on grant and loans.  The issue is that this Government has applied the loans and grants most wisely. These loans and grants could have been squandered to day as they are squandered in the past, and I think we must give credit where it is due.  I thank you.

MR SEBAANA KIZITO: Thank you for that information, but the point I made was made in good faith, that is Uganda, if we want to talk about real wealth of the country we should not talk about it in terms of borrowed money.  We should try to improve and if we have to improve what are the indicators of an improved economy?  Every quarter, the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning issues a booklet showing economic indicators of the country.  There is one very important economic indicator, which is never shown there, and that is the indicator of employment.  I do not know whether it is a policy, whether our Government has got any policy on employment at all.  

We have seen and we have heard statements made in this very House, with effect that this retrenchment policy successful because it has retrenched so many people to this quarter, in October we retrenched so many others without creating any more jobs.  If we do not create any jobs, I do not even know whether at the moment, we even know how many people are employed in Uganda.  I think I want to appeal to the Ministry of Planning and Economic Development - (Interruption)

MR BASOGA NSADHU: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to inform the speaker holding the Floor that he is talking on a very serious point, and the information I want to give him is that even despite the impressive figures of people who have come here to beg to invest in this country, I recall the President gave us very, very impressive figures of industries that have been set up.  But in comparison to the people who have been retrenched, and to those who have been absorbed in those factories or industrial plants that have been established here, the number of unemployment is increasing and general poverty is increasing.  

So, I think the hon. Member is right to demand that next time they should tell us what rate of an employment we are having and perhaps even introduce an employment package for our people.  Thank you very much.

MR SEBAANA KIZITO:  Thank you hon. Basoga Nsadhu for your point -(Interruption)

MR PAJOBO B. JORAM: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I want now to inform the Member who is talking now, that according to the law of Uganda, one have to pay Shs 60 as a salary for a worker per month.  Secondly, if a worker dies, he is paid Shs 260 in Uganda to day, I do not know whether you are aware, Shs 260 if a worker dies, that is the law of your law.  Then secondly, if you lose your eye you may be paid Shs10, that is law.  Now I mean this is a serious matter.  Thank you.

MR SEBAANA KIZITO: On the issue of workers dying in my private capacity, I have got a remedy for that that is funeral benefits Insurance, but Mr Chairman, the point I am making is to request the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning, to tell the country periodically as it does in its booklet on economic indicators, how many people are employed, at least, how many they know that are employed, how many jobs have been created, whether unemployment is going up or down because unemployment is a very, very important economic indicator.  

It would have also been a very good idea if the Minister of Finance in this House stood and told us, how we have performed, what were our target last year, have we achieved the, if we have not achieved them, what has caused the problem and how do we intend to avoid the problems? This is to me as a businessman. It is what the Budget is all about.  You look at how you perform in the past, you see where you failed and you see how you can remedy the situation and then you plan how you go ahead from there.  

I want to talk a little about the taxation policy.  I am not going to talk on all taxes, but I am going to concentrate my attention on rents, some of you know that I have some properties, and therefore, I know what this rent is all about.  As the Ministry of Finance taxes gross rent at the rate of 20 per cent gross rent. I want, to demonstrate to you, how ridicules this kind of tax is.  I would very much appreciate to the Minister  (Interjection) 

I am going to give you an example of a man who borrowed Shs20 million to put up a house, and having put u that house, he rents it for say Shs 300, 000/- a month.  Which is equal Shs3.6 million a year, if he borrows the money, at 15 per cent he will pay Shs3 million in interest against gross income of Shs3.6 million.  At the same time, he will have to pay 20 per cent of Shs3.6 in income tax; 20 per cent of 3.6 is Shs 720,000/=, then he will pay another 10 per cent to the City Council for city rate a 10 per cent of value which is another Shs2 million.  So, this person for an income of Shs3.6 million, he will pay more than Shs5 million in taxes and rents.  Now do we want to encourage people to invest property?  

I know that Uganda at least, Kampala needs about 20 thousand housing unit every year up to the year 2000.  If we tax people in this way, then are we encouraging investment in property or are we not more ever, there are very, very few leaders or if they exist at all, who lend money for property development. So, all people who develop -(Interruption)


MR MAYENGO: Point of information. Mr Chairman, that is not encouraging people to invest, it is encouraging them to be corrupt, because they do not pay these taxes.

MR SEBAANA KIZITO: It is very sad, Mr Chairman. Mr Chairman, therefore, I would request -(Interruption)

MRS KALEMA: Actually, I would just like to respond to the hon. member who gave information to the hon. speaker, that people who own housing and they are asked to pay taxes, they pay the taxes, maybe you may know some of those who do not pay who are corrupt, but the others pay.

MR SEBAANA KIZITO: Thank you very much. My other request is to the Minister of Finance, to look around and find a financier who is willing to bring money to Uganda to lend to property developers, because at the moment money for property development is either for savings of individuals or groups of individuals or it is borrowed on short term basis, which is very expensive indeed.  

Therefore, I would like in his next trip, especially, if he has an opportunity to a company, the President to make one of these trips looking for investors, he should be in a position to explain that in Uganda, there is famine not of food, but of good accommodation and that there is an opportunity of investing money in that sector of the economy. Therefore, they should be persuaded to bring money here. (Interruption)

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I accept the observations, hon. Sebaana Kizito is making, because also as he knows, some of us may be on the same clubs.  As far as property development are concerned, but the option left to Government are not very many, and here, it is not out of the wish to discourage development of houses and I must congratulate people like hon. Sebaana who are going to the great length to do something for our country in the areas of estate development, but the climate in the country to attacked foreign investment in long term investment like property development must be very right.  

Therefore, the challenge we are facing together as this country is whether we can show over a reasonable period of time that we have policies and situations which attract for someone to think of investing and getting the money after 20 years.  If a situation does not give assurance to the investors, then the people will come here for short-term investments.  So, I think the important thing there, is for us to create, to continue to build on the favourable climate for us to be able to attract money, which will not be taken out in less than 20 years. That is the personal challenge.  

However, the people opt to have 20 million shillings and invest in transport.  These were to pay tax.  But if they opt to put it in housing, they should also pay some tax.  I cannot say that it is possible to say when you choose to invest Shs 20 million shillings in a house as far as tax is concerned, but you demand services.

MR BUTAGIRA: Point of order.  Is hon. Kafumbe Mukasa, the Deputy Minister of Finance in order to misunderstand hon Sebaana Kizito?  He did not say those who are engaged in housing business should not pay tax.  What he was saying is that the tax was so choking; it was still in the industry.  Is he in order to mislead us?

THE CHAIRMAN: You have corrected him, hon. Member.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr Chairman, I wish hon. Butagira know the tax rates.  Then he can use the word ‘choking.’ These tax rates on housing are lower than the tax on PAYE and tax on other incomes because we want to guide people to stay in housing estates.  So, you better look at these figures, Sir. (Interruption)

MR BUTAGIRA: While I agree that it may be lower at 20 per cent than other tax rates, compared with total expenses on that loan as I have indicated, the man is making a loss rather a profit and no one will invest if he knows for sure that he will make a loss.  You have just stated so.  

MR KASAJJA:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I wish to than the speaker who is holding the Floor for accepting this information, to the House.  This information refers to rental income.  In fact, I anticipated that some Members might lead the clarification on rental income, and in reality when you get this information you will realise that rental income is the lowest rate that we have of the tax rates. 

For example, I gave an example here, that if you are to have an income of Shs100/=, call it as Shs100, 000/=, they take away 20 per cent and 80 per cent is what is taxed.  Then they take away about Shs 80, 000/=. So, you are left with Shs 70 because 100 minus 20 you get 80, and then take away the chargeable rent, which is 70,000/-.  So the tax 20 per cent of chargeable rent which is 2,000/= is 2 per cent.  So, in effect we are paying 2 per cent.  So, 2 per cent of 100 per cent is actually very low rate and most Members have misunderstood this rate thinking that it is a high rate on income.  In fact, it was done so by URA to encourage investment in housing.  It is not actually for this investment. I wanted to bring this information if the Member wants to get the calculation; I have it here.

AN HON. MEMBER: I thank the U.R.A. representative in this House.  However, I wish the Uganda Revenue Authority took into account other expenses connected with property like maintenance, city roads, interest, all those are expenses of that investments and therefore, to take a figure and say I charge only 2 per cent is not very correct.  I want to say how welcome investors are to this country, everybody has said so.  But I want also to say that when Investors come here we should look at the investment, which aims at increasing our employment.  

In some countries they are accepting investment if you can show that you going to employ so many people because you have got a lot of people who are unemployed.  I am in a position, to know because I own some business enterprises and so many people come to me looking for employment and I feel very much sorry that I am not in a position to help because this economy is not expanding.

AN HON. MEMBER:  In addition to the point being made by the hon. Member, other than investing - even these people who own contracts, I think they should also be governed by certain conditions of creating employment.  We have unemployment in mind.  The people in Jinja, they bring those Chinese even to drive their tippers, to push the wheelbarrows, and to do other things.  When we have people here who can do such simple jobs so that there should be conditions of governing these people who come here even to win contracts. SIETCO is a very big embarrassment to an employment problem in Uganda.

MR OBWANGOR: Point of information. There is no need to take employed people from Kampala to Jinja, Gulu, when there are workmen there.  That money should sank into all districts - the eleven districts not again to be exported into Kampala.

MR BAKABULINDI:  Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform the hon. member that the issue he is debating about is a very important issue. We are crying for investors simply because all along the Ugandans were denied a chance to invest - to make this country grow at a level of which we want.  We are talking about taxation.  Surely, if these people were given a chance and taxes reduced a bit, we would not be crying for investors from outside, and if we are not careful, we are going to continue begging for investors.  They will continue after the year 2000 unless the indigenous people are given a chance and are pushed to do -(Interruption)

AN HON MEMBER: Mr Chairman, to have so many expatriates coming to work in this country, on jobs, which our people can do it, is unacceptable to us especially to me as a nationalist.  Another thing it was made on the Floor of this House and we need some clarification of Government that some Asians whose properties were spoilt before by our Government, but who have come back and claimed the same properties and depicted Ugandans who have been trading in those properties.  Now these Ugandans are thrown out and they are on the verandahs.  Now if the Ugandans cannot trade in Uganda where will they go to trade in? (Applause) 

My last point is about Agriculture.  I want here in her absence to praise Madam Ssekitoleko, the Minister of Agriculture for the efforts in this research.  You know there is now an organisation called NARO, which is responsible for agricultural research.  They have come up with a lot of intentions or discoveries or whatever we call them, of good cassava, coffee and so on. And this is something a lady who is the Minister for Agriculture, has achieved without shouting too much about it.  This is the way we want our ladies to perform rather than to go on singing for women liberation without shouting that when you are liberated you can loose something.  

I want to end by appealing to the Minister of Finance and the Government as a whole, that in Uganda when you tell manufacturers or industrialists to come and invest in our country, especially when they come by parastatal bodies, which have been in operation and they have been employing people and they have got people who depend on these industries.  Let these people who come and buy, let them not just dismiss our workers.  Because it is difficult to get another job, once you are dismissed from what you have; and it is important that as you grow in other sectors - the issue of crop-creation is very, very important.  Thank you very much.

MR KAJUBI SEPIRIYA (Kasanda County, Mubende):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I will be brief on the point and would like to touch economic performance, external debt, and taxation of coffee.

About economic performance; it is good some sectors are really blown up especially industrial sector have gone up by about 15 per cent.  This is very commendable, and another sector, which is showing growth, is the coffee receipts.  Which is about 61 per cent, this is good.  But agriculture is not numbered among the sectors, which have grown.  Whereas agriculture is the producer of wealth of this nation.  It grew up by only 1.7 per cent.  Which means agriculture in the Ministry of Finance has been very much analyzed.  It has been given very little attention, and of course someone was thanking the Minister of Agriculture of what she has done.  But research without economic growth, I think will not really help this country.  

So, let research be oriented to productivity so that anyway, we can really realise more money.  But some researchers tend to go in for very small things.  Anyway, let even this university studies be oriented to her production.  Anyway, let this be done.

I am really concerned about agriculture although the President says, we are getting richer than poorer, yes, probably the Government is getting richer - there is feeling that we are getting richer than poorer, but the producer - that the man who produces maize and coffee - he is getting poorer.  So, let us ask the Ministry to really put much effort on the developments of the farmers.

The President said, he would solicit the Cabinet to make plans, for assisting, for developing, for the agriculture.  Let us hope, anyway, that the Cabinet will not really forget to do this.  This is a very, very important thing.  When the Minister of Finance was quoting the things which have really brought in a lot of money, he quoted the banks - and of course Forex Bureaus and so on.  Also leaving out the productive sector, which is agriculture.  So, this really causes a lot of concern.  

I think we should really address these problems very, very, urgent because the people in the villages are not really facilitated to produce much.  The rural credit should be revitalised to help people, for instance, in the north, north east and north west, the rural credit was concentrated around towns as so and so said and probably this is why we experienced big famines in the north and these big famines have been brought because of marginalisation of agriculture.  Even the big farmers, by big farmers I mean, the large scale farmers, very big commercial farmers, have been marginalised too and they are quitting agriculture in favour of trading in maize and most of the tractors, we got about 500 tractors through UDB and UCB but most of these tractors are carrying bricks and stones and so on and so forth.  Why?  Because of high interest rates.  Because when one deploys his tractor on the farm he will not be able to pay it because that interest jumped from 22 then to 26 then to 30 up to 42 per cent and that is why anyway, many commercial farmers failed to really service their loans and unfortunately they were called bank defaulters instead of probably being called other names.  All this is controlled by the Ministry of Finance so the Minister of Finance has a lot to do to bring up agriculture so that we can really overcome poverty in this country.

From this I go to the foreign debt; the external debt.  The external debt has been 2.6 billion dollars.  It has been so far about three or four years.  Which means when we pay we just service interest and we do not touch on the principle.  But what are we going to do?  I think in my view we should call the people concerned with agriculture, AGROVET developers and they come and meet the Minister of Finance and then devise ways and means of increasing our production so that we can really pay off this loan.  If we do not do this we are really finished and you see even the President said we are not optimising the man in the grassroots, that is the man - I mean.  He is not really optimising his resources, why, because he is neglected.  First, by the Ministry of Agriculture because the extension workers are not visiting him to show him how to do it; secondly, by the Minister of Finance, because he is not really helping.

Thirdly, I would like to touch on the Ministry of Marketing; the Ministry of Co-operatives, Marketing and Industry.  They have neglected one most important point and that is, marketing of crops because people in the grassroots are getting poorer because they are tortured by the middleman while the Ministry of Industry is really not doing its job because these people are not doing much. The officers they have are the most highly trained people in that sector yet they are not addressing markets overseas and so on.  (Interruption)

MR SENDAULA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I have been listening very patiently and I would like to get a clarification from the hon. Member holding the Floor as to what the Ministry of Trade and Industry has not done because I have been waiting for him to develop the point and then get to know exactly where we are falling short, of what is expected of us.  

As far as we are concerned at the Ministry, as a Government Policy, which we are meant to implement, is to liberalise the industry.  We did not.  We allowed everybody, we liberalised and allowed everybody to buy and sell and, in general, me as a farmer I am seeing the situation much better than it has ever been because at the time when the government was involved in coffee, for example, the minimum price was Shs 210.  As we speak today a kilo of kiboko is Shs 950.  I would not have expected the position to have been any better.  It is the same story with beans and maize.  (Interjection) Excuse me; let me go step by step.  Beans and maize are selling and there is hardly any farmer who has come to complain that there is no market for his beans or maize.  So I am seeing the situation getting better every other day.  

So I do not really know whether the hon. Member is complaining of these commodities to be flowing very fast on the market and their prices increasing so fact because I have yet to know exactly what he wants.  Now, regarding the prices, say of cotton and other commodities, I have got to be very clear and understood over cotton and say beans.  Mr Chairman and hon. Members, the prices of cotton and beans have been constant in foreign currency but the exchange rate - (Interruption)

MR OBWANGOR:  On a point of order.  Is the hon. Minister not out of order by taking the Floor of the House by destructing the other Member who is holding the Floor of the House with a lengthy information and speech?

THE CHAIRMAN: The hon. Minister is giving information.  The hon. Minister is in order giving information but try to be brief.

MR SENDAULA:  Mr Chairman, before I was interrupted I was trying to explain the logistics of cotton prices in local currency.  One, cotton globally the prices have been very low indeed.  Two; when we get this whatever is paid as proceeds in dollars, because of the change in the rate of exchange, where we used to get Shs1, 200 per dollar we now get Shs900 and this is affecting the price paid to the farmer as far as cotton or beans and maize are concerned.  But with coffee the global price has been on the increase and as we speak now we are looking forward to a figure of about five or six dollars per kilo of coffee which was barely sixty cents about four years ago.  So that is the situation.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI: Point of information. Further information, Mr Chairman, the hon. Kajubi is making here a very important observation, which I expected the hon. Deputy Minister of Trade and Industry to have touched on it, which he did not.  The issue is this, in Lira, as I speak now there is too much maize and there is too much famine across the border in Sudan and also in Rwanda.  Why can the Minister not buy or lobby people like the World Food Programme, take them to that place then they buy this food and then thereafter the farmer will have his money or in any case the Minister should talk to buying this particular maize, stock it for an emergency which is simple.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order.  Hon. Kajubi, please wind up your speech.

MR KAJUBI:  Mr Chairman, also regarding the Ministry of Co-operatives, Marketing and Industry. Also in my view, the famine has really been intensified by this Ministry.  Why?  Because we have silos but in these silos there is not a grain of maize, there is not even a bean.  Before they used to buy, the Ministry used to engage in buying grains and so on and then put them in silos so that during the time of hunger or famine the government could supply food, for instance, in the Northern area and so on but because there is not any grain that is why people have been very hungry here and surely very shameful for us to really have food in the southern area while there is not a bit of food in the north because why, because there is not any food in the silos.  (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member do not over repeat yourself, you are raising a lot of issues.  Please, just wind up your speech.

MR KAJUBI:  Mr Chairman, leaving that aside, I would also like to request the Ministry of Finance together with the Ministry of Agriculture and with this Ministry of Marketing to come together and devise ways of making rural areas very attractive for the farmer.  For instance, valley tanks, I think, should be there so that we could get water for irrigation because water for irrigation is really driving people out of their districts as hon. Karuhanga said.  

Regarding coffee; the producers of coffee or exporters of coffee are complaining about the tax, 40 per cent.  The per cent is really very astronomical.  It is suggested that if taxes for coffee are so high it might encourage smuggling so that is why, anyway, I would like to advise the Minister of Finance to consider this.  Instead of taxing people according to what they have sold, let there be a nominal sort of tax that will not detract people from declaring what they have sold.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

ADJOURNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, this Debate will continue tomorrow at 2.30 p.m. I now adjourn the House accordingly.

(The Council rose at 5.15 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 13 July 1994 at 2.30 p.m.)








