Tuesday, 16 July 2002

Parliament met at 2.20 P.M. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEKEAR: Honourable Members, since the 2nd of this month, we have been having a general debate on the Presidential State of the National Address, which we have to conclude today and we start another debate.  We have a list of Members who contributed to the general debate on the presidential address, and since really the character of these general debates is that you debate the general policy of Government, and now when we start on the other general debate, I will consider those Members who were unable to contribute to the general debate, and they will get the preference.  So, those who did not contribute last time should not be worried; you will be able to contribute what you wanted to say last time. Well, that is for your general information.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I am seeking your guidance on matters arising from the Communication from the Chair. Mr Speaker, in the course of our debate last week on the President’s Address on the State of the Nation to Parliament, I raised the matter of urgency to meet with His Excellency the President this week if opportunity arises, on matters pertaining to national security.  

Mr Speaker, a number of contributors on this topic persistently raised the issue of the urgency and importance of further elucidation on matters of security from the President.  The Deputy Speaker, who was in the Chair, assured me that she would communicate the concern to His Excellency the President.  

Mr Speaker, the guidance I am seeking is whether it would be necessary to raise a motion at the end of our debate, calling His Excellency to come and address us, or, whether you have since heard from State House regarding my request that His Excellency addresses this august House on matters pertaining to security, especially in the North, Teso districts and Kampala. 

We are very concerned to the extent that we, Members of Parliament, are really beginning to feel insecure.  We are being punched, kicked, threatened by Members of the UPDF, and he as a Commander in Chief, maybe he could tell us about the conduct of his officers.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, since what you have said arose from the general debate on the debate on the address by His Excellency the President, I for one know that the presence of the Executive is always here, and although the President is not here, Members of the Executive have been able to communicate to him your concerns.  

As regards your appointment, you know the appointments with His Excellency take time; there is a procedure, you do not say today I want to see you and you see him because there are prior arrangements that might have been made. But this matter will definitely be pursued, and if he has time, definitely he will attend to you or other means will be used to solve the problem of your concern.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Mr Speaker, this is the second time I am standing here to protest, with humility, on a point of procedure related to our new version of the Rules of Procedure.  Mr Speaker, every time I stand here as a representative of the people, I feel insecure to make a point in the absence of a revised version of the Rules of Procedure.  So, on a point of procedure, I am seeking to know when we shall have this in front of us to facilitate our deliberations so that whenever we speak we have weapons.

THE SPEAKER: I think arrangements are being made to avail Members with their personal copies, but in case you have a problem on any procedure, please, ask me; I will be able to direct you.

MAJ. KAZOORA: Mr Speaker, I am seeking your guidance, but I beg your indulgence that I give you a background of this guidance I am seeking.  On Saturday morning, I got a call from hon. Amuriat who told me that a senior officer of the UPDF had assaulted the MP for Ngora. Minutes later, hon. Epetait himself called me and told me he was in pain, and he narrated to me what had happened - and then these newspapers you have been reading. Mr Speaker, I see him on the Order Paper to give a personal explanation but unfortunately he is not in the House.  I am made to understand that he has been admitted at Mulago. 

Mr Speaker, why I am bringing this up, Sir, is because hardly a month passes without seeing ‘this Brigadier has done this’; ‘this Lt. General has done this’; ‘this colonel has done this’! Now it has come to one of us.  I am wondering, Mr Speaker, if you yourself next time you meet a senior officer of the UPDF - the guidance I am seeking is from Government, are the citizens of this country safe before senior officers of the UPDF? Can Government tell us what to expect?

THE SPEAKER: Well, you have sought guidance from me, but as you will appreciate, this matter of security is not within my competence to give you guidance on.  What I can say is that it is deplorable if such an incident happens. I had intended to deal with the issue, which you have raised at an appropriate time when the item you have raised is read out because, as you see, on the Order Paper we have a personal statement by Dr Francis Epetait. When it comes, I will mention something about that.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE LAND AMENDMENT BILL, 2002

THE MINISTER OF WATER, LANDS AND ENVIRONMENT (Mr Richard Nduhuura): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that a bill entitled, “The Land Amendment Bill 2002” be read the First Time.

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate Committee of this House.  

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Speaker, in respect of this Land (Amendment) Bill, the Land Act was passed in 1998. It is a pretty thick legislation and I would imagine that land being so important, nearly every Member of Parliament would wish to have the parent Act to read it together with the proposed Amendment. I have even been interested to buy a copy for myself. But I wish to appeal to the Minister that at the moment, the Government Printer is not printing this thick legislation of the Land Act, which is so important. One reason is that it was passed some 3, 4 years ago. It is out of print and it will be very difficult for Members to compare the parent Act with what is intended to be amended, which is very important even if it means we buy it ourselves. So, will the Minister ensure that the parent Act is printed and made available to Members who would wish to buy them? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, you have heard the concerns of the Members. What he has said is the concern of everybody here. I request that you take appropriate steps to ensure that you have copies of the law so that when we look at the amendments, we are able to compare, accept or reject them.

DR NKUUHE: Mr Speaker, I have another concern, which is actually in your court, because when Parliament was assisted, one of the objectives was that on the parliamentary website, the Acts and debates will be put there. If Parliament were actually doing its work, these Acts would be available on the parliamentary website.  So, I appeal to you, Mr Speaker, to ensure that this work is done so that if we cannot get a printed copy, then at least we have a fallback position whereby we can go to our website and refer to the Act. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Whereas that is a solution, and definitely that will be done, it cannot solve the problem that the Member has raised. They have to have their own copies.  

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, that is the issue which hon. Kazoora was raising. Yesterday, hon. Francis Epetait requested to be availed an opportunity to make a personal statement on what appeared in the newspapers about an incident that took place at Entebbe VIP Lounge. As a result of this request, hon. Epetait was included on the Order Paper. He was supposed to make a personal statement on the matter. Unfortunately, as I was coming to this place, I received a note to the effect that hon. Epetait has been admitted to Mulago Hospital as a result of what happened. So, it will not be possible to hear his personal statement until he is in position to avail himself. That is the official communication I have received, which I thought I should pass to you.

MR OKUPA: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. The additional information I want to give is that hon. Dr Epetait is in Ward 6C. So, if you want to see him he is in 6C. Thank you.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I was touched when you mentioned that Dr Epetait has been admitted, because before he communicated so, he had also indicated that if he manages to come to Parliament, immediately after that statement, he would go to Mulago for admission. But Mr Speaker, I beg you to let me briefly state what I saw at Entebbe. We traveled together from Namibia to Entebbe Airport.

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you leave it until the statement is made? Don’t you think it is better that way?

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I am also seeking further information from the Chair. Since you have heard from the patient or the victim. I would not call it police brutality this time, but army brutality. It is brutality; I would like to repeat, it was not a wedding party. 

Mr Speaker, while we are waiting for the statement from the victim - and this is a matter of law and order - do we expect a statement also from the people responsible for law and order? In other words, is the government aware of this incident? Have they taken any steps, and what is the interpretation of this incident by the Attorney General? 

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr Speaker, I am a duly elected Member of this House, so I enjoy the same privileges like everybody else. I rise on a point of order. What is said to have happened at Entebbe happened between individuals.  Is it in order for hon. Aggrey Awori to allege that what an individual is alleged to have done was done by an institution? Therefore, is he in order to allege that what happened was a brutality? 

THE SPEAKER: My understanding of his inquiry was just - because what happened at the VIP Lounge at the International Airport, a government establishment, is alleged to have happened between two important people, a Member of Parliament and a senior military officer. I think the kind of statement he was envisaging here was not to put blame but to know what steps are being taken; only that. So, I do not see anything out of order in making that observation -(Applause).

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you Mr Speaker. As you know, this is a very grave matter, and I want to inform, not only Members of Parliament, but also the entire country that this matter is a police matter and it is being investigated. I request that you allow the appropriate bodies to take the necessary action so that curative measures may be taken. I thank you.  

THE SPEAKER: This covers the matter. I think we should proceed with another business.

MR NYANZI:  Mr Speaker, I only want to inform the House that just last year, an army man also harassed me and I was taken to prison, but Parliament never even debated it because the case was in the hands of Police.  So, if at all it is in the hands of the Police, there is no need of debating it here in Parliament.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, I do not think that when dealing with this matter we need to be subjective because the Prime Minister has answered the question.  He has said they are aware and a Government organ namely, the Police is investigating the matter.  I think maybe it is true yours did not surface, but it was investigated and amicably settled in your favour.  So what is wrong for him to say the Police is investigating?  Maybe you are blaming them for not taking action, but since the Police took action and the DPP considered the matter and ruled in your favour, I think the Government did what they are supposed to do.

MR NYANZI:  Mr Speaker, what I wanted to inform the House is that if the case is in the hands of the Police, it cannot be debated in Parliament here - (Laughter).

THE SPEAKER:  Who was aware of this?

MR BANYENZAKI: I wanted to inform my honourable colleague Nyanzi that at that time he was not yet a Member of Parliament because he was not yet sworn in, so there is no way he could raise this in the House - (Laughter).

MR NYANZI:  But, I was still a Minister.
THE SPEAKER:  No, no! (Laughter).
MR BAKALUBA MUKASA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is a point of concern; mine is different from what we have been talking about.  My concern is about the on-going war in the Northern Uganda.  
THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, we have an Order Paper for today, and the item we are dealing with was the item of ‘Personal Statement’. So under this, we cannot start a general debate.  But if you want to talk about Northern Uganda, since we are about to re-open a general debate, you may take that opportunity to bring up whatever you want to bring on that issue.
REV. BAKALUBA MUKASA: Okay; because we have lost a Major, I felt concerned, Mr Speaker.
THE SPEAKER:  Well, it is true, but you will bring it regrettably.

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT TO THIS PARLIAMENT ON TUESDAY 11 JUNE 2002
(Debate Continued.)
THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, as I said, the general debate was concluded and now I want to put the question.
(Question put and agreed to.)
MOTION
“THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

(i) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2001/2002.

(ii) THE BUGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2002/2003, ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE”.
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Isaac Musumba):  Mr Speaker and honourable Members, I beg to move that this Parliament do resolve itself into a Committee of Supply for consideration and approval of the following:

(i) The Revised Revenue and Expenditure Estimates for the fiscal year 2001/2002.

(ii) The Budgetary Proposals for the fiscal year 2002/2003, Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure.  I beg to move.

Mr Speaker, I need one second to see whether the Members have received the materials in question.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and hon. Members.  Mr Speaker, the motion has been moved, and I am informed that the seconder, hon. Kabakumba, is in a position now to second it and then it can be generally debated.
THE SPEAKER:  You don’t want to make any contribution?
MR MUSUMBA: But, Sir, the motion that was moved was actually the basis of what people heard in the budget speech.
THE SPEAKER: Yah, now how do we start this general debate?  You do not want to say anything really?  Okay, the motion has been moved.
MR LUKYAMUZI:  Mr Speaker, unless we are creating a precedent, and a very dangerous one at all degrees, if a Government proposes a Budget, honourable as it is, I would have expected the front bench to be in position to support it before it is seconded -(Applause)- otherwise, you better resign and we take over if you are not in support –(Laughter).  So, is it in order for the hon. Minister to move a motion without supporting it?
THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think the Minister moved the motion and he was seconded by one of the Members of the front bench, but according to his explanation, he says he need not make further contribution because of the Budget, which was read, and the Minister explained.  Now since he is the mover and you are not satisfied with his motion, then you can make your own contribution.  This is what is happening.  I cannot force him to – he has moved it competently, I cannot force him by saying, “say something, say this, and say the other”. Hon. Kabakumba, can you proceed?
MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker- (Mr Ruzindana rose_) 
MR RUZINDANA: Mr Speaker, some time back the Budget Committee considered this Budget before coming to Parliament. Should we not listen to the Budget Committee; should we not hear the Chairman of the Budget Committee?
THE SPEAKER: Who says we should not?  You see, the first thing was that the Minister moved the motion and he said the person actually he had earmarked for supporting his motion was hon. Kabakumba.  Why don’t we hear from them, then we shall get to the Committee.

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am here to support the motion moved by the Minister for consideration and approval of the revised revenue and expenditure estimates for the fiscal year 2001/2002, and also the budgetary proposals for the fiscal year 2002/2003 estimates of revenue and expenditure.  

I would like to inform the honourable Members that the main working documents include the Budget Speech, the Finance Bill, the Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure, the Background to the Budget and the Uganda Poverty Reduction Strategic Paper, among others.

I would like to assure this House, if they are not comfortable with the word, ‘seconding’ - because the hon. Minister for Parliamentary Affairs seconded that motion - they can substitute it with ‘supporting’ this motion, and that is exactly what I am going to do. Hon. Members -(Interruption)-

MR ADOLF MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, I am moving on a point of procedure. This motion has been moved by the Minister of Finance, and has been seconded by the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs. We would have expected a report after that from the Budget Committee, and then Members of Parliament either stand up to support, like hon. Kabakumba is doing, or may be to express their views. I seek your guidance.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, there is nothing wrong. The person who stood to second the motion was a minister, and as far as he was concerned, he had prepared the other one to support. When I wanted him to say something about his motion, apparently he declined, and then somebody who was supporting the motion came in. Let us hear their case and then we shall call the committee to put their case. There is nothing we lose really.

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As we all know, this Budget is supposed to support the presidential manifesto so that it is implemented to the President’s satisfaction and, of course, we the voters of the President. I would like to assure this House that, true, there have been problems, which I see as a Member of Parliament, but there have also been achievements.  

This country - you remember during the general debate, the issue of security and good governance was very prominent and some people in some circles were saying they might not support the Budget for Ministry of Defence. I would like to call upon this House to consider the issues of security; both of lives and property very, very seriously, and in effect support the Ministry of Defence’s budget.  

Just today, there was a report in the papers that a truck was burnt on the Karuma–Pakwach road, but every other day, we are being assured that security is improving. I am not very sure how government could explain this. In some instances they say there is lack of logistics; in others they say the strategy was wrong. But I think it is incumbent upon government and us to find a solution for these special programmes, even if it means through special budgetary allocations. 

There has been an increase, we are told, in gross domestic product, and, of course, as you are aware, inflation went down, if you include the food crops. But if you subtract the food crops, inflation went up. I think it was 3.5 per cent. Mr Speaker, I would like to be protected -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you came to support the Minister who did not make a contribution, that is, to justify why you are moving a motion. We should then hear from the committee, if it has a report, and then we start a general debate.

MRS KABAKUMBA: Yes, Mr Speaker, I am coming to that; I was only giving a very brief background. 

Government is seeking approval of the revised revenue and expenditure of 2001/2002 and of the budgetary proposals.  There has been need to revise the revenues and expenditures because in some cases the revenue, which was anticipated, was not realised; there were shortfalls in the revenue, and to that effect, there was a need to revise. Of course if we do not approve the proposals, then government can easily be paralysed. That is why we are here to seek the support of honourable Members for the revised expenditures and for the budgetary proposals of 2002/2003. I beg to support.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.  

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE BUDGET COMMITTEE (Ms Beatrice Kiraso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. I had earlier requested Members to come with the report of the Budget Committee so that together with the report of the Budget Committee, which was sent to His Excellency before the Budget was read, and the Budget Speech itself, we may have a more focused discussion of the Budget Speech.

The Budget Committee, where all chairpersons of the other committees are ex-officio Members, interacted with the government through the various sectors and then at the end, with the ministry in charge of the Budget, which is the Ministry of Finance. I am glad to report that the Budget Act, to a very great extent, has been implemented -(Applause). 

Mr Speaker, Parliament was able to fulfill its statutory requirement by presenting its recommendations on the indicative budget estimates to the President by the 15th day of May, and make observations on Government policies and programmes as is required in Section 7(3) of the Budget Act. 

I thank the Sessional committees for the work they did in spite of the limited time and the technical skills that we needed in order to interpret the budget proposals. It became evident that committees of Parliament require sufficient technical skills and tools of analysis in order to domesticate the budget; that this reform will not be worthwhile if a lot of effort is not put in capacity building to enable Members of Parliament appreciate more issues concerning, not only resource allocation, but also resource mobilisation. I hope and trust that the Parliamentary Commission will attend to some of the problems, which I have already brought to your attention, Mr Speaker.

On the macro economic plan and the expected growth of 7 per cent, the Budget Committee made the following observations: - Hon. Members, I do not want to waste a lot of time because the report from the Budget Committee has been circulated. I am trying as much as possible to give the highlights of areas where I think Parliament should pronounce itself as is required by the Budget Act Section 11. It reads: 

“Parliament shall analyze programmes and policy issues that affect the national budget and economy and, where necessary, recommend alternative approaches to Government”.  

So, I will try to highlight those areas where we think we may come up with recommendations on alternative policies and programmes. I wish also to report that at that time of interaction before the Budget was read, a number of issues that were raised by the Sessional committees and the Budget Committee were, to a very large extent, catered for in the Budget Speech and the resource allocations. Where they could not be catered for, some explanation was given.  

Since I have already circulated the report, the honourable Members through their Sessional committees have got a right to question where they think these issues were not appropriately addressed.

Mr Speaker, our economy is characterised by pessimism of global demand and the world economic outlook appears to be gloomy. These are poor prospects of Uganda’s external trade or exports, and the effect on foreign direct investments into the private sector. According to the World Economic Outlook, 2000, the external sentiments are already deposed. Thus, the 7 per cent growth is overly optimistic in the medium term. I think we need, as government, to make it a bit more realistic.  

We also observed that there is constrained domestic private consumption due to tight monetary and fiscal policy. On this issue, I have requested the Bank of Uganda to work together with the Budget Committee so that we have an interaction, maybe a one day workshop, where we are made to understand more about the monetary and fiscal policies and to appreciate how the Bank of Uganda runs the reserve account, both the local and the foreign. I will be letting you know when we have finalised this arrangement.  

Mr Speaker, we also pointed out that there are higher unemployment rates. It is a potential risk to the achievement target of the growth rate. 

On the expenditure related macro economic issues, the issue of public administration has come up very strongly. We realised that there is a lot of duplication in the structures Government employs to carry out its public administration.

The Budget Committee appreciates that the size of Cabinet is too big for this economy, and it was pointed out that the size of Parliament itself is also big. That although the public outcry is about the emoluments going to an individual Member of Parliament, this is not the issue; the issue is the size of Parliament of 307, it is too big for this economy. We believe that government will look at areas, which can be addressed to reduce on the size of Parliament.

Mr Speaker, having looked at the size of Cabinet, having observed that the size of Cabinet is already big, and that there is somebody to supervise every sector - because every sector answers to some Ministry - it was amazing to note that there is a presidential advisor also for each and every sector where there is already a Cabinet Minister and so many deputies or ministers of state.  We thought this was a duplication, and Mr Speaker, I am also glad to report that there has been an independent study by the donor community, which has also pointed out such areas of conflict and duplication of work.  So, we believe the Government will address this area of public administration.

Mr Speaker we also did note that in spite of decentralisation, in spite of the fact that a lot of work has been now pushed down to the lower local governments, ministry headquarters have remained top heavy.  If you look at the money that is being consumed at the headquarters, and this is not only the political supervisors, but also even the technocrats and how that money is used, it leaves a lot to be desired.

The other area which was talked about in the Budget Committee was that of RDCs; that because of the number of districts and also the effort – I do not want to call it the ‘craze’, although somebody pointed out the ‘craze’ in the Budget Committee – there is a practice of giving people jobs even when there is no job to be done. You find one area with an RDC, a Deputy RDC and five or six assistant RDCs, and in most cases, these people do not have a lot of work they are doing; but then remember, they are being paid from the government coffers.  

The other area related to a macro economic issue is the strategy for export intervention. According to the report that was given by the Minister - I am sure all of us received this Report before we interacted with the Minister. This one was the Macro Economic Plan and Indicative Framework submission to Parliament. Mr Speaker, it does mention that on top of the Shs.50 billion, which was given for AGOA activities, they had to part with Shs20 billion more. So, we requested for the utilisation of the Shs70 billion. I think as Parliament, which appropriates this money, we are entitled to know what the Shs70 billion did for those AGOA activities. 


And not only that, Mr Speaker, but the committee also did note that AGOA - if it is to be effective and if Parliament is to get timely information on its progress - should be housed under the relevant ministry. That is the Ministry for Trade, Tourism and Industry -(Applause).

We did observe that AGOA, big as it sounds, seems to be a desk in the Office of the President. Somebody is saying that it is an NGO, I do not know about that, but we need proper accountability of what is going on in AGOA. We need to know how much we have achieved and how much we hope to achieve. I wish to inform members that in this year’s budget, there is Shs120 billion put aside for AGOA activities. I think that for prudent public finance management, Parliament being one of the institutions to oversee how public resources are managed, we are entitled to know how these monies are being used, who is using them, and what benefit this country is getting from such funds.    

We also did observe that Uganda is a member of various regional and international bodies, but that we are in huge arrears in terms of our contribution to those international bodies. Now when we do not pay our subscription and there are meetings and there is voting, Uganda does not vote because it is not up to date with its payments.

The Budget Committee recommended that if we cannot afford membership to all these various regional and international bodies, let us scale down and retain our membership to only a few bodies where we shall pay our fees on time and be able to vote, other than being in an organisation just by name.

A number of government departments continue to rent office premises from private developers. For example, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, and Uganda Revenue Authority, which is under the Ministry of Finance. Ironically, others rent government properties, like the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, which rents Amber House.  

On the other hand, honourable Members, government properties and plots are being sold or given away to private persons or investors under an arrangement, which was not made clear to this august House.  

There was an issue of the residence for the Vice President. As the occupant of the second highest office in this country, it is proper that the Vice President is accommodated in a befitting residence. However, the Budget Committee was provided with contradictory information, which I hope will be cleared by the time we finish this general debate on the budget.

In the first place, the location of the identified residence was kept secret to both the Sessional Committees on Public Service and Local Government, and the Budget Committee, for security reasons.

Secondly, the Sessional Committee on Public Service reported that the price of the property identified was Shs2 billion and that only Shs367 million was budgeted for in this financial year. We thought it would not make economic sense to tie up Shs367 million when you want to buy property worth Shs2 billion, yet we have other demanding needs. So, we proposed that that money be re-allocated to other demanding areas until government has got enough money to buy the Vice President’s residence. 

Then the Ministry of Finance came up with another explanation - I hope that at the end of this we shall have the proper picture so that the record is put straight. The Ministry of Finance reported that actually, the price of the residence was Shs1.1 billion, and the Ministry of Public Service for the property had already released that Shs900 million. They added that Shs367 million is what was actually required towards the sealing of the deal. I think this House is entitled to know the fate of our Vice President’s house.

MR AWORI: I just want to know why you keep on leaving out the Speaker?  

MS KIRASO: I beg your pardon?

MR AWORI: There is allocation for State House; two, you are seeking allocation for the Vice President; and three, why are we not also considering official residence for the Speaker? (Applause).

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, hon. Member. I am seeking clarification because it looks like we are discussing official residences. I know that there is a residence for a Chief Justice but the retired Chief Justice has refused to move out of it - (Laughter).

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, I thank my colleagues for raising those issues, but the report I am giving –(Interruption)

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Francis Ayume): Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you chairperson for giving way. I would like to give this clarification in relation to the official residence of the Chief Justice. 

It is true that the Chief Justice has not yet occupied his official residence because the former Chief Justice, Mr Justice Samuel Wambuzi, is still residing there. Reason; some time back, the former Chief Justice, the hon. Justice Wambuzi, approached government to facilitate him acquire a personal house on a similar arrangement like the sitting civil servants. The hon. Wambuzi missed out on that opportunity because his was an institutional house. And it took government some time before we could identify such a house for Justice Wambuzi to purchase as his personal –(Mrs Kabakumba Masiko rose on a point of clarification_) I am clarifying; if you do not believe what I am saying, that is another matter. 

It took government some time to find such a house. Now that the government has found the house, Justice Wambuzi has already paid about half or more for the house so far. I wish he were entitled to occupy that house, but he is not. Unfortunately, the identified house happened to be occupied by another judge, a foreign judge, who is not entitled to purchase it under the civil servants scheme. So, the problem is now with the vacation of that house. Any time that is done, Justice Wambuzi will vacate the official residence and the Chief Justice will occupy it. Thank you.

MR SABIITI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the hon. Attorney General. Were all the civil servants given houses? And those that did not get are they still in those houses where they were before? Does that mean that a Chief Justice, or any other civil servant who never benefited from that exercise will cling to government to be given a house? I find it strange. Could the Attorney General explain this to us? 

MR AWUZU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Attorney General does not deal with housing, there is the Ministry of Works and Communications, which deals with housing, and I know the answers to his questions so I beg to be given permission to answer them. 

Not all civil servants got houses. Those who missed, we are very sorry about that. However, the Ministry of Works has got a plan whereby, through the Housing Finance Company, the money from the houses that are going to be sold - because not all the houses were sold - is going to be put in a fund. Civil servants who did not get houses are going to borrow that money and use it for building new houses for themselves. So, we hope that all civil servants will be housed by the time they leave the Public Service. Thank you.

PROF KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, does the policy of buying a house in which officers of government have been staying, also apply to the President?

MR ERESU: The Minister for Works, Housing and Communications has just stated that the civil servants who did not benefit from the arrangement of acquiring houses would benefit by getting loans from Housing Finance Company to build houses for themselves. I suppose the hon. Chief Justice is one such person. Why is the situation being handled differently for him?

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I am seeking further clarification -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  Why do you not get information from the Minister for Public Service? Because -(Interruption)

MR AYUME: I thought I made myself clear. I said, the Chief Justice had first of all appealed to government to help him acquire a house under that scheme. In fact he has been so facilitated in the sense that a house was found and he went through the process of obtaining a mortgage from the Housing Finance Company in order to acquire it. He has already paid 50 percent or more for it. It was not given to him free of charge.

MR OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Ministry of Public Service is responsible for the welfare of civil servants in terms of accommodation. Since the policy to provide accommodation was abolished however, the civil servants are to benefit from the sale of pool houses. They will benefit from a housing loan scheme, which has been developed by the Ministry of Public Service, in conjunction with the Ministry of Works, obtainable from the Housing Finance Company of Uganda, Limited. 

As for the former Chief Justice, he was paid all his dues, and he is on the normal pension, which accrues every month. And every end of the month he picks his cheque. 

As to whether or not the President or the Vice President may be entitled to acquire their official residences, that cannot arise. Those are institutional houses and they will not be acquired as has been in the case of the sitting civil servants. I thank you.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, now that my honourable colleague on the front bench has referred to the matter of the President not refusing -(Interruption) - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, why do we not allow her to complete and we debate these issues later?

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, by answering these questions, the Ministers have set a precedent. They have opened the gates to speculation. I am wondering, in the event that President Museveni refuses to leave Nakasero and he does not want to go to Rwakitura, are we also going to buy him another house?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I would rather the chairperson proceeded with the report.

MS KIRASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to react to the first issue, which hon. Aggrey Awori raised, about the residence for the Speaker. My report is based on the preliminary indicative budget allocations, which were submitted to Parliament for the coming financial year.

The one for the medium term was also submitted. The medium term expenditure is a three-year expenditure framework. I am not saying that this issue should not be talked about in future, but after this financial year then we shall add on another year to form another three years. 

The relevant committee of Parliament can bring this proposal through its relevant sector or ministry, and then it will come up to the Budget Committee and later, to government. But I think it is something worth thinking about, because the Speaker is the third most important person in this country. For now, I do not think we can talk about it much because it is neither in this year’s budget nor in the medium term expenditure framework.    

The Committee also did note that a lot of funds have been injected in the program of construction of classrooms, but because of politicians at the lower local government level and lack of supervisory capacity at those levels, it looks like the work which has been done is shoddy, and Government has lost a lot of money through the construction of classrooms under UPE. The Committee did recommend that the Auditor General should carry out a special value for money audit, and come up with a report to Parliament as soon as possible. 

I would like to report to Parliament that I have consulted the Auditor General on this matter, and whereas in the past the Auditor General did not have the facility of carrying out value for money audit, there is now training going on in value for money audit and this is the area - I think it is a coincidence - where the study is being done. So, very soon, the Public Accounts Committee and Parliament will be getting a report on the value for money audit in as far as construction of classrooms is concerned. 

The other area, which was looked at by the Committee is the expenditure on Defence.  Defence expenditure is estimated to be two per cent of GDP, but then we also noted that Defence, along with State House and President’s Office, are areas, which always get huge supplementary budgets. Accounting procedures in Defence, as all of you might know, seem to leave a lot to be desired, because all of us have been reading in the newspapers about the frauds and embezzlements, which have been dominating that area. There have been non-transparent procurements. You are aware about the undersized uniforms, the junk helicopters, the rotten foods and all that stuff. 

The Committee, as a disciplinary measure to the defense sector did propose a cut of Shs2 billion from the development expenditure of Defence to fund other priority areas of the economy, and I would like to urge this House to support this action. 

Honourable Members, we have got institutions that are charged with administration of public resources, and the Auditor General is one of those institutions.  We are told that there is a lot of expenditure, which is classified. Such classified expenditure is neither scrutinized nor audited by anybody. We think this is a loophole, and it is subject to abuse.  You cannot say that the Auditor General should be privy to some information, but then, some rally driver is given money to go and make procurements on behalf of the whole Government Minister of Defence? 

For better management of public resource, Mr Speaker, Parliament should compel Government to open its accounts to scrutiny and audit, and scrap that amorphous item called classified expenditure - (Mrs Matembe rose_). I hope hon. Matembe is getting up to support me on this one.

MRS MATEMBE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do agree with what hon. Kiraso is saying, but I just want to inform this House that the issue of auditing of classified expenditure within the Army has been the subject of a number of discussions until eventually, a system of auditing those expenditures was agreed upon between the relevant authorities and the Auditor General. I do think that now the Auditor General must have concluded auditing the first part within the agreement, and I hope this will continue.  I thank you.

MS KIRASO: Thank you very much, honourable Minister.  Mr Speaker, the Committee looked at the issue of the National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS).  It is a feeling that agriculture is the nerve center for this country, and with the program for modernization of agriculture being implemented, the Committee observed the piecemeal implementation of the NAADS program, and felt that this may not address the nation-wide programs in agricultural production. 

The Committee was informed that in the financial year 2002/2003, which is this one, the overall NAADS would be operating in 16 districts with coverage of 100 sub-counties only. We did recommend a re-allocation of more Shs4.71 billion to operationalise NAADS so that more districts and sub-counties are covered. The details are attached to the budget Committee report; that is Appendix One. If you have that Committee report, you can look at our proposals where we hoped to get the Shs4.71 from to re-allocate it to NAADS.

After Sessional Committees had examined the allocations to the different programs within sectors, given their budget ceilings, a number of recommendations for re-allocation within the sectors were made. The details of our proposals to re-allocate resources to areas where we thought they were needed are also contained in that Budget Committee report. So, honourable members, I would like to urge you to look at our recommendations for budget allocations.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, after receiving Sessional Committee reports, the Budget Committee did make proposals for re-allocations between sectors.  It is at this point that we made the other proposal for re-allocation, which I have already talked about.  

The Committees observed that the medium term expenditure framework assumptions which had been used in calculating growth in expenditure of the non wage for public administration, and non public administration of 10 per cent was not realistic.  So, when we applied the realistic one of 5 percent, which we think is in line with inflation, we managed to squeeze from the same budget some extra 18 billion, which 18 billion is proposed for re-allocation. It is contained in your reports. 

I also wish to say that the Ministry was not comfortable with the assumption of 5 per cent, but it did however promise to maintain our proposals in the budget with a view of finding funds to commit to these priorities; and the priorities are also contained in that report.  I do not think I have to read them, but you will look at those recommendations for re-allocation.  

Mr Speaker, the Budget Committee also made some general observations on privatisation and utility reform.  The process was taking too long, allowing for asset stripping in enterprises, which are due for privatisation.  Of course, we know that when an enterprise is due for privatisation, there is job insecurity. There is not enough supervision, so people want to get out as much as they can in the shortest possible time.  So, in this regard, we would like to urge the Ministry which is in charge of privatisation to carry out this exercise - I do not want to say as quickly as possible, but let them try to speed it up, while maintaining transparency and accountability of public funds.  

Mr Speaker, we also did note that there are still various projects, which should be under some other ministries, but are still retained under the Ministry of Finance.  We thought this issue has been raised before many times and the Ministry of Finance should address it.  

We did note, Mr Speaker, that the funds committed to the National Planning Authority and the Capital Markets Authority in the budget did not reflect the seriousness for the functions of these organisations.  Funding should be increased in the coming financial year so that it is in tandem with the responsibilities of these ministries. The National Planning Authority in particular would solve the problem of mushrooming ad-hoc projects based on politics.  Of course we know that we have to balance, but we should also look at the cost-benefit analysis. 

I would like Members to look at a scenario where machinery is mobilised, money is put on a road, for example, and before that road is completed, because we want to balance our politics, we have to rush now to another area to start on a project; before that one is completed, we rush to another one. So, you have got three incomplete projects whereby by the time you come back to complete these projects, even the little that you have already worked have already been destroyed.

Mr Speaker, the report tackled Ministry by Ministry in our observations and recommendations, and honourable members, because the Sessional Committees did interact with their ministries, I think the main input of this reform, the Budget Act, was to minimise the amount of time we spend debating the budget. Issues to do with policy and programmes have already been raised between the various ministries and Parliament through their Sessional Committees.  So, what are we going to do with policy statements? I am sure that is the question.  

Hon. Members, the policy statements this year will be treated differently from how we have treated those policy statements in the past.  First and foremost, Section 6 of the Budget Act says: 
“Each Minister shall cause to be prepared and submitted to Parliament a policy statement of the relevant Ministry on the preliminary estimates submitted under Section 3 and 4 by the 30th day of June in each financial year.” 

I believe that most of these ministries have submitted their policy statements but what is more important is sub-section (2) of section 6: It says, “A policy statement made under sub-section (1) shall be in a form prescribed by the Minister responsible for Finance, and shall reflect specific data on value for money and the extent of achievement of objective, targets on money received and spent.” What does this mean?

It means that each Sessional Committee, after receiving its policy statement, is going to look at how much money was appropriated by this Parliament in the first place, and how much of that was actually released to that sector or Ministry? What was it to do and what has actually been done?  This is the value for money that we are talking about.

The format was agreed on between the Budget Committee and the Ministry of Finance, and the highlights of the format were circulated to the Chairpersons of all the Sessional Committees before the new ones came up. But when a Chairperson gets a document like that, it becomes the property of the Committee, not his or her personal property.  So, I believe that format is still with the various Committees.  

Honourable Members, on local resource mobilisation, because we thought it would not be prudent only to talk about expenditure without thinking of where this money is coming from, you are aware that the money which is being budgeted for is coming from Uganda Revenue Authority, that is the tax revenue, and there is non tax revenue. Then there are grants and domestic and external financing which accounts for 15 per cent: grants 32 per cent, URA 51 percent and non-URA 2 per cent. This is an improvement from the last budget where more than 50 percent of Government resources were coming from external sources.  Now, it is 53 percent coming from within.  

There have been shortfalls experienced in revenue collection.  The tax base remains narrow because the non-monetised sector of the economy remains very large.

The Committee was informed that Government programmes of PMA - Programme for the Modernisation of Agriculture, the PEAP, the Poverty Eradication Action Programme and the Medium Term Competitive Strategy and the Strategic Export programmes are all aimed at structural transformation and modernising the economy.

Honourable Members, the Budget Act requires the President - this is section 13 - in each financial year before the 15th day of June, to cause to be presented to Parliament information relating to the total indebtedness of the State, showing the grants, showing the loans and showing all guarantees.  

I wish to report that on the day the budget was read, the Minister of Finance did make this presentation, but what we intend to do with this presentation is to make copies for each Sessional Committee so that each Sessional Committee looks at those loans or grants which are relevant to their sectors so that when they are reporting on the policy statements, they also come up with the information relating to the utilisation of these loans and grants.  This is a detailed report, it shows total indebtedness of the State to date, and it also shows sector by sector, how much money has gone there in as far as loans and grants are concerned.

Honourable Members, I wish to draw your attention to Article 152 of the Constitution.  Article 152 of the Constitution empowers Parliament to pass all laws to do with taxation. It is this Parliament, which passes it. It says:  
“No tax shall be imposed except under the authority of an Act of Parliament.”  

But I would like to inform you that when the Budget Speech is read and the Minister makes some proposals in taxation changes, they start implementing them immediately before Parliament pronounces itself on them. I think that practice must stop.  

I am aware that there is a law; I think something to do with the Public Finance Act, which empowers the Minister to start implementing those changes. But to me, and I think to all of you, the supreme law of the land is the Constitution –(Interruption). I will get the information, honourable Minister. 

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker and honourable Members, first of all, I want to apologize for the way we began. I was not clear in my mind, given the new arrangements under the Budget Act, where –(Interjections)- I was not aware that the chairperson of the committee would make this presentation before the debate, I was thinking about the old days.  So, I apologize.  

However, on the point of the law that hon. Kiraso has just raised, it is true that under Article 152, it is only Parliament which mandates the collection of taxes.  But it is also true that Parliament, by law, established the Provisional (Collection of Taxes) Act. There is a Provisional (Collection of Taxes) Act that validates all changes made at the time of the Budget Speech. 

The Minister signs the Provisional Collection Order, which is an instrument under that Act, to validate and legalise those measures until such a time when Parliament debates that particular provision. After Parliament has debated that particular provision of tax, if Parliament varies it in whichever direction it takes, the new tax takes effect as of the day when that variation becomes law. Before that, every collection in between is validly collected under the Provisional (Collection of Taxes) Act and the Order there under. So, Sir, we are perfectly within the law set by this Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: I think her concern was technical to - when you look at the Article - this collection that you make in between the time you read the Budget and the other. I think she was aware of this, but she was questioning whether technically it is in conformity with Article 152. I think she was just raising it that way.

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, it is not only that. Of course I am looking at a prudent budgeting method. I would like Parliament to foresee a situation where this measure and the money that it is expected to raise has already been factored into the Budget, and then the proposal is brought to Parliament and Parliament varies it.  

Mind you, that money was expected to be collected. It has already been budgeted for; items are already in the Budget, which will be financed by that money. But for one reason or another, Parliament varies that proposal. So, what happens? That money will not be realised.  Therefore, the activities, which were supposed to be funded with that money will not be funded, causing budget cuts, and this is what we are trying to minimise, I believe.  

There is no contradiction between what I said and what hon. Musumba said, I wish we could just harmonise things so that they are smoother, so that such a situation does not arise.  Actually, I wish when the Ministry came up with this proposal, they had also brought proposals to do with taxation, so that we talk about them and agree on them before hand.  

THE SPEAKER: You mean the taxation aspect should be revealed before it is imposed? Should they give you the details of the taxation measures they want to put in place?

MS KIRASO:  No, the proposals of where they might increase and where they may decrease.

THE SPEAKER:  General information?

MS KIRASO: Yes, general information, so that we agree in principle then they can come up with the details. I have already said that most of the issues are in the report which, together with the Budget Speech, should form the basis for us to do justice to the Budget Speech, and later the policy statements. 

I would like also to inform Parliament that the Budget Committee and the Budget Office realised that we make recommendations on the Floor of this House arising out of debates of policy statements, and there is never any follow-up on whether these recommendations have been implemented or not. Sometimes we cannot even trace the recommendations because the reports are scattered all over the place. 

Now the Budget Committee has moved to condense all the recommendations, which were made by the Sessional committees when we last debated the Budget. We shall be circulating this book to all of you to look at the recommendations, which were made for each and every sector, so that it is easier for committees to follow up when they interact with the ministries on what happened to their recommendations.  

We will be circulating this book, I think tomorrow, because it is already in the Budget Office. I thank you very much, honourable Members.

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much, chairperson.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want the honourable chairperson of the Budget Committee to clarify to me one point. I do not know whether I was a bit warped when she was reading this one out. If your recommendations are not met in the policy framework, what follows?  

For instance, I am referring to the agriculture sector committee, which recommended that the money meant for the offices of the Minister of Agriculture and Animal Industries be relocated, because it did not fall within the jurisdiction of the Ministry to give money for the establishment of that office. In other words, they referred it to the Ministry for the Presidency or State House. So, what happens; because in the policy framework it is there and it seems they are going to utilise it? 

What happens when your recommendations are again reflected in the policy framework? I do not know what you recommended on that one and what the way forward is.

THE SPEAKER: These are recommendations, as you say.  There are other constitutional provisions that will prevent them from imposing them, unless the Executive accepts. What do you think should be done? These are recommendations.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Mr Speaker, do you mean to say that we reject them totally in that essence?  Because they have recommended in their Budget Committee that such money should be put, for instance, to disease and pests, and it is not in the policy framework. What do we do from there?  What is the way forward?

THE SPEAKER: But how far do you go as far as the Constitution is concerned? How far can you make the changes to proposals that are effective, other than through recommendations? You have to be conversant with some provisions in the Constitution. I do not know whether I am clear, hon. Sebuliba. 

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: I have not got the explanation well. 

THE SPEAKER: There are certain huddles in the Constitution, things that we may not do, but we can recommend. I think it is important to appreciate that certain recommendations we made here are advisory and others are mandatory.  So, I do not know whether what you are suggesting is not a recommendation, which the Executive should consider and take, or not.  I think we should know that difference. It is not that every resolution we make here is mandatory; some are just advisory.

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, the recommendations and the interactions which we had with the Government before the Budget was finally prepared gave us an opportunity to negotiate. It gave us an opportunity to pronounce ourselves where we thought the money should be put and what changes should be made.  

The issue you are talking about, honourable member has been handled in the Budget. For example, there was Shs8.3 billion, which had been put aside for coffee seedlings. We recommended that out of that money, they should only retain Shs5 billion for coffee seedlings and Shs3.3 billion goes to fight the coffee wilt disease. We did not see any rationale of putting all the money in coffee seedlings and yet there is a disease fighting the seedlings.  That one has been addressed.

There are issues that could not be addressed, and an explanation was given to the Budget Committee.  But the Sessional committees should continue following up some of these issues with the relevant ministries.  

However, about the Constitution, which the Speaker was talking about, different bodies have been going to the Constitutional Review Commission to present their views. I do not know if there is any arrangement, maybe the legal people will advise us, where Parliament will take its views to the Constitutional Review Commission as a body, as an institution. Because, it also does not augur well with us to continue making recommendations here and yet there is nothing that compels the Government to take them or not to take them.  I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Do you mean that as Parliament of Uganda, as the 7th Parliament, we take views to the commission when eventually the whole thing will come here and we decide on it? This is what is going to happen. The work of the Constitutional Review Commission will end here. As a Member of Parliament from a constituency, or as a group, you can go there, but for us to sit here and table it - I do not know whether the Executive has done that - it becomes a problem.

MRS DOROTHY HYUHA (Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I wish to thank the chairperson of the Budget Committee for the input she has been making.  

I am the chairperson of the Social Services Committee, and I am glad to have been re-elected as chairperson in the 7th Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Congratulations!

MRS HYUHA: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, following the Budget Act, which gave the mandate to the Budget Committee on which I am ex-officio member, we made an input as sectors to this Budget Committee, and made recommendations to Government. It is true that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development came to respond to the issues raised by the Budget Committee.  

I also wish to inform this House that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Ssendaula, wrote to the chairperson, Parliamentary Budget Committee, a communication which says: “Action taken on the recommendations of Parliament on the preliminary estimates of Financial Year, 2002/2003.”  

As far as my sector is concerned, I know we have the mandate of monitoring and analysing policy matters of three sectors – Education and Sports; Health; Gender, Labour and Social Development.  I wish to make an observation here: When I look at the policy statements from the three sectors, I am sorry to say that what the honourable Minister indicated here is not reflected in the policy statements from the various sectors. 

I also wish to give an example, so that when the members are debating and when we go back to our respective committees, we have a clear vision of how we are moving. Out of the three sectors, I wish to inform the House that the committee requested that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, which has been denied -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But aren’t you now really contributing? You started a contribution. Why don’t you continue with the contribution?

MRS HYUHA: So, I will continue with the contribution, Mr Speaker.  Thank you.  

As I was indicating, in the social services sector, we have three sectors. I wish to inform this House that it is only in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, where we requested for an addition of Shs.0.455 billion, and it is indicated here, according to the communication, that the Ministry of Finance agreed, and we are glad that it has made an addition. But when I look at the two other sectors: Education and Health, in all the recommendations that the Budget Committee made, the Minister indicated here that “action taken”, but when I look at the policy statements, I do not see it. 

So, I wanted guidance.  How do we move? Is it a question of making recommendations here and they remain at that?  We said that as Parliament we should always have an input, and we thought that some of our recommendations should be honoured.  

Mr Speaker, I wish to use the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development as an example –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But since you have received these policy statements, and I imagine you have summoned the various ministers and ministry officials to come to you, why don’t you keep those questions that you are now raising? Keep them, so that when they come to you, you say, “I have this, but I do not see it here, what happened?” Eventually when you make your Sessional committee report, maybe you will point them out and maybe the officials will clear you when they come to you.

MRS HYUHA: Mr Speaker, I want to accept your guidance, but given the way the chairperson has advised us, I have been on this committee, we have been making recommendations and some of these recommendations are a follow-up of what we recommended in the previous financial year. They came to the Budget Committee, we recommended and they were taken on, but when we come to the policy statements, they are not there! What do we do? I again wait for the sector to make a recommendation? 

For example, on the side of Government constructing one secondary school per sub-county, Government had indicated that 270 schools would be grant-aided within the Medium-Term Budget Framework. In the year 2000/2001, Government grant-aided 90 secondary schools and we had hoped that in this financial year, Government would grant-aid another 90 and then the same the next financial year.  But when the Committee recommended a strategy to address this issue and the Budget Committee accepted – (Interruption)

MS KIRASO: Of course the chairperson of the Committee on Social Services is raising very important issues, but I remember when we interacted with the Government after we had made these recommendations, we were given the breakdown of how the national Budget is allocated in the various areas or sectors. 

The overall goal of Government is to reduce poverty by the year 2017. To make that dream come true, the Poverty Eradication Action Plan (PEAP) spells out four pillars, I am sure we all know them. Education takes 26 per cent of our Budget, and mind you, there is security, agriculture, law and order, public administration, health, etc.  

The explanation was, since education is already taking 26 per cent, which is a very big chunk of the national Budget - I am sure the honourable member sat in that meeting - let us try to move towards a balance in the four pillars of PEAP. If we get all the money and put it in education, then how about the other sectors? That was the explanation that was given.  

We were told that as the years go on, they move towards having a balance between the four pillars and the other sectors that do directly influence or eradicate poverty. The committee took that explanation, because all the other sectors will come up and say they want more money, but all sectors are under-funded because our budget is under-performing. I thought we agreed on some of these issues at that level.

MRS HYUHA: Thank you very much for the information, Madam chairperson, but I was picking up from the communication from the Minister, which said, “action taken”.  

When I look at the sector of education, we indicated a lot of proposals, and he indicated that so much would be added here but when I look at the policy statement, the same stand remains. For example, we found out that Lumumba Hall in Makerere University is about to collapse on children, so should we re-allocate, what do we do? We recommended some re-allocation, and the Minister indicated that Makerere would be given 300,000 shillings; it is not there. Mr Speaker – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, since you will be presenting a report, I think you should conclude.

MRS HYUHA: I want to conclude, but my concern is Parliament making recommendations that are not taken on.  It becomes time wasting for us, year in, year out, to come here to make recommendations that are not considered. The Minister, according to this Budget Act, indicated that he would take such and such action, but when I look at the policy statements, no action has been taken. I wanted to draw the attention of the members to this before they go back to their committees. We feel we have been given a supply of air; there is no addition of money!

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we started a general debate on this matter, and as the chairperson said, we have a Budget Act that is being presented for the first time.  According to it, we would be finalising this matter by the end of August. So, a lot has to be done because we are in committee, but also, much was done before the Budget was read. 

Now you are expected to show that there is an advantage in having a Budget Act other than taking the normal practice, which we had, in which we would take three months before the Budget is approved. We intend to ensure that this budget is approved by August or something like that.

LT.COL KATIRIMA: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. I wish to be guided on how we should react to the recommendations of the Budget Committee and the discussions they have held with the Minister of Finance. As you see, the Budget Committee met and made recommendations based on what they had got from the sectoral committees.  Some agreements were reached with the Minister of Finance, and as the chairperson of the Social Services Committee has said, some of the recommendations have not been accepted.  

I would like to be guided; because Parliament had not debated the recommendations of the Budget Committee, which were discussed with the Minister of Finance, what is our position going to be on the recommendations of the committee and the reactions of the Minister of Finance to whatever emanated from the Budget Committee?  

My feeling is that we should have debated the report of the Budget Committee so that we take a position as Parliament and we recommend to the Ministry of Finance that this is what we want.  For example, I am strongly opposed to the recommendation of the Budget Committee that two billion shillings be cut from the budget of the Ministry of Defence and is re-allocated to other needy areas!  

I appreciate that there are resource constraints and all areas are lacking here and there. Indeed we lack greatly in the Ministry of Defence, so for a Ministry which has so much to do under a constrained budget, how does the Budget Committee recommend to the Ministry of Finance that even two billion shillings be taken away when we have not debated it in this House and taken a position?   

I want your guidance, Mr Speaker, on how we should treat the report of the Budget Committee and the discussion they have had with the Ministry of Finance. Should we start afresh now to discuss the recommendations of the Budget Committee and come to the positions that the Minister of Finance should now take into account? I want your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you should recall the background that led to the passing of the Budget Act.  Before the Budget Act was passed, what used to happen was that the House itself would hear about the contents and policies of the Government on the budget day.  Before that, we were in complete darkness. 

At the same time, after the Budget was passed, we were supposed to own it; we were supposed to have passed the Budget. This was a non-satisfactory position, to which the House said, “No, why should we be rubberstamping everyday?”  The Budget is read on 15th, we have to pass it, we cannot alter this, and we cannot influence this and the other!” 

So, the Budget Act was passed as a Private Members’ Bill. It was passed to enable Parliament to participate in the budget process at an early stage before the Budget day, and even to have an input, which the Executive may or may not accept. 

This Constitution, which we are following, has not been altered, and it does not allow you as an individual - other than a motion moved by the Government - to impose a charge on the consolidated fund but at an early stage, because I think it was two months or three before, the President, who is in-charge of finance, sent us some details, not the taxation aspect but some details about the allocations and so forth. So, we participated in the negotiations; we said, “but the stress has been here, don’t you think we should stress here, can’t you alter this…?” The Executive has accepted some of these recommendations but others have not. 

After this was done, each Sessional committee sat and considered what was being proposed for its ministries and on 15th May I sent a report, which was a collection of all the views from the various committees, to the President. 

I think about two or three days after, the Minister of Finance said he wanted to meet the committee concerned so that they can talk about some of the recommendations which were at variance with what the Executive had done. This they did, and I think certain things were accepted and were reflected, but not 100 per cent. After those negotiations, the Minister of Finance must have gone to the Cabinet, which is responsible for dealing with this, and they did what they could. 

So, you cannot say, if the reduction was made on your constituency, it must have been agreed on only by the committee itself. We cannot say the committee did this! The committee made its recommendations, and the Executive considered these and they adjusted accordingly. 

Now you are going to debate, and the general debate will be centred on the motion, which has been moved by the Minister. The committee has also given us its views so that you debate the general policy of the Budget - what it is aimed at, its failures - and then make suggestions.  

Maybe for the next Financial Year, these things will have taken root, but as the honourable chairperson of the Committee has said, it is not that every recommendation that you make will be accepted. There are other financial constraints that may prevent the implementation. Although the spirit may be there, they might find that the body is not.  That is when I say that the ability to implement what has been promised is not there.  

So, this is going to be a general debate, and as I indicated, even the State of the Nation Address was a general debate about policy of Government – what is fed here, what should be improved here – and we are going to do the same thing here.  

This debate is going to take six days. At the same time, the various committees wish to meet to consider the policy, but only to add, because you already started debating these policies when you met the ministers before, and you also met the Minister of Finance. You negotiated what changes you wanted for your sector and this was accepted.  So, that is what you are really going to do, but I think the stress is that this time it will be a shorter process than it has been before.

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, hon. Katirima has got a point, and it is a very important point. It is not until you start implementing a law - even the Constitution - that you see where it might be weak, where it may need to be strengthened, amended or even some sections deleted. 

It is true that in this law there is no provision for the Budget Committee to bring its report of recommendations to Parliament to be debated and owned by Parliament before these recommendations are presented to the Executive. It is very true.  We had actually pointed it out, I think together with the Speaker.  We had seen that anomaly, and as time goes on, since this is our first time to implement this Act, I think there is room for improvement on the Act so that in future, after the Budget Committee has made its observations and recommendations before the 15th, before presenting them to his Excellency through the Speaker, we bring them to the House, we debate them and we own them as Parliament. I agree with you on that matter.  

THE SPEAKER: Maybe also to report, many other countries have learnt about our experience on the Budget Act and the Budget office.  There has been resistance in some jurisdictions because they think this kind of law is an invasion of the territory of the Executive. 

Our explanation has been that this was not an invasion of the territory of the Executive. It was trying to make us efficient as Parliament, to improve on our method of doing this so that we are partners in this budget process, especially because at end of the day we are going to own it. So, if we are going to own it, we should become partners so that we help each other to do what is supposed to be done.

LT GEN. TUMWINE: Mr Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the chairperson of the Budget Committee. She has said that the law does not require the report of the Budget Committee to be owned and discussed by the House before it is passed on. And she has said, and I agree with her, that it was an oversight and that in future something could be done. 

While we recognise that there was an oversight, instead of waiting for the future, I wanted clarification as to why we cannot do it now. Does the law stop us from doing it now, in spite of the fact that it is not mentioned?

THE SPEAKER: I think what she is saying is that as we implement this law, we shall see weaknesses, and when we detect these weaknesses, the best we can do is to improve on the law by effecting necessary amendments where we did not foresee a situation.  But we cannot really try to change the law administratively. We are Parliament, and this law was passed by us; so if there are loopholes, as she says, to plug those loopholes you do so by making an amendment. But give it time; we are implementing this law for the first time. It is not every time you detect a weakness that you come here and amend. I think let us give it time and we shall see.

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to give information, but I also want to declare my interest with regard to the law that is being discussed.  The interest is that when I was still in the 6th Parliament, I participated most actively in having it drawn, but I wanted to give this information so that this is not understood to be lacking within the law.  

The reason the framers of the law at that time did not want the Budget Committee report to come to the House at that point was because if it came to the House - you remember at this point there are still negotiations between the Parliament and the presidency - if you bring it to the House and the House takes a position as a House, then - I do not want to use the word ‘polarises’, but it sets positions and it ceases to be a matter for negotiation. 

That is why the framers of this law said okay, let the members who have something to say go to the committee, let the matters be set out in the committee.  At that point it is still a committee matter, and the arbiter of the highest order is the whole House. Because, in case the President or the Minister of Finance did not agree with the recommendation of the committee, they will come here, and the House will hear the committee chairperson and the Minister, arbitrate and make a final pronouncement. So, it was not an oversight. The thinking could have been changed, but that was deliberate. 

MR MWANDHA: I was going to say partly what hon. Musumba has said that the basis of the Act is to provide for negotiations between the executive and the legislature because before this Act came into force, that was missing.  We were always faced with a budget, which we had to approve. We were not allowed to increase anything, and it was difficult to make any changes without having information. We were all the time having to approve the budget as given.  

I happen to have chaired the last meeting with the Minister of Finance, and the Minister and his technical officers were extremely pleased that the Budget Act is in place. This is because a number of things that were communicated by the Budget Committee to the President were eye openers even to the Minister of Finance himself, and he was very pleased.  

As a matter of fact, there are certain areas of the Act, which the Minister would like to have amended. In fact we told the Minister to go back and look at the Act and identify those areas which he believes should be amended to make the relationship even better, and I think the Minister is going to do that. So, if Members have anything else that they may think will be necessary to effect by way of amending the Act, I am sure that that will be welcome.  That is the information I wanted to give.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, let us continue with the debate.  

MRS SARAH NYOMBI (Ntenjeru North, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to start with export intervention as the chairperson has put it. 

One of the highest priorities for the medium term is to increase exports and support rapid economic growth and structural transformation. The principal government programmes supporting exports include the Strategic Exports Programme and NAADS.

THE SPEAKER: Only five minutes Honourable.

MRS NYOMBI: Yes, I will be brief, Sir. I started with that note which I quoted from the Minister’s budget speech. I would want to express my disappointment, Mr Speaker. With all that is in place, and it is known by government and by all of us that in the last financial year, a total of Shs52.5 billion was provided to support the Strategic Export Programme.  But I wish to inform the House about the Royal Agricultural Show, which was held in UK between 1st and 4th of July this year. 

To my surprise, and yours too, we did not have a stall as Uganda. Most of you are saying, ‘why’ when we have all the funds put aside for doing this. As I said, I was surprised. When we got there, Mr Speaker - self sponsored not by government. We expect all the funds put aside to be allocated to solicit for markets but if we do not exhibit in such shows, I do not know how we could access markets.  

I wish to inform the House that Ghana, Nigeria, and Morocco had stalls at the show. What actually interested me were the sweet potatoes, bananas, and fish in the stall of Ghana, which we have here. What we have here is the best quality.  

When we met with the Ambassador, we were a group, self-sponsored, but we had interest. Our country is the nerve centre for agriculture, and this is a royal agricultural show, where we would present our produce to attract markets! Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

MR MIKE SEBALU: Thank you very much for giving way. I note that it was good that you went to attend that show. Did you go to exhibit something or you just went to have a look at -(Laughter)-

MRS NYOMBI: I Thank you very much, my colleague. I went because I thought Uganda had a stall, and I was very much interested in supporting and talking more as a politician regarding that stall. 

To get back to the point, Mr Speaker - I think that was a joke. I think we realise there is poor co-ordination between all Ministries concerned. According to the Ambassador, a deposit of 1,400 pounds was paid to book a space in this show for Uganda, but I understand the exhibitors were denied visas. But all this arises from poor co-ordination. If it was organised by all the ministries concerned, I believe our exhibitors would have been there. Our farmers were willing to exhibit if granted visas and if we were properly co-ordinated. 

The point I wanted to raise here is poor co-ordination between our missions abroad and all ministries concerned. I know our President is very famous as a spokesman for Africa and for addressing all issues affecting Africa, including soliciting for markets for our goods. But I wonder how he could do all this all by himself! If he could delegate his role to give the state of the nation address to his vice, I think he should delegate this important role of soliciting for markets for our produce so that our people get helped. With the bell ringing, I think that point is made.  

Another issue I wish to tackle is about graduated tax. My people in Ntenjeru North do not want to pay graduated tax because the coffee wilt and banana wilt diseases have hit us. And I wish to inform the Minister for Disaster Preparedness that my people are going to suffer for the next three years. We do not have coffee and bananas. The ministry of Agriculture is aware and is doing a good job of clearing all bananas from Ntenjeru North because of the banana wilt, but what is next?  Because, within this period, we have been given cassava to plant but it is a process; it takes some time. So, I beg the Disaster Preparedness Minister to take consideration of Ntenjeru North. My people are badly off. There is no matooke and coffee because we were hit by disaster.

As I wind up, I urge all honourable Members and the government that it is high time we started practical accountability. We have been talking of accountability, accountability, but to my knowledge it has been book accountability. For example, for the 1,400 pounds that was paid for a stall at the Royal Agricultural Show, the books will show that it was paid yet in the stock, nothing was done on the ground. As an auditor, I think we should do practical accountability and stop book accountability. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR JOHN ESELE (Bukedea County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister for the Budget Speech and I also thank the Chairperson of the Budget Committee. I would like to address the increasing income to our people. 

Mr Speaker, both His Excellency and the Minister say that the economy is growing by 5.6 per cent. This is at the macro economic level but at the micro economic level, the person in the village is not realising this increase in the economy. I think that in order to empower the person in the village, we should address seriously the issues surrounding improvement in agricultural production.  There is no other way the man in the village can improve his well being unless there are improvements in the agricultural sector.  

I was very excited when, about six years ago the President introduced the idea of the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture (PMA). If this programme had been implemented very effectively, a person in the village would have improved his economic status but the PMA is being implemented so slowly. It is now six years but it is only in 24 districts. I think something has to be done to hasten the process of implementing the PMA so that all the 59 districts of this country are covered as fast as possible.  

I note that there are three areas around which we can improve our agriculture. One of them is the provision of credit or subsidies to our farmers. Many countries whose economies are agriculture based actually subsidise their farmers. In the U.S, in May, Parliament approved a subsidy of 70 per cent to their farmers, but this is not being implemented in Uganda. I think we have got to change our thinking and really think about providing subsidies to our farmers.  

Our extension services are not doing what they are supposed to do; they are not very efficient. Again, I was excited when the NAADS programme was being introduced, but still it is only operational in six districts. I think we have got to think of all ways possible to operationalise the NAADS programme in as many districts as possible.  

On markets, this year there has been lower production of maize because a lot of maize was produced last year but there were no markets, and the price went down very fast. I appeal to the government to find ways of motivating the farmers through provision of markets for their products. 

When I was a member of the Cotton Board until a few months ago, we developed a program with the Cotton Development Organisation that would help the President’s target of one million bales in five years. In that programme we had made recommendations on credit facilities, extension service delivery and the government approved it but I was disappointed few weeks ago to learn that the government did not provide the funds nor did it provide the funds for implementing what we had recommended in order to achieve one million bales. So, this poses a danger that the one million bales may not be achieved in the 5 years to come.  So, I would like to request Government that extension services for cotton and credit facilities that we proposed should actually be provided.  

On the AGOA, AGOA is targeting agriculture and agriculture based industries, but the person who is important in this who is the farmer in the village has not been adequately sensitised on what AGOA is. I am sure even some Members of Parliament are not very conversant with AGOA. I would like to ask the government to go and sensitise the people at the grassroots on AGOA so that they are able to appreciate what it is and what it has for them.  

I would like to say something about higher education. I appreciate what the government has done in the UPE programme; now there are a lot of candidates for secondary schools. When I am in the village, a lot of children ask me to help them in secondary education and, of course, I cannot. But the government has promised us universal secondary education. Could I ask government to implement this promise so that we get more of these students going for secondary schools?

In the area of health, I am privileged to be a member of one of the NGO hospitals, and the board. The NGO hospitals are doing an extremely good job, and I appreciate what Government is doing to provide additional funds to NGO hospitals. I was not happy the other week when I read from the Uganda Confidential that somebody had recommended that government should reduce the budget on health. I would like to differ a little from the recommendation of the Budget Committee that Shs1 billion should be removed from the NGO hospitals and be taken for the rehabilitation of the government hospitals. I think the NGO hospitals need this money so that more people can access the services they provide. Let the Government find other money elsewhere for rehabilitation of the government hospitals.

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much.  Honourable Members, those who contributed to the general debate on the State of the Nation Address - I have got the list here- I think I will give the opportunity to those who did not.

MR HOOD KATURAMU (Rep. of Persons with Disabilities, Western):  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I wish to thank the Minister of Finance for his Budget Speech, and in the same vain, thank the chairperson of the Budget Committee for her recommendations and observations she made in her report.

Mr Speaker, sometime last year, we leaders of people with disabilities met the President and our concern was the big number of people with disabilities who are due to graduate this year and join secondary education.  Indeed, our fear was that these children would not join appropriate secondary schools where they will be catered for efficiently.  

Mr Speaker, I seek clarification from the Minister of Education whether there has been a proportional increment of classrooms in secondary schools to match with the increasing number of pupils from the primary schools.  That is the first clarification I seek.

Mr Speaker, my second area of concern is to comment on the transparency in the Ministry of Defence.  While I appreciate transparency in the expenditures of Ministry of Defence, I am also conscious about the security of this country. A lot of issues that concern security of any nation cannot be exposed to the public for the sake of justifying expenditure on the budget, and honourable Members will bear with me on this matter that this Parliament has a leeway in passing any law that can lead Government to institute a committee of people with high integrity and moral character to vet the expenditures of the Ministry of Defence. But for one main reason, the security of this country cannot be exposed in such a manner that can endanger this country and its people.  That is my second concern, Mr Speaker. Therefore, hon. Chairperson, I hope you will bear with me that on this matter, really we may need to be very careful when we are going to discuss it, particularly when it comes to exposing our security concerns.

Mr Speaker, I wish also to comment on AGOA. You are aware that Government undertook a restructuring exercise in the ministries.  It was indeed a trial in the 6th Parliament. As you are aware, Sessional Committees were bringing here their agitation on the performance of some departments that had been transferred from one ministry to another, and one of them, if I may give an example, was the training of nurses, which was transferred from the Ministry of Health to the Ministry of Education.  We felt that there was inefficiency for the Ministry of Education to handle a department in which it does not have professional people that fall under that line.

I think AGOA needs to remain, as of now, where it is.  We have just heard from the honourable Member of Parliament from Ntenjeru, and she sincerely exposed the challenges that our Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry is facing.  That if we could fail to promote trade outside Uganda, I do not think it is advisable to have this new venture of AGOA entrusted to this Ministry when it is actually in its infant stages.  

Mr Speaker, if you have a leaf to borrow, it is from the AIDS Commission.  The fight against AIDS has been a success story and it has been under the office of the President.  I think it is important that in these initial stages AGOA should be supervised and monitored by the highest office in this country to see whether it can be successful, and then we can continue with it in the Ministry.  Thank you.

CAPT. DAVID MATOVU (Kooki County, Rakai):  I thank you, Mr Speaker.  I also stand, Mr Speaker, to support the motion and I have a few comments to make.  One, Mr Speaker, is about education.  

It is true Government has gone a long way to promote education, especially in primary schools, but there is a problem of school dropouts, which has not been adequately addressed, especially of the girl-child and even some boys have taken on better business in the countryside.  I think Government should again come up with a law to address that shortcoming of school dropouts, especially in primary schools.

The other one is grant aiding: we are of course aware that Government is trying to ask many private people to come in and help them where they cannot reach.  It is true many people come up with private schools in the countryside, but to some extent, they get stuck to find scholastic materials, staffing and at times structures, but they are doing Government work. This would be Government lending. I would request Government once in a while to come in and see how to help these private schools, and even at times when the community for example says “no, we are giving up these schools”, Government should take them over. 

It would be really a blessing to the Government: they have put up classrooms, they have gathered children for you and they are saying, “please, here you are Government, take over your role”.  You know that to register a school is a very cumbersome process; it involves asking for toilets, asking for this and that, yet even some government schools do not have some of these facilities they are asking for.  

Higher Education: 

I have seen in the Budget some 400 million being proposed for the loan scheme for the needy bright children.  I would want to propose that we really see equity in the use of this money.  I am proposing a proportionate allocation of this money so that – maybe we use the population quota or taxpayers’ quota in the countryside, or at the worst, equitable distribution so that really all our districts have access to this money other than having this money at some point and you find a few who have contacts benefiting.    

Mr Speaker, I also want to talk about health.  The President in the State of the Nation Address talked about the decline in the immunisation coverage.  Indeed, it is true immunisation or preventive health is the cheapest way of service delivery because it is cost effective.  But when you look at the data, of course there is decline and the reasons are simple.  The Government is to blame because immunisation is not palatable, people are de-campaigning it on most of these radios! In Mbarara there is that radio called the Great Radio.  No action is taken. The programme is highly criticised and Government does not come up.  So, we need, I think, some law also to address that one. 

Mr Speaker, I can hear the bell ringing, but I wanted also to talk about that tax on fuel, which we saw in the Budget of the Government.  When fuel is touched, three things happen to a common man:  Of course tax fares go up, prices of crops are affected which are already bad because these people really have that excuse of saying that fuel has gone up and also shop commodities go up.  So you find the seven billion you are trying to look for causes a lot of distortion in the community.  I think Government here should be very, very careful when it is touching fuel.  It is a very, very sensitive area, which traverses all sectors of life, and I pray that Government really looks at it very, very carefully.

Mr Speaker, in the Budget there was this issue of the stagnant infant mortality rate and maternal mortality rate for a number of years. They mentioned HIV and other diseases but I think the most dangerous area is   malaria. I come from a constituency of about eight sub-counties and lying along two lakes. I can assure you, Mr Speaker and honourable Members, if you went to that place, things are out of hand! Very soon I will be requesting this Parliament to declare Kooki a disaster county.  

In some places people wake up as late as 10.00 a.m. or mid-day.   They cannot go out because mosquitoes are all over.  In Kyalulangira sub-county you cannot talk of Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture because it is not needed.   People wake up at mid-day to avoid mosquitoes. So, it is a very, very big problem and it is a major cause of death in the countryside. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  You see, in Australia there is a small animal, which sleeps for 18 hours a day.

MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA (Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I would like to have a few comments on the Budget Speech by the Minister of Finance.  Now, one issue I would like to re-sound is about the Universal Senior Secondary Education, (USSE).  

Now, according to the President’s Speech to the Nation, he had said that 1.6 billion had been put aside to cater for 90 secondary schools in the country.  When you look at the communication from the Minister of Finance, he is talking of one billion.  So, at this point I would like to get clarification from the Minister of Education whether we still have 90 schools to be granted aid in this financial year, given the fact that the president’s manifesto talks of one a secondary school per sub-county.  So, will the one billion Uganda shillings cater for the 90 schools or it is less?  Maybe the Minister of Education could assist me here.  

Then about road equipment, there is where the Ministry of Finance has put aside some money for at least four sets of road equipment units, and I would like maybe to make an appeal that the Ministry of Works and Communications should begin with the new districts, especially Mayuge, because in Mayuge we have only 30 kilometres of road network catered for by the central government.  Worst of all, we are near a lake, and after every two kilometres you get swamps and I am worried that when El Nino comes in August, some of us are likely to be cut off, either when we are in the constituencies or when we are in Kampala.  So, I would like to appeal to the Ministry of Works to at least look into the newly created districts, especially in the lake basin.

Mr Speaker, I would like to get clarification from the Ministry of Defence.  Something was talked about security and good governance.  I would like to get clarification from the Ministry of Defence because whenever we move to our constituencies, there has been a question about war veterans right from the Second World War up to now.  So, some others have said that they have filled forms, they have gone to Bombo, they have sold their goats and chicken to go and be verified and all that process is over but up to now, they have not heard any response from Government.  So, could I get clarification from the Ministry of Defence as to whether we are looking at the veterans right from 1945 onwards or you are only looking at veterans who were retrenched in 1993, the NRA.  

The other issue, Mr Speaker, is about the second-hand clothes, which the Ministry of Finance highlighted in the Budget. The figure was small; it is just 5 percent but the information I am giving to this House is that the informal sector is quite tricky.   It is telling people that the second-hand clothes were increased by 50 percent.  So, I am seeing a situation where the business community is being cheated.  

So, my view would be that Government would have, first of all, established several textile factories before moving in to tax second-hand clothes because as long as it is 5 percent, the rural people know it was increased by 50 percent.  Hence, if a shirt has been costing Shs1,000 the businessman in the rural area is likely to sell it at Shs2,000.  So, that is my view that Government should have put up a few of the factories before it moved in to tax the second-hand clothes.
The other issue is the schedule of the indebtedness of the Ugandan economy. It is quite alarming that the Ugandan economy has a lot of debts to pay, but I have observed that there is a loophole within the local governments. Day and night, year in, year out, we borrow money. And what is happening is that there are no checks and balances at the local level. The local councils out there are just salivating to get this money and then misuse it. We are here to answer to the country.  

So, I appeal to the Executive to frame a law that can closely monitor the funds taken to the local levels of our economy because much is wasted, and we do not see any impact. An example I will give you is about the water. It is sad to note that in my constituency, I have less than nine boreholes, whereas the figure that the Ministry of Finance quoted was different. They provided for several water springs and boreholes in the constituency. So we need to have checks and balances right from ministerial level down to the district level.

What is happening is that the ministries only wait for accounting. You cannot account rightly without checks. Actually, the Ministry is convinced that boreholes were put in place when in actual sense it is hot air.

Lastly, Mr Speaker is the Functional Adult Literacy Programme. According to the budget, the Ministry of Finance has said that 11 new districts have been involved, and money has been set aside for the programme. What is perturbing however is that when you move around in the constituencies, you find some students of the Adult Literacy Programme soliciting for support from a Member of Parliament, saying, “can you buy us a few boxes of chalk?” So we need to have this one streamlined. 

Members of Parliament should be aware of what is going on, and at the same time, the District Council should be coordinated with the Ministry of Gender, Labor and Social Development. Otherwise, the whole burden will go to the Member of Parliament, as is the case for the education of the disabled. So, I would like to appeal here that something be done, and we have coordination, with Members of Parliament actively involved. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MS JESSICA ERIYO (Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, for reading the Budget Speech to us. I would also like to thank the Budget Committee for the analysis that they have made of this Budget, and the recommendations.

I would like to say that I am pleased, and I am grateful to URA for boosting revenue collection. Much of our budget is now going to be funded by locally generated revenue. As we heard from what the chairperson of the Budget Committee presented here, 51 percent of the Budget is going to be funded by these locally collected taxes, and two percent by non-tax collected revenues. This is something that we must commend URA for, besides the shortcomings of the institution.  

There are certain issues that did not feature in this year’s budget. Hopefully, when we roll out the medium term budget beginning from next financial year, some of these issues will feature in the three-year budget framework paper of this nation.  

Right now, there are certain areas, especially in my district, where people are worried due to the El Nino that is striking us this year. Adjumani is halfway bordered by the river Nile, but we still do not have capacity in the district to utilize the water that is flowing by. This, despite that for about three to four months in a year, it is completely dry in that area. We would like to see the government doing something in that respect, at least support the district to be able to do some irrigation and also improve on fishing methods.

Our people have now gained skills through local initiatives, they have been trained in agriculture and fishing in order to produce products for the market, but they do not have the capacity to do so. We would like to see that the budget of this country supports the local people in this kind of area. We have been talking about markets – our President has moved out a lot to look for markets for our products too, but we also need to do something in support of the people so that their capacities can be built in order to be able to access these markets.

I would like to add on to what my colleague from Ntenjeru North said. I was supposed to be one of those to travel to the United Kingdom for the agricultural show, but I got disappointed when at a certain stage we realized that getting a stall for Uganda was going to be a problem. I had already collected some samples of products from my district and from some other areas so that I could go with them to display at the Ugandan stall, but unfortunately that was not possible. I am as equally disappointed as my colleague. I think this government needs to do a lot in this area. Hopefully, in the next agricultural show, perhaps the one in America next year, the government will allocate something to that effect.

I would like to comment briefly on the issue of security versus development. Much as we discuss our budget, much as we applaud this budget, there are parts of this country where development cannot easily take place because of insecurity. Here, I would like to say that I do not support the idea of the Budget Committee that the Defence budget should be cut by Shs 2 billion.  

Every day I am able to find out what is happening in my district. The district security has to be boosted. We need to at least have more than one Brigade deployed in the district because of the insecurity caused by the Lords Resistance Army –(Interruption).

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank hon. Eriyo for giving way. I would like to seek the following clarification. When the Budget Committee proposes a reduction by Shs 2 billion, and the hon. Member says, “no, that money should be there”, is she trying to imply that the on-going war in Northern Uganda, which has gone on for the last 16 years, has not been successfully contained because UPDF has been under-funded? 

I think our concern here should be what the UPDF has done with the resources that they have been allocated over the last 16 years. The other time they went and bought junk choppers, that was misuse of funds! Is the hon. Member trying to tell us that UPDF is grossly under-funded, and that is the reason we still have insecurity in this country?

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I heard the hon. Member saying that what the Ministry of Defence did last financial year was just misuse funds; if I heard him correctly. Is he in order to say so, yet the Ministry of Defence has managed to keep this country at least 90 percent safe, not withstanding minor setbacks in Northern Uganda? We have registered success in many operations, which the honourable Members here are aware of! Is he in order to say that the Ministry of Defence was just misusing funds?

THE SPEAKER: Well, that is how you might have assessed the honourable Member’s contribution. It is a question of assessment. As far as he is concerned, a lot has been given to the Ministry of Defence, and his assessment is that they have achieved nothing.

MS ERIYO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to say that in my own assessment, UPDF has done something; they have tried their best. Last year, people were making a lot of noise because of UPDF being in the Congo, but do we have the ADF misbehaving the way they used to? Security in Western Uganda has improved! Are we saying that Northern Uganda should remain insecure? 

My Brother there comes from Terego where there is no war. But I come from Adjumani where the Lords’ Resistance Army is disturbing my people everyday. Mr Speaker, I say this because right now, the convoy system is back. Vehicles going to Adjumani are now being escorted by the mamba, by the buffalo and so many others, which consume a lot of money. Do we want our people of Adjumani to be consumed by the Lords’ Resistance Army?  

In addition to that, when you look at the road from Gulu to Adjumani, the section of the road from Pabo to Adjumani cannot be constructed because of the insecurity. If we have the security beefed up, these roads are going to be worked on. Right now, in the rainy season the vehicles that travel on that road get stuck because the road surface is bad, and it cannot be repaired due to the rebel activities. 

Cutting down on the Defence budget, honestly speaking is bad for our people because development activities cannot be embarked upon seriously without security. Mr Speaker, I reject that proposal by the Budget Committee.

I would like to say that I recommend the issue of putting emphasis on the registration of births and deaths, which featured in the budget speech. Mr Speaker, statistics help us to plan. Adjumani district is already ahead because we do have a village registration system that we initiated when I was still working in the District Planning Unit. We register deaths and births and we have trained the local councils at village level to be able to register all these statistics. Where death occurs, we impressed it upon them to indicate the cause of the death too. That will help the district in planning for all the services that it is offering our people.

I would also like to commend the efforts that government is making to address the issue of HIV/AIDS. I commend the multi-sectoral approach on the issue, including the District Response Initiative. The District Response Initiative has been planned for the last two years and now districts are taking these activities seriously. 

For instance, in my district we have a very active Persons Living With AIDS (PLWA) Association, which is now kind of demystifying the issue of HIV/AIDS. Counseling centres and clinics have been set up in these areas, testing centres and skills training for people living with AIDS is going on. This is going to help us in a way that these people are now going to be engaged in economic activities, other than like in the past when they would not be active and yet they should be taken care of. They participate in economic activities and are also able to support their families and themselves. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker and Members of Parliament. I would like to first of all thank His Excellency the President for the state of the Nation Address, which was very good and puts us ahead, as far as harmonising the major constraints this nation is facing is concerned. 

I equally thank the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for the Budget Speech he presented. I also thank the chairperson, Budget Committee and the Budget Committee Members for the recommendations they have put forward for us Members of Parliament to discuss and thoroughly consider far approval as far as running this government is concerned.

I commend government for the great achievements you made in the last financial year. I sincerely thank government for the major direct interventions made to ensure that success of programmes is thoroughly achieved. I commend, for instance, the Fisheries sector. For the Fisheries sector to achieve such milestones was because of government’s direct interventions, right from fishing practices to the landing sites, to quality assurance up to the export markets. 

I would like to request government to emulate such examples as the above. It should come out very openly to support sector programmes to ensure that we are able to export products of the required standards.

During our discussions in the Sessional Committee of Agriculture, we were disappointed to find out that some of the products that we export to southern African countries, especially maize, were of moisture content 21. So, you find that those products were eventually rejected and destroyed. As I commend areas where we have done well, I request government to come in directly to support the agriculture sector in the area of exporting products.  

I want to raise concern over the policy of the sector wide approach by the ministries. A lot of programmes are coming up and are being introduced through the sector wide approaches, ignoring decentralisation where the people at the grassroots could all be directly involved. The sector wide approach has brought about a lot of problems Ministries have retained a lot of funds, they have taken up implementation of programmes they cannot handle, they have created shoddy organisations in form of secretariats, and these are consuming a lot of funds in form of capacity building in form of officials from the ministries facilitating lower programmes. Whereas under the Constitution, decentralisation should be seriously entrenched and supported where there are still shortfalls, we should come up with ways of supporting them and improving and ensuring that districts and sub-counties ensure that there is efficient and effective implementation of programmes. We have an example, which is going on right now.  

We have the Ministry of Local Government carrying out sensitisation of local leaders who are elected.  It is said that 85 per cent of the leaders under local governance are new leaders, but you find that all the training and orientation process is a preserve of the Ministry of Local Government. And to the disappointment of the local authorities, heads of department, technocrats are not involved in the orientation, which is going on.  In such a way, we shall eventually find that there is still conflict of interests and roles and misinterpretations of responsibilities between the local leaders, political leaders, and the technocrats in the local authorities. I request the Ministry concerned to come – (Dr Nkuuhe rose_)

DR NKUUHE: I thank you honourable Member for giving way. To strengthen what you are saying, the Ministry of Finance, just one department, Finance and Administration, has 35 support staff and 42 staff. The Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry where co-operatives are, the department supposed to spearhead co-operatives has only 5 staff. So, I do not know how we are going to fight unemployment among the youth with 5 staff!

MR KASAMBA: Thank you for that information my colleague.  I think that shows that even within ministries, we have variances as far as manpower support is concerned. Thank you for that comment!

On the issue of revenue collection, my colleague from Adjumani has commended Revenue Authority for improving the revenue collection, but I would like to bring it to the notice of this Parliament, Mr Speaker, that the businessmen who are paying revenue to this country are suffering as if it is a privilege for the members of the Revenue Authority to collect money.  Businessmen are suffering! 

I have visited the long room.  Actually, the long room is a wrong room in the true sense.  People to pay revenue face a lot of hardship. I request the concerned Ministry, Ministry of Finance, to look into this and to improve the effectiveness and the efficiency of revenue collection. 

On the local level, or even on the national side, there is need to carry out a national study as far as the tendering system is concerned. There is already now a policy of tendering out revenue collection, and you find that so many local authorities are tendering to private people. The common man is paying the revenue but what Government is getting to deliver services should be thoroughly studied.  

You find that of the revenue, which is collected by the tenderers, the tenderers retain almost 50 per cent.  When you look at the local market down there in the villages, you find that one tenderer gets a market under a tendering system; he pays a monthly revenue collection of about Shs 200, 000 but that one is collected in a weekly –(Mr Eresu rose_)

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, I am a little bit at a loss.  The speaker holding the Floor is talking about revenue collection and talking about revenue collection by the Uganda Revenue Authority.  That was when he talked about the long room being termed a ‘wrong room’.  But at the same time, he is talking about the tendering of revenue collection.  The clarification I seek is; is the honourable Member holding the Floor telling us that Uganda Revenue Authority has tendered the collection of revenue?

MR KASAMBA: Thank you very much my colleague.  I think the tendering system is at the local authority level whereby you find that revenue collection is tendered out to private collectors in form of licenses, market dues and the like.  But you find that the tenderers retain a lot of revenue. I think we need to study –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think he is referring especially to local administration; markets, landing sites - they invite private people to tender for the collection and then pay the local authorities the money collected.  I think he is referring to that system.

MR KAKOOZA: I would like to inform the honourable colleague of mine who was saying that the tendering of revenue does not affect - I have got information here that there is a case whereby on tenders like that of UTODA, there is VAT collected.  Since 1999, there has been uncollected revenue from UTODA retaining that tender. It has been owed by Shs920,000,000, which had a VAT element of Shs156,000,000.  It has not been collected and City Council is continuing tendering to UTODA.  So that affects the  - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, but I think the system when it was initiated some years ago, these local authorities were using their employees to collect revenue and they were not remitting anything.  So, they realised an impact when they tendered to private people; at least they would remit something.  But before that, I think they had no way of checking, so they bid.  They said if you give me the market, I am going to give you Shs50,000,000.  They used to get maybe one million or less.  So, if they can get 25 million instead of one million or five million, I think it is an improvement.

MR KASAMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that clarification.  I am not objectionable to the system of tendering, but how much is the common man paying, and how much is Government getting for effective implementation of services?  That is a question we need to address to ensure that the gap between the revenue paid by the taxpayer and what the Government gets is narrowed by the tax collectors.  That one we need to look at, and I emphasise that we need to look at it and improve upon it!  

I would like to appreciate the Ministry of Works for the road, which is being tarmacked; that is the Kyotera-Mutukula road.  However, there is a lot of concern as far as the workmanship is concerned.  I would request the Ministry to send in a technical team to supervise the contractor to ensure that everything that is supposed to be done is to standard.

Also, the road is almost getting completed but my people who are supposed to be compensated as far as the road reserve is concerned have waited, the other financial year has passed, this one is starting, there is no response from the Ministry. (Mr Awuzu rose_) Maybe the Minister has something to say.

MR AWUZU: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Thank you for putting that question.  There is actually no need for the Ministry to send engineers now to go and supervise the quality of that work because according to our contracts, even from the day before the work starts, we have got consultants who are employed full time on site, and they are supposed to make sure that the work is done according to specifications and so on.  But then, should the contractor not do the work according to the specifications; there is a six months period where any failure on that road is repaired at the cost of the contractor. And since the last Local Government Act came into force, as you will probably know, when Government does a project, all land is supposed to be compensated for before the beginning of the project. That is exactly what is now happening.  

This Kyotera-Mutukula road, and then the other road from Mbarara to Ibanda, those were not involved so the compensation was not done ahead of time. If you look at, for example, the Pakwach–Arua road, the money is given ahead of time and the compensation is virtually done before work actually starts. For example, for that road now, the people are actually being paid when the work is just beginning. Thank you.

MR KASAMBA: Finally, I would like to go to the issue of PMA. There is need for a thorough mobilization. The people have not yet benefited from PMA, and I think the biggest approach we need to take on for its effectiveness to be seen on the ground is the participation of the district members and the sub-county members in the implementation of the PMA programme. But it is very disappointing that the secretariat is carrying out a lot of sensitization, capacity building, training, whereas what we need is productivity on the ground. We need increased productivity in the villages and a strategy for marketing which should be emphasized whereby Government, if need be, directly supports organisations which are ready to advance marketing of those products. Not at the expense of the farmer, but for the benefit of the farmers.  

I think a lot of money is being sent into PMA, but when you assess the impact and then also its integration into schools, we have 7 million children - a third of the entire population is in schools. If we could introduce ecological zones where agriculture is trained to these infants, then we can be sure that in 5 to 10 years we shall be having nationals who are interested in agriculture, who have practiced agriculture in schools. That would be a strategy, which would help all of us nationally.  I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MRS LYDIA BALEMEZI (Woman Representative, Mukono):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank the Minister for Finance for the report he presented to us. I have gone through the Minister’s report and I have appreciated it, but I would like to propose that as he has considered promoting technology, which is a very good thing for our country, and has considered removing VAT on computers, I wish to suggest that he considers removal of VAT from the tapes and ink so that this can be meaningful because bringing a computer when you cannot access the information in print would also be half done. So, if the Minister could consider that, I would feel very happy and appreciate him the more.

MR OKUPA: Thank you honourable Member. There is no VAT on stationery.

MRS BALEMEZI:  Thank you!  Mr Speaker, I would like also to talk about the roads.  Time and again, we have talked of the waterways, and every time the minister presents his budget, the proposals are always for Kalangala Islands. I would wish to remind the minister that Mukono has seven sub-counties, five of them comprising of a constituency which is very inaccessible because there are no boats and there is no ferry.  

The last time some money was allocated for Buvuma Islands, it was reported to us but in practice, the Shs800 million was diverted by the ministry to do other urgent work, and we had been promised that this would be reinstated, which I have not seen in the Minister’s report. So, Buvuma Island and Kome are very difficult to be accessed, and those areas are somehow backward compared to the rest of Uganda. 

Now, for security purposes, people have been stopped from moving on the waters without life jackets. This means that there is nobody who will be moving to Buvuma Island because people have been using these very small boats and they had never thought of buying life jackets because they are the poorest of the poor; there is none who can afford a life jacket! So, I would wish to suggest to the Minister that since they have thought of telling people to put on life jackets, let Buvuma be - (Mr Awuzu rose_)- let me complete this sentence. Let Government consider accessing Buvuma with a ferry and life jackets for the first time so that we can also move. Mr Speaker, Buvuma is my constituency and this means that you are cutting me off from this part of the area.

MR AWUZU: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you for giving way, the Member of Parliament for Mukono.   It is true that this financial year we are buying a ship for Kalangala, but we are not only interested in Kalangala. In fact we are interested in all waterways in the whole of this country. It is in Government plans to have ferries across areas of central Uganda and northern and also eastern Uganda. It is our plan to have ferries from Nakasongola to Lango area, joining Busoga area with Kayunga and so on.  And also, when the money is available, we shall have newer ferries in your constituency in Buvuma.  

Currently, there is an old ferry, which is working there. We tried to keep it in very good condition like the one at Masindi Port. It was breaking down every now and then, but now we have put it in very good condition and there is no problem.

Now, the question of life jackets: The travelers on those boats are very poor people, we do agree, but they are not the ones who are supposed to supply those life jackets, it is the boat operators running the business.  If you want to run a business, then you must fulfill the regulations, which the transport licensing board put for those businesses.  They make money, and the owner of the boats must provide life jackets. And we have not finished; we are putting a statutory instrument whereby if you want to run a boat business, then you have got to provide each of your passengers with a life jacket.  

Then on the good side, there is a South African firm which has come up because when 70 people drowned on the lake, they felt very sad indeed, knowing that there is no lake rescue here in Uganda. They have come up, and we gave them permission last week, and they are going to operate a rescue service beginning on Lake Victoria. 

They have also interested some organization to come and manufacture life jackets in Uganda. That organization is going to manufacture these life jackets and give them free to boat owners. So, it is not all lost, there is hope that we shall save lives on lakes in future.  Thank you.

MRS BALEMEZI: I thank the Minister for that clarification and explanation –(an hon. member rose_) the Minister has given me enough information, and I thank you. From the Minister’s information, I am surprised to hear that he has forgotten that we have a Police post and a health centre there. When he says that whoever moves there is on business, I want to remind him that we have Government officials on the islands, if they do not have life jackets, then they might be forgotten. But as you have put it, in future, maybe in 2006, they will be reached and that gives us hope.

On security, I would like to thank Government for the work they have done as far as security is concerned, but when intensive security is put in place in Kampala, whoever runs away from the security personnel tends to spill over to Mukono. 

The entrance and outlets in Mukono are very insecure, and we have very few police posts. Much as we have the Central Police Station in Lugazi, this is not adequately facilitated.  We do not have any patrol car manning the area to keep the linkage between the police posts within the districts. And as you know, we have enormous forests, sugarcane plantations, tea plantations, and to sum it up, we are surrounded with water. All these are areas, which are very difficult to patrol without vehicles, and even our security personnel are not very well facilitated.  

I believe this happens even in Iganga, because there is a portion which we share with Iganga but sometimes we fail to identify where the people belong, whether Iganga or Mukono, because of the waters and forests. So, I would like to call upon the Minister of Finance to look into providing security with more transportation and facilitation to the Police personnel.  

On health, I have realized that there are no animal vaccines in districts, so whomever an animal bites has to run to Entebbe. I think this is very inconveniencing for some areas, which are quite far away from Entebbe. I would wish to –(Interruption)

MRS MUGYENYI: Mr Speaker, the vaccine against rabies is available at every district with the District Veterinary Officers -(Interjections)- Yes, in fact what is lacking is the facilitation for the DVO’s to do the immunization against rabies, but the vaccine is available, and it is free of charge, as far as I know.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MRS BALEMEZI: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Minister for that information, but I was aware about the vaccines at the headquarters in Entebbe, my problem was accessibility of these vaccines in the districts. So, if that could be worked on so that our districts could have access to these vaccines and even train our –(Mr Okupa rose_) but, Mr Speaker, the clarifications are making –(Interruption)-

MR OKUPA: Just a clarification from the Minister, please, I beg that you give me some time. The clarification I am seeking from the Minister –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, the person holding the Floor is the one to allow you to ask for clarification. Both of you cannot switch on the microphones. She has the Floor, unless she accepts.

MRS BALEMEZI: Mr Speaker, I was winding up on the roads, and once again, Mukono has always been coming up in the Minister’s speech to upgrade the road from Kyetume through Kisoga, Buikwe up to Jinja. This was the old Jinja road –(Interruption)-

THE SPEAKER: Now you are starting a new point, really.

MRS BALEMEZI: It is not a new point, Sir, because I had already talked about it. I beg your indulgence, Mr Speaker. As I wind up, still on agriculture, I thank the Ministry for having facilitated the officers to curb the banana wilt, but I am disappointed to see that much as two sub-counties were deprived of all their banana plantations, there is no replacement, or at least something to substitute. 

We are worried because our people in Nakifuma Sub- County have now been deprived of all the food they have been growing, that is bananas, and we have no food in form of seed for planting. I wish to call upon the Minister to think about allocating some funds to facilitate my area with some seed for planting, to substitute the food that has been uprooted. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR JONNY RICHARD BULAMU (Luuka County, Iganga):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, because I was not around, I will start by thanking the President for the State of the Nation Address. It was so good; it stimulated everybody because of the manner in which it was given. It highlighted the strong achievements and the weaknesses, so everybody was involved in debating.  

Two, what was not liked by some others is that he delegated. I thought he should be praised because for the first time, he has started delegating, even very important constitutional obligations! I was very happy when the person in particular was the Vice President, popularly known as Naigaga –(Interruption)-

MR MUTULUUZA: Mr Speaker, is the honourable member holding the Floor in order to take us back on a motion we concluded? 

THE SPEAKER: I think that is his style of starting off the debate - (Laughter). What should be appreciated is that the two things are related. In the State of the Nation Address, there is an element of reporting what has happened in the past financial year and what is going to happen in the new financial year.  

Actually, it gives you an indication as to how the Budget will be, because the Budget is supposed to implement what the President has addressed in the State of the Nation Address as far as that particular year is concerned.  But I think that is his style.  I think he had a point to make, that Her Excellency Naigaga delivered a speech on behalf of the President.

DR BULAMU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. To those who have been teachers before, you will realise that you do not just jump to a new topic -(Laughter)- because it is the same brain. You sort of try to link, so that there is continuity of thinking -(Laughter).

I would like equally now to thank the Minister of Finance for his presentation and the chairperson of the Budget Committee. In particular, I do thank them because it is for the first time since this bill was brought by. The approach is new, but they have tried their best to make us understand how best to utilise it.  

I have this to say to the Front Bench; please, there are certain political indicators that you should pay special attention to. If you went to a home and found that there is no box of matches and there is no salt, you would earnestly know there is marked poverty.

I want to tell you how we are being judged in the constituencies. When we have children dropping out from P.7 year to year and not a single secondary school is being promoted, we are very lamentably being judged as politicians and eventually as Government.  

When from year to year children are dying of diarrhea diseases, of malaria, and they continually have no drugs in health units, no water, no boreholes and not even these plastic tanks from UNICEF, the indication is that somewhere somehow, inestimably, that constituency is being neglected.
 
My colleagues – no, not my colleagues - I request the Front Bench to sympathise with us –(Interruption). 

MS AKELLO: Mr Speaker, I would like to tell the honourable member holding the Floor that as much as we are elected, and as much as we are sworn in to this Parliament, we are his colleagues. Thank you.

DR BULAMU: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Earnestly, if these people realised the gist of being colleagues, they would have sympathised with us -(Laughter). And the way we trot to their offices for this, for that, they would have realised that it is high time they started taking us as equals. One day some of them will talk even more than some of us to come back –(Mr Musumba rose_) Mr Speaker, the ministers wants to shorten my time, but –(Interruption)

MR MUSUUMBA: Thank you, hon. Bulamu, my colleague, for giving way. Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I just want to tell hon. Bulamu that first of all, we all have constituencies, but no constituency is the better simply because the Member of Parliament from that constituency is a minister. 

The money that goes down to these constituencies through the districts is voted here by you, hon. Bulamu. All negotiations about how much should go to which district start and end here in this House. Therefore, my colleague should not consider people at the Front Bench any better off in terms of money. There are no private resources. I thank you.

DR NKUUHE: I would like to inform the speaker on the Floor that my neighbour is the First Deputy Prime Minister, and when you move from his constituency to mine, you can see a clear, distinct difference - (Laughter).

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr Speaker, is hon. Nkuuhe in order to make a serious allegation that he has not been able to substantiate? Can he substantiate the serious allegation he has made that simply because the First Deputy Prime Minister’s sub-county is being transferred to his district there is a marked difference? Is he in order to make such an allegation without any substantiation?

THE SPEAKER: Well, honourable member, I do not know, but hon. Kategaya is an ex-officio member, and he has no constituency. But even if he had, in the statement, which was made by Dr Nkuuhe, he said you see a difference. I do not know whether his difference is better than the other - (Laughter)

DR BULAMU: Mr Speaker, I thank you for all that guidance, but I have this to say to honourable colleague, hon. Musumba. Since he is a father, he will take this lightly. You can take a knife from a child and give it a stick and the child will get the same satisfaction. It is not the way we do get –(Interruption) -

MR MUTULUUZA: I wanted to give information to the honourable member holding the Floor. Actually, right now, Ministry of Works has, I understand, commissioned graders to hon. Awuzu’s constituency whereas in my constituency, which is in Mpigi District, the roads are not worked on.  Surely, I think I agree with the honourable member holding the Floor that constituencies where Ministers come from are enjoying better –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But honourable Member, you only succeeded in a constituency where there was a minister. Hon. Mugwanya was the minister. Wasn’t he a minister at one time? What happened?

DR BULAMU: Mr Speaker, I thank you very much for allowing me to wind up. I want to wind up after at least thanking the Ministry of Works, which has made Luuka realise there is a Government that thinks of it. I, however, want to tell the Ministry of Health that I have four sub-counties without a substantial health unit, and this is detrimental, not only to the way the electorate looks at it, but also to the way they hold the government in pride.  

Much as agriculture is done extremely well in Luuka, it is not being benefited from because of marketing. So, the government should come up with a policy of allowing people to market their maize, coffee, and nanaasi. When these things rot, people are discouraged and poverty creeps in more and more. 

The other thing - because you are not allowing me to continue - is HIV/AIDS. I would like to urge the government to request every politician to do an integrated approach in every walk of life, more especially in his or her constituencies. If you have gone for a funeral, talk about HIV/AIDS, if you go to a party, the same, you have gone for agriculture, the same. Government officials should also be encouraged to do that so that it is part and parcel of every walk in doing the work. This integrated approach should be handled politically rather than being left to individuals to decide whether they do it or not. 
 
Lastly, agriculture should be modernised. Of late I have heard that there are some machines roasting nanaasi and bananas so that they get a higher market, so that they are exported more easily, so that at least the maize, which we export cannot be returned because we have not prepared it properly. I want special attention to Luuka because it has stayed for a long time without being attended to. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I believe this is a convenient time to adjourn. Therefore, it means we have come to the end of today’s business. I have noted the Members who wanted to contribute today. We are going to continue with the debate – (interjection)- no, no, do not worry.  You need not worry. We still have some days to deal with this subject, and you will be given opportunity to make your contribution. I thank you for your kind attention. 

The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. when we will continue with the debate.

(Parliament rose at 6.00p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 17 July 2002 at 2.00p.m.)


