Wednesday, 11 July 2007 

Parliament met at 2.34 pm in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you. Once again we are sitting here within a very short time to bid farewell to a colleague, hon. Francis Mugarra Kabagambe, who passed away on Monday at Kampala International Hospital. We are here to convey deep condolences to the family, relatives and friends of the late Kabagambe. We are also here to convey deep condolences to the people of Ntoroko who enabled him to come and serve in the Eighth Parliament of Uganda.  

The late Kabagambe had been in Parliament for just one year. In spite of the short period he had been in Parliament, he was able to make an impact that will remain in the records of this Parliament. We shall greatly miss him. Since his death, I have received messages of condolences. This is from the National Resistance Movement Central Executive Committee:

“The family of the late Francis Kabagambe Mugarra, Ntoroko, Bundibugyo
The national leadership of NRM has received with great sorrow news of the passing yesterday of NRM Member of Parliament for Ntoroko County, hon. Francis Kabagambe Mugarra.  

Hon. Mugarra has been an outstanding leader of the Movement in Bundibugyo District as well as an able and competent legislator who has served NRM well in Parliament as a member of the Local Government Accounts Committee. He was a disciplined member of NRM who always worked hard for the good of the Organisation.  

In the recent past, we worked very closely with the late Mugarra to resolve the conflicts that bedevilled the leadership of the Organisation in Bundibugyo. Thanks to him and other local leaders therefore, it is in no small measure that harmony now prevails in Bundibugyo. 

NRM joins his family, his colleagues in Parliament, the entire membership of NRM Bundibugyo and the rest of the country in mourning the passing of a dear colleague. His family and the people of Ntoroko County in particular have been robbed of their father and their elected representative much too early in the life of this Parliament. May the Almighty God rest the soul of the late Francis Kabagambe Mugarra in eternal peace.

Hon. Amama Mbabazi
SECRETARY GENERAL”

I have received another one from East African Legislative Assembly addressed to me:

“Condolence message upon the loss of hon. Mugarra Kabagambe Francis (MP) Ntoroko County, Bundibugyo District

On behalf of my colleagues from the East African Legislative Assembly, I express heartfelt condolences to you, honourable Members of Parliament and the rest of the Ugandan family, upon the loss of hon. Kabagambe Mugarra.  

Although most of the East African Legislative Assembly Members have already left for Arusha in preparation for a session starting tomorrow, we join you in paying tribute and mourning a fallen colleague. 

May the Almighty God comfort and strengthen his family and his constituents as they go through this difficult time. 

May God rest his soul in eternal peace.

Lydia Wanyoto-Mutende
Co-ordinating Secretary 
EALA (U)”


2.38
Entrance of the late Francis Mugarra Kabagambe

National Anthem (One Verse)

Laying of wreaths

THE SPEAKER: Before we get to the motion, I must say that there are many people who have come to attend this special function in respect of our fallen friend. I may not be in position to mention all of them, but I have been advised that we have in our presence hon. Baguma Isoke, hon. Lydia Wanyoto and hon. Nusura Tiperu of the East African Legislative Assembly, hon. Anthony Butele, hon. Victoria Sebagereka and many others. We also have school children from Bethel High School in Iganga and many others. Thank you for coming.

I read messages during my communication and I think I should also read those that I have just received before we go on with the motion: 
“On behalf of the Buganda Parliamentary Caucus and on my own behalf, I wish to extend our heartfelt condolences to the family and the constituents of hon. Francis Mugarra. 

In his one year in Parliament, he had distinguished himself as an expert on issues of microfinance and the co-operative movement. His death therefore is a great loss not only to the family but also to the constituency, the co-operative movement in the NRM party and indeed the entire country. 

The caucus has made a contribution of Shs 1.4 million with hon. Jane Alisemera towards the burial arrangements. 

May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

Rose Namayanja Nsereko, 
Chairperson, Buganda Parliamentary Caucus”

I have also received the following letter:
“Members of Uganda Parliamentary Forum on Food Security, Population and Development learnt with shock the untimely death of our colleague, hon. Francis Mugarra. 

We write to express our sincere condolences to the bereaved family, the people of Ntoroko County, Bundibugyo District and the NRM party to which he belonged.

Hon. Mugarra was one MP who selflessly worked for better quality of life of his people. We, for instance, remember how he was spearheading the initiative to promote rice growing in our constituencies. Indeed, he wanted Ugandans to be food secure and also have increased household and individual incomes. 

We have lost a committed leader and his contribution in the Eighth Parliament of Uganda will always be remembered. 

May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

Hon. Dr. Chris Baryomunsi, Chairperson.”

This one is from the Ambassador of Algeria and the Dean of the Arab Diplomatic Corps: 

“Dear brother, we have learnt with deep sorrow of the death of the honourable Member of Parliament for Ntoroko County, Mr Mugarra Francis Kabagambe. As Dean of the Arab Diplomatic Corps in Uganda, I wish on behalf of my colleagues and on my own behalf to convey to you, to the bereaved family and to the entire House my most heartfelt condolences and deepest feelings of sympathy during this grievous moment. 

May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

Please accept, Rt. hon. Speaker, the expression of my highest and fraternal consideration. 

H.E Aziria Abedelkader 
Ambassador of Algeria”

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. FRANCIS MUGARRA KABAGAMBE, MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT FOR NTOROKO COUNTY, BUNDIBUGYO DISTRICT

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, I beg your indulgence to say that present here is the Prime Minister of Toro Kingdom, Steven Irumba. You and your delegation are welcome.

2.53
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/MINISTER IN CHARGE OF EAST AFRICAN AFFAIRS (Mr Eriya Kategaya): Mr Speaker and honourable members, this is a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay glowing tribute to the late hon. Mugarra Kabagambe Francis: 

WHEREAS Parliament has learnt with profound shock and disbelief of the death of the late hon. Francis Mugarra Kabagambe, which occurred at International Hospital Kampala on Monday 9 July 2007; 

AND WHEREAS hon. Mugarra was an illustrious member of the Eighth Parliament who is remembered as a committed representative of the people of Ntoroko County in Bundibugyo District; 

NOTING with appreciation that he has represented his people in the last one year with maximum dedication and commitment; 

AWARE that the late hon. Mugarra was a veterinary doctor who mobilised the people of Ntoroko in the modernisation of agriculture and formation of co-operatives;

COGNISANT of his invaluable contribution to the Movement as a Deputy Resident District Commissioner; 

APPRECIATING his outstanding contribution as a member of the Standing Committee on Local Government Accounts and Sessional Committee on Physical Infrastructure;

SATISFIED that the late hon. Francis Mugarra Kabagambe indeed dedicated his life to serve his countrymen and women and therefore deserves recognition of this Parliament,

NOW THEREFORE be resolved by this Parliament as follows: 

i) That it collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, relatives and friends, the people of Ntoroko County, Bundibugyo District, and of Uganda at large for the irreplaceable loss of a distinguished son of Uganda, hon. Francis Mugarra Kabagambe.

ii) That is takes cognisance of the dedicated services and contribution that the late hon. Francis Mugarra Kabagambe has, in the course of his illustrious life, rendered to the people of Uganda and Africa as a veterinary doctor, mobiliser, politician and a member of the Eighth Parliament.

iii) That the Almighty God sustains the bereaved family and grants our departed colleague, hon. Francis Mugarra Kabagambe, an eternal rest. 

I beg to move.  

THE SPEAKER: Seconded by hon. Alisemera. You can proceed with your motion.

MR KATEGAYA: Mr Speaker, the death of the honourable member is actually a tragedy because he has died at the age of 50, which is prime in anybody’s life. In his short life, our departed colleague has achieved something in the academic world. As was stated in the resolution, he had a diploma in animal husbandry to start with and then he became a veterinary doctor. Lastly, he had got a masters degree in business administration from Makerere University.

The departed colleague was an organiser. He was particularly an organiser in the co-operative movement societies. He was the chairperson of the Ntoroko Cattle Marketing Co-operative Society. He was a co-ordinator of the Mid-West Uganda Cooperative Alliance. Later on, he joined politics. He became a cadre of the Movement and the Deputy Resident District Commissioner of Kayunga. As we all know, he was a current member of the Eighth Parliament.

I met Mr Kabagambe when he had just joined this Parliament and he reminded me of my first visit to his area. He was a charming, sociable character, like the people of Ntoroko when I visited them, very friendly and hospitable. So, the family will not only miss him but he will be missed by this Parliament in particular and the country at large. With these few words, may his soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.59
MS JANE ALISEMERA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Mr Speaker, I would like to second this motion to pay tribute to the late Francis Mugarra Kabagambe. Allow me to begin by extending my most profound sympathies and condolences to the family and friends of the late Francis Mugarra Amooti. In particular, all my thoughts are with his immediate family - his wife Christine, children, his father and mother. 

Francis was a greatly committed Member of Parliament. He was committed to his constituency and above all to his party, the NRM. He has been a great mobiliser and he had good communication skills. He has been a humble but very efficient man in handling issues. 

Mugarra was very instrumental in the establishment of co-operative societies in Uganda. Most of the co-operative societies had died in Uganda. Most people know about this, but I want to tell this Parliament that what the late honourable started in Ntoroko, in Rwebisengo, has continued to survive and thrive. As we talk, it has branches as well as a very powerful commercial building in Fort Portal town. As a great mobiliser, the late Mugarra managed to establish one of the best SACCOs in the district, in the country and in Ntoroko County, before any government intervention. 

Mugarra wanted to live by example. He was a committed member to his family. He is married to Christine Mugarra Abwooli and he has left children at university, senior six, senior five, senior four and senior two levels.

The late hon. Mugarra wanted to be a role model in the district. He had wanted to establish a demonstration farm in the district where others could come and learn from. Indeed, he had bought a big chunk of land to start this project but he has died before he has established it. 

He wanted to transform Bundibugyo District, and more so Ntoroko County. He wanted his people to start using modern farming methods. If you went there now, you would see fenced farms which he had started establishing. He had been telling the people in his district, especially in Rwebisengo, that they should start intensive cattle keeping so that they can leave the old ways of farming if the area was to develop. 

We, the people of Bundibugyo, are really shocked. We do not know whether we shall find any replacement. We have lost a great and committed son. Our people had started saying in Rutooro that “Mugarra nagarra omuka”, meaning that he is collecting from Kampala or from Parliament and taking back home. 

I will also miss him because on many occasions I have consulted him on political and development issues. He would give me a lot of advice that has helped me to grow in my political career. May the good Lord keep his family together, lighting his candle, and may his soul rest in eternal peace. 

3.05
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Mr Speaker, I stand here with a very heavy heart on behalf of the members of the opposition parties here in Parliament and on behalf of the West Nile Parliamentary Group that I serve as vice-chairman, to pay tribute to our fallen colleague, hon. Kabagambe. 

Mr Speaker, you have had a very unpleasant occasion in the last one year when on three occasions you have called us to this Chamber to do nothing but pay tribute to our fallen heroes. In the African context, death is the most painful thing. It is a destiny for all of us but most important of all, you will understand death better and take it lightly if your brother, colleague or sister of whom you have been robbed has for sometime been sick and you have paid him or her a visit. You can then easily say, “Well, it is God’s intention.” However, the way death has robbed us of our brother, so stealthily without even giving us an opportunity to be told or informed as to whether one of us is sick or not, is the most shocking thing to all of us. 

One thing that I have noted, which I think has continued to cement our relationship further as a parliament and as a country, is the fact that we collectively, regardless of the political organisations that we are in, have been able to unite in as far as death is concerned. 

Hon. Kabagambe is a person whom I knew way back when he was still serving in the Uganda Co-operative Alliance. The reputation of the late Kabagambe as a bureaucrat cannot be underscored. Today we know very well that the position in which he served before he came to Parliament has been a very difficult and challenging position to many people. To serve as a Resident District Commissioner and be able to stand up as a national leader and be accommodative to all political sets was a peculiar character that I discovered with our late brother when he served as the RDC of Kayunga.

He served at a time when his country was undergoing political transformation, getting out of the Movement system and going into multiparty pluralism. I vividly recall the day when we went to Kayunga to launch our own party, Forum for Democratic Change; he exhibited exemplary behaviour and maturity when he could not be partisan and ward us off. That was a very rare quality, and I wish many of our politicians within this Chamber and without could borrow a leaf from these actions of our great fallen hero. 

Hon. Kabagambe will be remembered in this Parliament as a mature legislator and a person who believed in dialogue rather than confrontation. You will recall the day when he very politely and ably brought up the issue of the dispute between the present Toro and Ntoroko. If he had not been a mature politician, certainly the course of action he would have taken and the manner in which he brought the matter to this Parliament would have caused a lot of stir and misunderstanding. 

However, because of his maturity, he was able to steer the waters clear and all of us, in a very mature manner, came out to agree that there was a problem and that there was a way through which this problem could be solved. We know for a fact that there are many problems of that nature affecting various districts and I think for us as Members of the Legislature, we will certainly gain a lot by borrowing a leaf from the mature approach taken by the late Kabagambe.

The late Kabagambe shared a lot with many of us especially those of us who represent disadvantaged parts of this country, the hard-to-reach areas of this country. He, without any discrimination, felt that the harsh conditions of Bundibugyo in general and Ntoroko in particular, were the same as those in the other hard-to-reach areas of this country. I think he will have died in vain if we Members who are a in position to talk on behalf of the people that we represent, cannot take that sober approach to solving the various problems that this country is confronted with. 

We will greatly miss our brother. His stay with us here in Parliament has been too short for us to reap much from him. We only wish that God had given him a longer time so that we would benefit more from his sober and mature approach. We further feel that to those of us who are living, we should borrow a leaf from the past performance of hon. Kabagambe. 

Bundibugyo as a district, Ntoroko as a county and the family and relatives of the late Kabagambe, together with the rest of the Ugandans, will very dearly miss him. We commend his soul into the paradise of God. The Lord gives and the Lord takes away; may the Almighty God rest his soul in eternal peace.

3.13
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Members of Parliament, we are all here today to celebrate the life of our colleague. It is sad that Francis has left us. As the Chairperson of the Committee of Local Government Accounts, to which Francis was a very dedicated member, I would like to say on behalf of the members of this committee, which is dominated by the NRM, that we will deeply miss our dear brother.

Hon. Francis Mugarra has been a very active and honest member who respects and adheres to the Constitution, the Oath of Allegiance to this Parliament and to commitment to the service. I remember that Francis would not miss meetings without sound reason. I would call him and say, “Francis, we agreed that our meetings must start at 9.00. Are you nearby?” and he would say, “Oh, sorry Chairman. I have a problem in Bundibugyo regarding my constituency and the land issue or the church that I am handling, but I want to assure you that I will be there for the next meeting.” Or he would say, “I am on the way coming. Give me ten minutes” and he would keep his word.

He was a Member of Parliament who would encourage unity during the meetings. As a committee that handles financial matters, we handle issues that concern people’s lives and their families and if Francis saw that there was disagreement, he would propose and say, “Chairman, why do we not stand off this matter and handle it later?” I would always take his advice and we would handle the matter in a closed session. Once we had agreed, we would move as a team and that is why the Committee of Local Government Accounts is a committee where when a decision is arrived at, nobody goes out to dispute it. 

When Francis wanted to develop his area, he requested us as committee members to go and give him support and we travelled as a team. I want to tell Members who have not gone to Bundibugyo that that day it rained and the road was blocked. However, Francis had gone ahead of us and so he mobilised his people to ensure that the road was opened for us to reach the venue. We had a fundraising in a church and our chief guest was the Minister of State for Internal Affairs. Therefore, this House needs to understand the pain that is in the hearts of the people of Ntoroko. 

I do recall, Mr Speaker, that hon. Mugarra wrote to you a letter but he also came to me and said, “Chairman, I have a problem. I have been seeing a doctor and that is why you have not been seeing me in meetings. I have decided to write to the Speaker. I need to be admitted and undergo immediate operation.” I saw his face and realised that his skin had changed. He told me to look at his eyes and I saw that they had turned yellow. So, I asked him why he was rushing and he told me that he had consulted his doctor and that he was going to be admitted in International Hospital Kampala. 

I further asked him what the issue was and he told me that the doctor had told him that it was obstructive jaundice. Now, being a lay person I had to ask him what he meant by that term. He explained to me and said that the vein, which transports what the heart purifies, was having complications and that the doctor had told him that the more he delayed sorting out this problem the more the complication would spread to other organs of his body. 

Mr Speaker, I immediately informed all my members and we prayed for him. Some members visited him and I was in touch with him on phone. After going through the five hours of surgery and waking up, Francis sent me a message saying, “Thank you for praying for me. God has saved my life.” I replied that “God is great. Let us keep on praying.” On Saturday 1 July, I went to visit him at International Hospital Kampala. He was on the second floor, room six. I found his wife who woke him up but I said, “No, why don’t you allow him to rest?” She told me that he was fine and that he could talk. He sat on his bed and narrated how he underwent a five-hour operation under a lead doctor, a Cuban expert, with I think three other doctors. He also told me that this Cuban expert has been a doctor in the UPDF and he is very good. He was really grateful that he had managed to survive and he said, “Anyway I came here because there was no way I could avoid this operation. I said, God if you want to take me through this operation, I am in your hands; take me. I am so grateful that the Almighty God has saved my life.” He was seated; his wife had to put a pillow on his back to make him more comfortable. For about 20 minutes we chatted and conversed and I said, “No Francis, now you need to rest. I am on my way out and more Members will be coming to see you.” 

Hon. Beatrice Rwakimari visited him and found him in a fair state. However, we were saddened to learn that the situation had changed all of a sudden and he had been rushed to the Intensive Care Unit, and finally, we are here today. Mr Speaker, it is a puzzle because Francis has been a very hardworking and committed person. Some days by the way, we would sit in meetings up to 5 o’clock without lunch. 

Mr Speaker, I also want to say that we are all flowers. When heavy wind comes we cannot resist it; it blows us away and we wither and fall off. The Bible says, in Matthew 11:28-30, and I want to say this to the family and I quote, The Lord says, “Come unto me all you that labour and are heavy laden and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn from me; for I am meek and lowly in heart; and you shall find rest unto your souls. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light.” Fare thee well my brother till we meet in eternity. Fare thee well Francis.

3.22
MS FLORENCE NAYIGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker for giving me an opportunity to say a word as we pay tribute to the late hon. Francis Kabagambe. I have been sharing an office with the late Kabagambe in this Eighth Parliament from the time the offices were allocated to us. It is also true that the late Kabagambe, as others have said, was a Deputy RDC in Kayunga District, so we will miss him.

I have known the late Kabagambe as a committed and hardworking Member of Parliament whose heart was always in his constituency. During the time we shared the office, I had an opportunity to interact with his family, especially his dear wife, and some of his children. So, I bring condolences to the family as a Member of Parliament who has been sharing an office with him, but also condolences from my district, Kayunga District. 

In Kayunga District, the late hon. Kabagambe was known as a very objective RDC and a mature person who always encouraged unity amongst the people of Kayunga. He never at any time entertained divisions or even took interest in the local petty issues or political issues in the district. He would always give guidance and he was always objective. 

As a person I have been sharing an office with, he has always shared with me the programmes he has for his constituency, and I have always seen him receiving people like officials from NARO, planning to get the right planting materials for people in his constituency. One time he was planning to take a full lorry of cassava cuttings for his people to ensure food security. He was also coordinating us MPs for upland rice from which Kayunga District would benefit. I saw him receiving technical people on ox ploughs and he took them to train his people so that they could be able to invest in agriculture. So, we will miss him. 

I therefore, want to thank God for his life and I also pray that God rests him in eternal peace. Thank you.

3.25
MS GRACE TUBWITA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support the motion. I send my condolences to the bereaved family, friends, the people of Bundibugyo and honourable colleagues. I got to know hon. Kabagambe in the committee where I have been serving as the Vice-Chairperson, the Committee of Physical Infrastructure. 

Hon. Kabagambe has been an advisor, like hon. Ekanya said. He always advised us whenever there were contentious issues. Colleagues, as you know very well at times you can receive something in the committee that can cause a lot of conflict and misunderstanding between members, but hon. Kabagambe would not talk much. However, whenever he got up to talk, he would speak as an advisor to guide the committee on the proceedings, and he really commanded respect in our committee - from the Chair and the honourable colleagues, who always listened to his word. Whenever he stood up to talk we would listen to his word and we always respected his advice, which has always worked. So, as the Committee of Physical Infrastructure, we have really missed a very articulate person.

Hon. Kabagambe, like other colleagues have said, really loved his people. Whatever he did, he always thought about his constituency. He lobbied so much to ensure that the Kabarole-Bundibugyo road was included in the Budget. I will never forget the day he mobilised colleagues from his area, hon. Jane Alisemera and the rest to come to our committee when we were receiving the minister in order to ensure that they get the last response from the minister on whether the road was going to be done. I would like to thank the ministry that gave them assurance. 

He did not stop at lobbying but he went ahead to work with the technocrats to ensure that when they went on the ground, everything was done in the proper way. One time when I went to the ministry, I found that he had gone with one of the technocrats I needed to talk to because he wanted to ensure that the survey - those who have been to Bundibugyo know that the terrain there is not so good so he had to be there personally. That shows that he sacrificed a lot in order to ensure that whatever work was undertaken in his district was done in a proper way. So, for the people of Bundibugyo, it is a great challenge and it is going to be a great challenge to find someone irreplaceable like hon. Kabagambe. 

Bundibugyo being at the border, whenever hon. Kabagambe discussed issues to do with trade, he really talked to his people in a harmonised manner in order to ensure that there was good trade between Uganda and the DRC. I did not know that Bundibugyo was at the border because I had never been there, but one time as we were talking, the language he used showed that he was a peaceful leader who encouraged his people to carry out trade with neighbouring countries and to be in harmony. He was a good leader and an African who wanted to associate with other people in other countries.

I will not forget to say that he was a good timekeeper. Whenever you made a programme to have a meeting with him, like hon. Ssekabira said, he kept time. His office was just next to mine. He has been an advisor to most of us. Although he joined in the Eighth Parliament, he had maturity in politics. He really tried to encourage us, and he would advise you on each and every circumstance. Whenever he got anything that he felt would be beneficial to everyone, he shared his ideas with the rest of the members. He was a member who was not selfish. He wanted everyone to benefit from what he knew or from anything that he had achieved. So, I will not forget him for that. 

I pray that God keeps his family in a rightful manner, in a proper way that his children can be in a position to acquire a future. As hon. Jane Alisemera stated, she talked about the classes, which his children are in. It shows that they still need more support, and I would encourage that whatever you can do to ensure that his family gets a future; if there is anything you can do, let us all stand for each other. 

Death has again robbed us. We have just been paying tribute to our colleagues who are going every time and then. We pray that God will protect those who are still in this House so that we do not come back again to pay tribute to another fallen friend or member of this House. I pray that God keeps his soul in eternal peace. May God bless him. 

3.32
MAJ. (RTD) TOM BUTIME (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I support the motion as put forward by the First Deputy Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business. Hon. Kabagambe Mugarra Amooti has also disappeared too early. Last time when we were here, I was with Amooti Kabagambe in Fort Portal after we had buried the late Brig. Mayombo, and he was very sad. Hardly did I know that next it would be him, who was very sad at the death of Brig. Mayombo.

In ancient and traditional Toro, when a catastrophe befalls an area or a country, other catastrophes are supposed to wait before they happen to allow the person who has died - as we say - so that flesh separates from the bones after burying him. But in this particular case, after burying Mayombo, when the flesh has not yet separated from the bones of Brig. Mayombo, here is another death of Kabagambe. I think, Mr Speaker, the gods do not seem to be happy with some of us but as you know I am a very strong Christian and I am not superstitious –(Laughter)- but I think the gods are angry. (Interjection) Somebody is telling me that the gods are actually crazy.

I was used to seeing a new Member of Parliament from Ntoroko constituency. We remember in the NRC, we had the hon. Constantine Karusoke. For the Sixth Parliament, we had Hon. Charles Rwabuhinga. For the Seventh Parliament we had hon. Rogers Matte. For the Eighth Parliament we got Francis Amooti Mugarra but he has been here for only one year. So now we are going to have another one. Instead of the five years that I was used to, now I am going to begin with one year. I think really this is very sad. That is why I insist, although I am not superstitious, that the gods are really angry with the area. 

Bundibugyo District has had a very cohesive team, as hon. Babiiha Alisemera has said, but you see, Bundibugyo is a district far from Kampala. It has had ADF problems, the DRC conflict, when it takes place, refugees cross River Semliki and they come to Butuku. The people of Butuku have to assist and contend with those kinds of problems. When it rains, we have landslides. 

Where the late Kabagambe comes from, Butuku, there is pressure on grazing land and they experience earthquakes. This area needs some time to rest so that the leadership can consolidate the district but the tragedies, like this one which has just befallen us is becoming very difficult to contain. I must personally sympathise with our brothers from Bundibugyo district and the people of Ntoroko constituency. 

Parliament, as the Leader of the Opposition has said, the late hon. Dr Okulo Epak was here, the late hon. Brig. Mayombo, and now Kabagambe. The speed at which, Mr Speaker, your Members of Parliament are disappearing is frightening. But as I said, we have got to be firm and that is a situation we have to contend with.

Kabagambe was a typical Bundibugyo-Butuku character: gentle but a very cultured person, soft spoken but very strong on issues, not over assuming over things yet he knows how to behave, and that is typical of the people where he comes from. 

Being one of the very senior people from that area, I really feel very sad. May his soul rest in eternal peace. I thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity.

3.39
DR KAMANDA BATALINGAYA (NRM, Bwamba County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support the motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to my late brother, Francis Kabagambe Mugarra. 

I want to also register my condolences, once again, to Mrs Christine Mugarra, the children, our mother, our father and my people in Bundibugyo, at the loss of my brother. 

I have interacted with my brother since 1980. My brother has passed through the rank and file as a public officer, now a politician. We the people of Bundibugyo and also Uganda at large are going to miss his expertise in both areas. 

It is a challenge to us to see that what my brother, Francis Mugarra had done for just the one year he had been in Parliament will continue and also ensure that our people benefit from the programmes he had already introduced in Ntoroko County and Bundibugyo district as a whole. 

Having said that, Mr Speaker, I would – a month ago in our interactions – as I had told you since 1980 we have been interacting with my brother. He called me, we were outside the corridors and he said, “Do you know doctor”, I said, “What?”  He told me that he had itching of the skin. Then he asked me what I thought it could be. I told him what he should do. After that he again told me that he was not feeling okay in the abdomen and that he also had a loss of appetite. He was seeing one of his doctors at the International Hospital in Kampala. 

The disease started, as hon. Ekanya has said; he had abdominal discomfort for three weeks and jaundice, the yellowing of the skin and the white parts of the eyes, as a result of the bile, which is produced by the liver, not being able to be digested through the intestines.  

After meeting his doctor, they did a liver biopsy. This liver biopsy revealed that my brother had chronic persistent hepatitis and liver cirrhosis. In other words, the liver was inflamed, that is Hepatitis, it was chronic; it was not just starting, maybe it had started some time back. Then he had liver cirrhosis; a disease where scar tissues replace normal tissues then they block blood flow through the organ. He had those two combinations. Liver cirrhosis caused the jaundice. They did the cholecystectomy operation, the removal of the gall bladder. 

We did a post-mortem that revealed that after the operation, he developed septicaemia, in other words, pus in blood. When they did a biopsy on a part of the liver they found that the stump had already developed some pus, this is now pus circulated in the blood – septicaemia. This ended up causing hepatic failure. So, the cause of death was hepatic failure; the liver could not function anymore that is why he was in the Intensive Care Unit. You know that the liver detoxifies the body, it takes away all those toxins but this liver could no longer function. So, my brother succumbed to death. We have the post-mortem report; hepatic failure or septicaemia was the cause of death. 

Dear colleagues, my brother is gone, it is a challenge to us. You have known the cause of death. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

3.45
MR JOHN OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. To fight an election to join this Parliament or any other Parliament in the world is not an easy job. Having successfully fought and joined Parliament then fate decides that one should not serve for all the five years is very sad indeed!

My sincere condolences go to the family of our departed brother, the people of Ntoroko County, the people of Bundibugyo, the Parliament of Uganda and the entire country.

In the Sixth Parliament we lost nine Members, almost two per year. In the Seventh Parliament we lost eight Members. The Eighth Parliament is hardly one year old and we have already lost two Members. The rate at which we are going is worrying.

I read newspapers from neighbouring countries; I listen to international news; Mr Speaker, my belief is that the rate at which Members of Parliament die in Uganda is the highest in the region. But why? Why are we going so fast?

At the same time, Uganda is a country with some of the best-trained doctors but we are dying in spite of having the best-trained doctors! I think we should look at our medical facilities again. The doctors are there, I think they are not well equipped; the facilities they should work with are so inadequate; the remuneration is the worst in the world – the lowest at that. I think we should address this matter.

The late hon. Mugarra Kabagambe was one of the first few new Members of this Parliament that I got to know by name and constituency. Sometime towards the end of last year, he asked me for a lunch appointment. I had not known him then but I accepted and we went for lunch. He took an interest to know what was going on in the North; in particular, he wanted to understand why the IDP camps could not be dismantled. 

He gave the example of the camps that were in Bundibugyo but only for a short time. We discussed and later on we had another round. Mr Speaker, this confirms that the late was a nationalist. He was the only one who came to me to try and understand what was going on in the North. I can confirm that he was a nationalist.

Mr Speaker, it is very rare for a serving or a retired RDC to go and contest elections and come to this Parliament. It is very rare. Normally it is the other way round. You serve here, and then your retirement benefit is to become an RDC. (Laughter) But the late Mugarra Kabagambe was one of the rare personalities who did it the other way round. What it means is that he served well as an assistant RDC. He was not high handed and the benefit was to be elected to come here.

I would like to appeal to Parliament as an institution, to inform Members when a Member is admitted in hospital. It is very sad to learn from the media that your colleague has departed and yet that colleague had been in the hospital for some time. I think we should find a mechanism of either putting up a notice on the notice board or a communication from the Chair to inform Members.

Lastly, we normally come and pay tribute here, but then after the burial, the family of our departed colleague is abandoned. The family starts fending for itself. Mr Speaker, we should seriously think about this matter that our relationship with our departed colleagues should not end at the burial. We should do something as an institution to make sure that the orphans and the widow continue living a comfortable life. May his soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you.

3.50
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We are here as Parliament to pay our last respect to a fallen colleague. I support the motion and send my condolences to the bereaved family, the constituency and the people of Uganda as a whole.

Mr Speaker, we are all destined for death because it is the will of God. As one preacher was preaching, he wondered at a funeral why we were wondering and complaining why we had lost somebody. He asked us: “Who of you did ask God to create this human being, and if he so chooses to take him, why should you complain?” I went back and wondered. If life was so, then why should we complain and at times say words that we are saying here? But I remembered that we do this because of the values and the good that the person stands for while he still served. 

The late Francis was my neighbour here and we used to consult a lot even before either he or I would talk. He would go ahead to ask you even when you had stood up moving towards a microphone and he would ask, “Emmanuel, what do you want to say?” I should say that I will miss him because he has counselled me not to make certain statements that could have been misunderstood given the circumstances under which we have been debating. To me, Mr Speaker, I will miss him as a neighbour, but since what has happened is the will of God, let us pray that God will give the others the strength to continue. 

Another issue and most important of all, is how many people do value the stressful nature that Members of Parliament live through as we execute our work? I have been here since the Sixth Parliament. I have seen young people being voted in and within two to three years they have developed wrinkles on their faces. I came here without grey hair at 35 –(Laughter)- I am only 44 but my head is greying. 

Mr Speaker, I have seen so many things happen here, but how many people do appreciate? Could be at times it has contributed to accelerate the demise and deterioration of the health conditions of our friends. Maybe we could have done better if the situation was different. It is painful that I must raise this when our colleague has fallen; I could have been given another opportunity to say this. 

It is painful and I wish the world understood the stressful nature of our work. I know somebody outside would want to say that these are occupational hazards. But Mr Speaker, I was contemplating the other day and saw how many people outside do sit and work and think on behalf of others. When others do not have roads, it is the Member of Parliament who should think for them as if they do not have families of their own to plan for. When others do not have access to water, it is the Member of Parliament who must be stressed to think on how the people must access water as if he does not have a family to get water for. Our friend is gone, but he has left a family with the challenges that he has been the one providing for. 

How many times do Members of Parliament stay through rough conditions, researching on so many issues and yet Parliament could have provided them with research assistants to reduce on the stressful nature of work? Mr Speaker, this is a challenge that we all go through as Members of Parliament. We appreciate the small economic basket for which we are all competing for but these are issues we must reflect on.

Finally, I know death is the door through which all of us are going to depart from this world. But to this one the last question I will ask - the challenge to our brothers who are religious - pastors and Christians, if I ask Members in this House: How many of us would want to go to heaven? I know everybody would put up their hand; and if I asked: How many would wish to die? None would put up their hand and yet death is the gate to heaven. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

3.58
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I hail from the same sub-region the late Kabagambe came from. I will say a few words in support of the motion. I knew the late Kabagambe while both of us worked as deputy RDCs, a very hard job and that is why hon. Okello-Okello is right to say, “It is never possible for RDCs to come,” especially the junior ones.

We got in touch with the late Kabagambe during our RDC retreats. He was humble, sober and he only talked on areas where he excelled best. I remember that his strong views on cooperatives; microfinance and rural savings were very instructive. I actually at one time said that if there was to be a ministry of cooperatives and rural development, the late Kabagambe would have been the right candidate to take over that ministry - if at all it could have been there. But that was my mind then because of his distinguished views on the subject.  

When Kabagambe was with the Cooperative Alliance, he helped establish and initiate many rural savings and credit cooperative associations, including those in my constituency. He had time for the rural people. He could drive his blue single cabin pick-up and move around the whole of the Rwenzori sub-region and we used to meet on our poor roads. 

As deputy RDCs, we could discuss how to pursue our political ambitions without compromising our jobs and he gave me the tricks of soberness and not even showing your ambitions to attract reprisals from your employers. 

We used to jokingly refer to each other as “cow people” with the late Francis. I would tease him that he feeds on blood and he would tease me that I feed on milk. 

Mr Speaker, I cannot go on; the late was very brilliant and he talked when he was very sure. He hated provocative politics and also hated people who only talked for the sake of it. In fact one time he whispered to me when we were discussing a certain matter. He said, “Some people like acting and they believe that when they are talking, they are making a point but when they are only acting.”  To me that was a very strong point and I said: “Francis, I hope I am not one of them.”

We will miss Francis as Parliament, as NRM and as our region, the Rwenzori sub-region. And it is indeed a challenge and much painful for our region after losing Brigadier Mayombo and now Francis. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

 4.02
MR ADOLF MWESIGE (NRM, Bunyangabu County, Kabarole):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to join the mover of this motion in extending my condolences to the widow, Christine Mugarra, and the family of the late Francis Mugarra. I have been associated with hon. Mugarra since 2001 when he stood as a candidate for Member of Parliament representing Ntoroko County.  

In 2001, I was the regional coordinator for the mid-west for the President’s campaign.  And I recall in April 2001, hon. Mugarra invited me to Ntoroko, in particular Rwebusengo, to assist him in his bid for the campaign for the parliamentary elections for that constituency.  His bid was not successful, but like any great leader, hon. Mugarra remained calm. He gave his colleague, hon. Rogers Matte who had won the elections that time a chance to do his best as he continued to do his work. 

When he was graduating with his degree in Masters in Business Administration, again hon. Mugarra honoured me to be the guest of honour at his graduation. And when he won elections in 2006, those of you who were there recall that he invited me to preside over his victory celebrations.  So, I have been associated with him as a friend, a colleague and of course the people of Butuku and the people of Bunyangabu and Toro in general are much intertwined. They are culturally linked; they speak the same language and we share the same cultural values. Therefore it was easy for me and hon. Mugarra to associate because of the historical and cultural bond that exists between the people of Bunyangabu and those of Butuku. 

Mr Speaker, when hon. Mugarra won his election, I knew for a fact that he had a long career in this Parliament. During the 11 years I have been in this House, I have observed that there are two categories of parliamentarians: A category that for reasons known to them do not often visit their constituencies and colleagues know that such a category of parliamentarians have not survived a number of terms. There is also a category of legislators who keep in constant touch with their constituents. In the one year that hon. Mugarra was in this House, you could see that he was in close touch with his constituents and that is the secret of longevity in both politics and in this House.  I therefore, had no doubt that the late hon. Mugarra had a very long and illustrious career in this House and in politics in general. 

Because of the demands that Members of Parliament have, which colleagues know very well, we tend to scatter our efforts in many things: Education, Agriculture, water, roads, mobilisation, et cetera. But when I visited Ntoroko, I could see that hon. Mugarra was focused. He was talking about modernisation of Agriculture because the majority of his people are cattle keepers. He was always talking about the provision of water to his constituency. 

On this note, Mr Speaker, I would like to invite the Ministry of Water in remembrance of hon. Mugarra and in paying tribute to the efforts he was making towards developing his constituency to ensure that the water scheme that the he craved for is implemented and water is provided to his people.  

About the road to Bundibugyo which he was always talking of, I understand from the Ministry of Works that plans are underway for this road to be constructed. If these three issues are tackled, I am sure the legacy of hon. Mugarra will live and live forever. 

Mr Speaker, I was able to visit the late hon. Mugarra twice in hospital and I observed from the family that there was always uncertainty about the management of his case. There was indecision about whether he should be flown out for further treatment but as hon. Kamanda did explain on the medical report, the cause of death has been ascertained.  But there was always indecisiveness; there were a lot of decisions to make about the management of his condition. 

I joined the Members of Parliament from Bundibugyo after the death of hon. Mugarra to plan for the burial arrangements. What shocked me is that it appears that the Health Insurance Scheme does not seem to be consistent with the expectations that we have. I was disturbed to learn that because the medical scheme was supposed to cover the medical expenses that a Member faces, but we were required to pay extra funds, a lot of funds. So, on this note I would like thank the office of the Clerk who intervened and bailed us out. 

I do not want to go into details of the difficulties we met in trying to get the body of our colleague from the hospital; I suggest that the Parliamentary Commission interests itself in detail on the terms of the medical scheme that the Members of Parliament entered. It appears to me that what we expected from the scheme is not what the providers think we are entitled to. I think we should take interest in this and have the terms more clarified so that we do not have to go through the trouble that we have gone through with hon. Mugarra.

Finally, I would like to extend my condolences to the family, to the widow, to the father of the late Mugarra, to the people of Ntoroko, to the people of the Rwenzori Region and Toro Kingdom upon the loss of our son and brother hon. Mugarra. May his soul rest in eternal peace.  I thank you, Sir.

4.11
MRS MARY OKURUT (NRM, District Woman Representative, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. When I heard the news that our colleague had passed away, such a man of peace, like everybody else, I went into shock. I looked at the picture in a very pessimistic manner, and I recalled the words of Shakespeare when he was musing about death, he said, “Out, out, brief candle, life is but a walking shadow. A poor player that struts and strums his guitar upon the stage and then he is heard of no more. It is a tale told by an idiot, full of sound and fury signifying nothing.” But Mr Speaker, when I heard the words that have been spoken about our late brother, I knew for sure that his life did not signify nothing. 

A few weeks ago, I was talking positively about him with hon. Margaret Muhanga, and when she asked me, I said, “To me, he is like an onion, he has that depth of analysis that trying to get to him is like peeling an onion, the more layers you peel off, the more you realize that he is a serious man; a man who means what he says, a very principled man.”

I will not say much; I would like to give my condolences to the family and the people of his constituency. We are all in God’s hands. Our people, the Banyankole say that one time, a long-horned cow stepped on a frog. The frog looked up and saw these long horns, and said, “As you will, long horned one, as you will”. May God rest his soul in eternal peace.

4.13
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, District Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising to support the motion for the resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to our fallen colleague, hon. Mugarra Kabagambe. 

I want to convey my heartfelt condolences to the family of the late colleague, most especially to his dear wife, Mrs Christine Mugarra and the children, Mzee Yafesi Kabagambe and Mukaikuru Kabagambe.

Mr Speaker, when we came to this Parliament for the multi-party dispensation, it was not easy to mingle freely with our friends from the different side of Parliament. But I vividly remember when my brother called and told me, “Look here, we have unique problems where we come from that are above political affiliations.  Kasese and Bundibugyo have their own problems. We have to sit and look at our problems as a region; we have to look at our problems as districts first, and then we can look at our parties”. 

And I think he did not only stop at that because recently, hon. Kabagambe went to Kasese to help us in fundraising for one of our schools. I wish to bring condolences from Kasese District and most especially Busongora North Constituency where he went to assist us to raise funds for one of our schools. This showed that he had a heart not only for the people of Bundibugyo, but also for the people of Kasese. We had similar problems, including low education, lack of facilities, poor roads, lack of water and the problem of poor grazing; you should have read in the papers that cattle keepers there move here and there all the time. I imagine that if he had lived longer, possibly he would be in a better position to speak to my brothers the Basongora cattle keepers about the modern ways of cattle keeping, which he had initiated in his constituency.  

It is unfortunate that we gather here to say bye to him, and it is unfortunate that such kind words are being spoken about him in his absence. Possibly, if he had been around, it would have helped him to improve and possibly aim to work harder. So that means that these words are for us who are living.  We should look back at our lives and see how we have treated our colleagues. Everybody who stands here says that Kabagambe was an exemplary leader; he considered his constituency first; and like one Member said, it could have been out of the stress of carrying the whole constituency on his shoulders. 

I pray as the others also prayed that we consider the family and lend them a helping hand. Let not our relationships end here in Parliament, but let them go further to assisting the widow and the children. A word is enough to let them know that we still care and that we were friends to their son, to their father and to the husband of the widow. 

May the soul of our dear brother rest in eternal peace. Kabagambe, the rate at which we are going - we shall join you soon or later.  May your soul rest in peace.

THE SPEAKER: Amen.

4.18
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  In supporting the motion moved by the Rt hon. Eriya Kategaya, I would like to start by conveying my condolences to the wife, the children, the parents, the people of Ntoroko, the people of Bundibugyo and the people of Uganda on the premature demise of our brother, comrade Mugarra Kabagambe.

The colleagues who have spoken have used different words to describe this departed comrade as mature, cultured, calm, interested in his constituency, a nationalist etc. 

In my view, I think hon. Kabagambe represented a typical nationalist - someone who new how to relate to others, one who had internalised the correct methods of work. He is someone who was interested in development and wanted to transform the people he represented and the people of his country.

I first knew comrade Mugarra when he came to this Parliament, so I have known him for just one year. But in that one-year period, hon. Mugarra made an impact on me. In this one year, I have been to his constituency twice, and on both occasions, hon. Mugarra joined me, and we worked together. One day, we started around 8 and finished at 9 p.m. So this is how I got close to see his correct approach to issues.

We went to the fishing village to Ntoroko on Lake Albert; my primary interest there was security, but he was there with me. And after we had discussed security issues, he pointed out to me that his people who were on the fishing village had been ordered to vacate by NEMA, in accordance with the law, because they are not supposed to be so close to the water. So he said: “I am a Member of the Movement, and this is the government I support, but my people are being told to just leave. I cannot shout or use the press, but my method is to talk to colleagues as much as possible so that we can get an understanding on this issue and find a solution”.

I agreed with him on two accounts, first that it was correct that those people should leave, that they should not live so close to the water. But also that it is incorrect for the Government, which should look after the people to just say go away to them. The Government is a parent, and it should be responsible; if there is an error, then it should be corrected properly. 

So I undertook that we would work on this problem together with him. When we came back, we had two breakfast meetings with him, at 7.30 a.m., and we invited the Chief Executive of NEMA. We discussed with him in a calm way, and he agreed with us to postpone this order and that we would work together to ensure that the people are assisted before moving them.

That is one of the points I want to use to illustrate the fact that this brother knew the correct approach to issues. We were able to find a way forward on that issue without knocking heads.

He was very concerned about the education of his people and their levels of income. He was also interested in the security of his people, being on the board, and the border being made by water, which is not so easy to secure. So many times, we shared views on how we needed to secure such a difficult area.

The constituency of Ntoroko is one of the difficult constituencies, in my view, first from the point of view of its level of development, and also because it is a constituency with a number of ethnic groups. As hon. Butime did relate, almost every time we have elections, we have to get a new MP for that place. But I think if death had not robbed us of hon. Mugarra, we would most probably have seen someone who would have served more than just one term. 

In the demise of comrade Mugarra, we have not only lost a nationalist, because although he loved so much his constituency. His clarity about national issues was outstanding. Even in the Movement caucus, he spoke on principle lines; and even if his view did not carry the day, he did not move to rupture the caucus to which he belonged; he knew that he had another opportunity to argue his case. 

So, this country has lost a person with skill, one committed not only to his constituency, but also to his country. As the acting Leader of the Opposition and other colleagues have demonstrated, even though he was what you would describe as “Movement 3.1.1,” he related very well with the Opposition, because even if we are on different sides of the House, we belong to one country, and if the multi-party is going to succeed, we need to emulate the legacy of brother Mugarra.

So once again, my deep condolences go to the wife, the children, and parents, and I pray to the almighty God to rest his soul in eternal peace. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, according to the Order Paper, we should adjourn at 4 p.m., but I see many people are still interested, so I intend to extend a little. So far, 15 Members have made their contributions, and I still see many more. I may not be able to cover all of you, but I will try to extend and we stop at 5 p.m. So I request those who contribute to be brief so that many more Members can go on record as having contributed.

4.25
MR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much Mr Speaker. I also rise to pay tribute and to also give a condolence message to the bereaved family, the parents and the people of Bundibugyo, specifically Ntoroko.

Mr Speaker, I represent Kanungu District, which in many ways resembles Bundibugyo. My constituency, like Ntoroko, has had a high turn over of Members of Parliament; a different Member represents each session of Parliament. Sometimes, that is partly because of the stress and pressure that a Member of Parliament bears to deliver to the constituency. 

For instance, hon. Matte, who preceded hon. Kabagambe did not contest. Hon. Kabushenga who was representing Kinkizi East did not also contest, so we came in – but I am prepared to come back in 2011, if I am still alive.

A lot has been said about the character of our colleague who has died. Hon. Kabagambe was a man who was able to relate with everybody, irrespective of your background, your political affiliation and views.  I recall for instance that because of his great interest in ensuring that we as Members of Parliament become useful and accountable to our members in the constituencies, he mobilised a number of us to promote interventions like apple and rice growing, he even arranged a meeting between us and the Vice President to ensure the success of these programmes. I remember most backbench Members said that it was their first time to go into the Cabinet Library where we held the meeting. 

    
I am saying this to show that he was the kind of man who was very quick to mobilise Members of Parliament whenever he would find a programme that was useful to us and he ensured that we took some of these to our constituencies. Therefore we feel pain and are saddened by this untimely death of our colleague. 

We have heard from the hon. Minister that the cause of death was obstructive jaundice due to problems of the liver. Mr Speaker, as a medical doctor let me say that that condition belongs to a class of illnesses that occur later in life, especially after 40 years, and there are many other conditions that fall into the same category like high blood pressure, diabetes, kidney problems and so forth. When you look at the trend of illnesses within Africa and Uganda in particular, these kinds of diseases are on the rise and we as Members of Parliament are the most susceptible together with other affluent members of society. Actually sometimes we call them diseases of affluence or diseases of life style. When you look at the design of our health services in Africa, you will find that when these services were being designed we looked at them mainly to accommodate primary healthcare concerns.  

The picture that we are seeing in our country now is that there is a mixture of diseases of poverty and diseases of affluence or diseases, which come later in life.  Therefore we want to appeal to those in charge of managing the health sector to re-design their interventions so that we are able to handle most of these illnesses that seem to be on the rise. 

One particular intriguing revelation is that earlier this year, hon. Kabagambe approached me and he had been looking for me for a week. I was in my constituency and his primary concern was that he was not satisfied with the quality of services being delivered by our hospitals in Uganda. He requested me, as a medical doctor, to sit with him, critic the policy framework in this country and suggest some policy measures as to how we can improve the delivery of services in this country. We have been working on some proposals because he was saying, “You go to Mulago Hospital, it is a beautiful building but what goes on inside is not satisfactory”. I am saddened that he has died before we could present some of these policy measures that we hoped would improve the delivery of services.

Lastly, Mr Speaker let me just comment on the services. Hon. Mugarra died in a private hospital and I have heard many Members saying we have the human resource in this country but sometimes there is poor facilitation. Having worked in government and private hospitals, what I have seen is that we have government hospitals like Mulago hospital with highly qualified staff but poor facilitation within the hospital. However when you go to most of these emerging hospitals, it is good that we had the human resource, which handled the late Kabagambe and they were well skilled and qualified. However it is also common to find magnificent and beautiful looking private hospitals with poorly skilled human resource and that is the challenge. Therefore, I want to challenge the managers of the health sector to look at these issues that we are able to provide oversight to private healthcare as well as improve services within our own public hospitals.  

If I was requested to write a sentence to summarise hon. Kabagambe’s death, I would say, “Here lies a leader who was a great mobiliser, a man of the people and one who always worked selflessly for the betterment of the people he represented.” We want to celebrate his life and thank the people of Bundibugyo for having voted him. May God rest his soul in eternal peace. I thank you very much.

4.33
MS BETI OLIVE KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity to join other mourners in paying tribute to the late hon. Mugarra and to mourn his death. My heart goes out to his family; his death was very tragic and shocking. I met hon. Mugarra sometime last year in the library. I did not know him but we established some discussion and I discovered – actually he said, “You have not come to talk to me about rice.” He was then sending e-mails and things about upland rice. I told him, “Well, my constituency is an urban one and I did not know much about that”. He then told me more about rice and said I could get involved in it and that he was willing to sit down and talk to me about it. This is somebody I did not know so I was highly impressed. He impressed me as a person who is not selfish, a person who shares and one who reaches out to people. We established a friendship, which was maintained up to about a week ago. When I saw him, I did not realise he was sick and that he was in the last week or so of his life.

There is a school in Kooki where I come from for which I am the patron and we have a fundraising function on the 11th of August. I told hon. Mugarra about this function and I asked him to come and promote upland rice for the benefit of the school. He said, “I will definitely come and be there”.  I was very shocked when I heard that he had died and I am sure that this country has lost a very outgoing person.  When we were discussing upland rice last year, it was in the middle of the debate on whether non Movement people should benefit from government projects. It did not matter to him that I was a member of the Opposition and this did not even arise. I am the one who was surprised that a member of the Government Party could be so open and so welcoming of me. I shall miss hon. Mugarra very, very much.  

Mr Speaker, when a person dies and the opportunity is created to speak of the dead, we should also speak of the living just as we speak about everything from life to death. The unfortunate death of hon. Mugarra presents to us yet another opportunity to talk about health facilities in this country and security of life. There is too much talk in this country about poor facilities and there are too many incidences arising out of poor health facilities in this country. The environment is polluted with fear and uncertainty of the facilities and there are too many sick people all around. 

Mr Speaker, shouldn’t someone ask what is going on in this country? If I look around I can tell you of people that are very close to me all over the World who are sick with cancer among other diseases. There is Dr Kiggundu in South Africa, James Musinguzi, Musasizi Kifefe- there are so many people and I can mention about 15 of them who are sick. What is going on in this country? Shouldn’t we have a formal statement from the Ministry of Health? Is it the diet? Is it pollution of the environment? Is it poison? Should we worry or not? 

We sit in Parliament day after day and we pass loan after loan. Almost every week we pass two to five big loans but not loans for medical equipment. However, every time we have a catastrophe we stand up and moan about the poor facilities. Why can’t the Ministry of Health bring us a loan, whatever it takes for approval in this Parliament, to equip all main referral hospitals so that we surely invest in the health of our people? 

Yesterday we discussed issues of population, health and development but we must take it further and resolve to have a healthy population but that goes with investing in equipment, personnel, health insurance and so forth. We can’t just come here, moan, pay tribute, ask what is going on and talk about health facilities when people are dying. People are the main investment in this country so we must deliberately do invest in them. 

Mr Speaker, as we pay tribute to yet another Member of this House, a person that has touched the lives of many people, including the lives of people from very unexpected quarters, I beg the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Finance to bring to this House a requisition for a loan so that we once and for all equip all the medical facilities in this country so that when a person dies, we know that they have died but the best has been done to save their lives. Rest in peace my friend. Thank you.

4.40
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Mr Speaker, I rise here to support the motion –(Laughter)- for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Francis Kabagambe Mugarra. Honourable colleagues are laughing but you had signalled to me even before hon. Beti Kamya -

MR SPEAKER: Hon. Okupa, just a few minutes, please. You can proceed.

MR OKUPA: Surely, Mr Speaker. I was saying that I stand here to support a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Francis Kabagambe Mugarra. We first met with the late in the Committee on Fiscal Infrastructure where we have been for the last one year. There the late articulated issues that pertain to the region of Bundibugyo District, especially those that have been mentioned like the roads, electricity, water and the issues of the fishing communities. I did realise that we shared many of these problems. 

I first went to Ntoroko in 1988 and it took us two days to get there. By then we were trading in fish and I was living in Fort Portal. I realised then that it is a very difficult place to reach with a number of problems as enumerated. That explains why every term a new Member of Parliament is elected. Others just give up and don’t stand because they know that the population will definitely leave them out. 

We cemented our relationship when hon. Odonga Otto and myself joined our colleague, hon. Kyetunda together with the Minister of Defence, hon. Crispus Kiyonga as the guest of honour in Busongora North for a fundraising function. I realised then that across the board there are people who take the issue of parties as issues that should not divide people. This was because at that time there were colleagues who would even fear to invite the opposition. 

There is a colleague in this house who I thought was closer to me than hon. Kyetunda who had a fundraising and when he distributed cards, he left me out. I asked him what had happened and he said, “No, I don’t want to invite you to my function”. I told him, “I am going to gate crash the fundraising” and he said, “Please save me”. I retreated because I did not want to put him in problems. 

However, these two were a different category of Ugandans and I think that these are the type of people we need in this country, people who put the issue of parties aside and know that we are one, people like the late. Later on he invited hon. Odonga Otto and I to visit him in future in Ntoroko but that has not happened because here today lies the body of the late. 

I did not even know that I had studied with some of his relatives, so I was shocked today when I met them. I didn’t know that while I was a student in Fort Portal, some of my classmates were relatives of the late. I was shocked to see them today and they are up there in the gallery. I know that I would have been closer to him had I known this. We had a number of Batuku students in the school and we were so close and we have kept that relationship strong. Therefore, it is really painful for me to get to know that I should have been closer to the late on his death. To omugurusi and omukaikuru, I say may the good Lord keep you strong as well as the family. 

Today, I met my predecessor who I have defeated twice in elections and who had never greeted me since 2001 signing the book. He embraced me and engaged me in a discussion and it was a landmark in my life. The late was a peacemaker and that is why he embraced all of us. This is what happened to me in my life today as we pay tribute to the late. We had tried to find ways and even use religious leaders to reach out to my predecessor and they had failed but the death of the Late Mugarra has solved that problem. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Let three minutes be three minutes, please.

4.45
MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA BIREKERAAWO (DP, Bukoto County South, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also rise to support the motion to pay tribute to the late hon. Francis Kabagambe Mugarra, MP Ntoroko Constituency, Bundibugyo District. I came to know the late in the Committee on Local Government Accounts where hon. Ekanya is the chairperson. We interacted during those committee meetings and developed a friendship, which I cannot say was brought about by this or that. He knew very well that I was a strong pillar of the Democratic Party and he was, as you have heard, a 3.1.1 Movement cadre, but this did not stop him from cultivating friendship with me. 

Mr Speaker, at first his name gave me trouble and you have even heard hon. Kamya pronouncing it as Mugaruwa. I thought he was Mugaruwa until I found out that he was Mugarra. In fact it gave me problems while pronouncing it until I started saying, hon. Ntoroko. It became easier for me that way. From then on we would interact and I remember that he had promised me- as you have heard he has been an expert in the cooperative movement. 

Well, he had promised to visit my constituency and assist me in creating SACCOS so that my constituents can access the bonnabagagawale funds. It is very unfortunate that he has died before he visited my constituency. 

Mr Speaker, I am one of those few people and I shed tears because I didn’t visit him in the hospital. He called me on Thursday last week and told me that he had undergone an operation and that he was recovering. On Friday, I met hon. Alisemera here at Parliament and I asked her the condition of our friend and she assured me that she had visited him and he was promising. Unfortunately, I travelled to my constituency over the weekend only to learn yesterday that my friend had passed away. 

People had talked about hospitals, health centres and the condition of living of our people. It is a challenge, and you know very well my mother has been sick of late and she was diagnosed to have cancer. But if you visit Mulago Hospital, the Cancer Institute - and we are here as Members of Parliament passing loans as hon. Beti Kamya has said without even thinking - I challenge the Leader of Government Business today to go and visit the Cancer Institute of Mulago. You cannot even think it is part of a government hospital, a referral hospital. It is very disheartening; as Members have said in this House, all of us, it is me to day; it is somebody tomorrow but how we go is a very disheartening thing. 

I would like to convey my heartfelt condolences to the widow, the children, the parents, the people of Ntoroko and to the National Resistance Movement for the pillar they have lost; because you have heard he was once a cadre. When you reach the RDC, you are the best cadre in any party but that did not stop him from making friendship. Some of you when you cross say from these parties where we are to different parties, you do not even want to talk to us you have left in these parties. But for him, he could even go out to look for us. I do not know whether he was trying to lure us into the Movement, but he was a real friend. Let me use the Latin words and say, Requiescat In pace. 

4.50
The Government Chief Whip (Mrs Kabakumba Masiko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to hon. Kabagambe Mugarra Francis Amooti who was otherwise a rising star but now a fallen hero. Much has been talked about him and I only want to add that Francis has been an articulate Member of Parliament, a loyal Member of NRM and indeed a devoted Member of the NRM Parliamentary Caucus. 

It has been stated and I would like to confirm that he spoke softly but firmly on the issues that continue to affect his constituents, and he would always defend a cause that he believed in. He was persuasive and never confrontational in his approach to issues, even on the most contentious ones. This earned him support both in the caucus but also on this Floor of the House. We will greatly miss him. 

I would like to thank his parents, “Omugurusi n’omukaikuru” Kabagambe for bringing up hon.          Mugarra very well.

From the day hon. Mugarra learnt that I was a princess, he never referred to me by name. He always called me “Maama Abwooli” because the mother is a Mubitokati, the same clan like myself. I will greatly miss his advice and comradeship. At his age, I would respect him like I would respect my father, but he was so humble. There is a way the Batoro greet. He would always bend for me as the tradition is in Toro in the mid-West region.

On behalf of the Members of Parliament who may not have an opportunity to talk, on my own behalf and indeed my family, I would like to sincerely express our deepest sympathies and heartfelt condolences to the widow, Mugarra’s parents, the children, all the family members, his constituents, this Parliament, the Rt hon. Speaker, the NRM fraternity and the entire country for this great loss. 

To the family, the good Lord that gives abundant mercies and peace will provide for your needs and fill the gap that has been created by hon. Francis Mugarra Kabagambe’s departure. May the Lord God comfort you during this difficult period and give Francis - I will put in bracket (son) a peaceful and eternal rest. Bye bye Kabagambe Francis Amooti, (son).

4.54
MRS MARY MUGYENYI (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I rise to support the motion and to pay tribute to our fallen colleague, but also extend my condolences and the condolences of my people, to whom he was a friend, to the family, the people of Ntoroko and to the people of Butuku in particular.

I first met hon. Mugarra a year before he came to Parliament. I had gone on a livestock visit to Rwebisengo, I remember, and I met this gentleman who was at that time not a politician in Parliament but who showed a lot of commitment to his people. As luck came our way, even before he came to Parliament, we started planning together and we actually said - we first of all discovered there was a lot in common between the “Batuku” and my people. Right from there, we started planning on how we could do joint programmes because there was a lot to learn from each other. As luck came our way, he came to Parliament. 

Hon. Mugarra was a very soft-spoken person - a lot has been said about him - but very wise. He was a good planner and there is no doubt about it. I used to look him up over lunchtime in our canteen in particular just to pick on his brain to know what he was planning next for his constituency. And I would find that there is something that I could learn from him. 

We had organised joint programmes and exchange visits; he goes before we have covered a lot that we had planned to do. I will definitely miss him, but I want to use this opportunity to say something to government and two ministries that I think could be relevant in this particular moment. 

Hon. Mugarra comes from a minority group at the very corner border of Uganda with Congo. A group of people that is not very well known, definitely because of their numbers, they are marginalised. Government hardly knows these people. For example, I discovered when I went there that the dryness of the area is excessive. The people are cattle keepers without water and we are always planning for other areas that have no water with livestock and you would never think that Bundibugyo is amongst those areas in Uganda that are dry. You would consider it to be a wetland in fact, but it is a very dry area particularly the area that he comes from. 

I want to appeal to the Ministry in charge of Water and in charge of Livestock to remember hon. Mugarra’s people to whom he was very committed - there is no doubt about it. It is a very big loss to these people. It is very difficult to replace a person like the hon. Kabagambe Mugarra. Only God knows because He plans; He brings us to earth; He takes us away and He knows why he has done that and we cannot challenge it.

The other ministry that once again I want to make an appeal to and to re-echo what my colleagues have said, is the Ministry in charge of Health. A lot is being done; government is putting a lot of effort in health, but I think we need to have a programme that is particularly focussing on the kind of diseases that are taking us now. These diseases that are not traditionally known to us; they are alien; they are foreign and they are killing us. Indeed, if you think about how many people are dying of cancer today - these are diseases that Africa did not know. 

Uganda of recent seems to be a clear victim of unknown foreign diseases. Can’t we have a programme that is particularly focussing – researching in the first place about these diseases and then getting us also to know as a population how to go about it? We need preventive measures; we seem to be dealing more with pathology - sometimes pathologists come in when it is too late. We need to know how to live. If it is our style of living, let it be focussed on so that we have a programme on that. May the good Lord rest your soul in eternal peace. Bye colleague. 

5.00
MRS JOYCE KWEBIHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support the motion to pay tribute to hon. Mugarra Kabagambe, MP Ntoroko County, Bundibugyo District. 

I first extend my condolences to the family of the late MP, hon. Mugarra, his wife and children here present, his parents and all the people of his constituency. I extend my condolences even to the Speaker and all members of Parliament because we also have really lost our Member. I extend my condolences to the people of Rwenzori region because Kabagambe’s people are really our people. We shall miss him very much. 

Secondly, I stand here to pay special tribute to the late Kabagambe Mugarra because he had rare qualities. I personally observed that he was very social and respectful to people. He was also co-operative and very principled. Indeed, he was a social man because I personally gained from his advice when this “bona baggaggawale” started. He advised me on how to make SACCOS for our poor people of Kyenjojo District. In that respect, even the people of Kyenjojo District have lost hon. Kabagambe.

The late Kabagambe gave me an opportunity to visit his constituency. I found that really he was very close to his people; his people loved him very much and he kept close to his people. It is something for us to learn; it is also something for us members of Parliament to learn, that hon. Kabagambe had time for colleagues. This is a weakness to all of us MPs; sometimes we do not have time for one another. Therefore, we shall greatly miss him and I know the NRM will miss him. But I am encouraged to know in his death that death has no party; it has no religion; it has no tribe as I see all people here joining in the sorrow of saying farewell to our departed brother. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: What I am going to do is to note that hon. Toskin wanted to make a contribution and honourable Member for Ntungamo District. Otherwise, we have to close this debate.

5.04
MR JOSEPH MATTE (NRM, Bughendera County, Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Death has robbed of a good friend. I just met hon. Kabagambe about one year and a half ago, when I decided to stand for my people of Bughendera in Bundibugyo. Bundibugyo is a district, which has been disadvantaged through years, and sometimes we wonder whether our people think seriously about us. I thank the NRM government that has tried its level best to make some improvement. 

When I met Mugarra, he was going to campaign in his own constituency – and I am from Bughendera. I was the chairman of the task force for NRM for Bundibugyo District. I first took him to task to explain why he was contesting. One thing he said to me is that team spirit is very important. I agreed with him that it is extremely important. If we cannot be united and talk as a team, there is no way we can go forward. 

Bundibugyo is a district with over 37 different ethnic groups of people. Of these, three are arranged in this order of priority: We have “Bamba, Bakonzo, and Batuku. I happen to be a “Mukonzo” from the mountains and my constituency covers the mountains physically plus the lower area, while Mugarra’s constituency also covers the mountains. So, he wanted me to help him in the mountains. I asked him, “Why do you want me to help you?” One of the things he said was we should never think of tribe as an important thing. The important thing we should emphasise is citizenship. Where will your tribe take you? The citizenship will take you somewhere; you talk as a Ugandan and you are okay. But if you talk as a Mukonzo or a Mutuku, that is not very important. 

Then we went on to another challenge and he asked, “What about Africa?” I told him Africa is good because I am a Pan-Africanist. And we went on to share ideas on what we were going to do. He said the problem we are facing is a balanced diet, among others. So, what can we do to improve the diet of our people? For example, I found out that in my constituency people can take a month or two without tasting meat. In his constituency also, he had another problem; they have a lot of meat but carbohydrates are a rare thing there. So we asked about how we could help each other. I said I would try to bring animals – I do not want to go into details but that was very important. 

Two, we discussed and realised there is a skill required; that is education. If you have education, you have the eyes to the world. Without education, it does not matter whether you are a son of a great person here; the first thing they will ask you is what qualifications you hold. So, we said education was important; he confirmed that and I liked it. 

We talked about apartheid in Africa where the minority is still ruling the majority. He said the majority of people on the continent are women but how many women are in key position? What a shame! This is something we should work for so that democracy can be practised in its real sense, rather than having the minority ruling the majority.”  We agreed that that apartheid is not any different from the one that was in South Africa, a few years ago, where four million White people were ruling over 20 or 30 million Black people. That is where we got the term, “apartheid”.

Finally, we talked about the unification of Africa.  Mr Speaker, People have talked a lot about nationalism.  But in our conversation, we talked about a great dream of uniting Africa. It is so sad that none of us has had the chance to talk to him about this again. Otherwise, we finally said, “This continent of ours, however much we may be proud today or very rich or very poor, we cannot survive in it without a unified Africa.”  He eventually agreed with me that Africa will only realise its independence when we have one Africa, one people, one president, one passport and once currency.  

With these few words, I deliver condolences to the family. The family is a great family; he is married to a wonderful wife and it is a pity that the man is gone.  May his soul rest in eternal peace!

5.10
MR ERISA KAAHWA (NRM, Buruli County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I first met Mugarra in 2004 when he came to my school for an admission for his son in senior one.  I later met him again when we invited him to discuss the discipline of his child and academics, among other things. I continued meeting him on every visitation day when he personally visited his son. I also met him every other time he came to pick and return his son to school.  I later met him when I invited him to the school to celebrate my successful election as Member of Parliament; he came willingly. When he invited me to Ntoroko to celebrate his successful election to Parliament too, I also went.  From those moments, we continued meeting till we established a very close relationship. 

I found hon. Mugarra a very lovable person, very understanding, a man who loved his family; a very disciplined gentleman and a man who could never speak unless he was so sure that whatever he was to say would be accepted.  Mugarra, as others have said, was a nationalist and possessed other virtues that I will not go through in the interest of time.  

Many people have come up and lamented that we need to do something about families of deceased persons.  I want to request, Mr Speaker, that in future, members of Parliament, heads of departments and possibly, even government, should be able to get a system where they should come up and tell us their contributions to the families of people who pass away, other than just coming to comment and lament about how they have lost a great and dear person; we should make some contributions of some kind.  

In Africa, such occasions have always occurred and it is common that Africans come out and tell the public what they would do to families that lose their dear ones.  My prayer is that Members of this community could evoke that Africanism such that every time they are passing on eurologies, they also state what they can contribute. I know they do provide money, but what about the people of the family who are going to live much longer?  What contribution do they make towards their families?  

It is out of that Africanism in me that as we wish Mugarra long lasting times, I wish to say that as long as his son who is now in senior three at Progressive Secondary School lives there, I will pay his school fees. (Applause)

We have lost a great man in Mugarra and we, as members of Parliament, have lost a friend.  I know the children in my school who have met him so often every time for consolation, have lost a great counsellor.  Members of staff in my school have also lost a great friend. We, all together, wish Mugarra a peaceful rest.  Thank you so much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.  Honourable members, as I indicated I put on record that hon. Toskin and hon. Rwakimari wanted to make contributions, but because of time, it was not possible. I want to repeat that this has gone on record. Honourable members, before I put the question, I want to read these messages.  This is to the family of the late Mugarra Kabagambe.

“The Management and Members of the Parliamentary Cooperative Society Limited have learnt with shock the untimely death of our member and friend, hon. Francis Mugarra Kabagambe.  The late joined our society in February 2007, and has been a very active member.  We were only beginning to learn from his wide experience in cooperatives.  We will miss him for his better ideas and wide knowledge. As a policy we have contributed Shs.1m only to the bereaved family.  He had made savings with the society and the cash contribution will be arranged so that it is passed to the members of the family. 
May his soul rest in eternal peace.”

The next condolence message is from the Leader of the Opposition and it was brought to me early morning yesterday. 

“On Tuesday, 10 July, I received a copy of an e-mail addressed to you by the former Member of Parliament for Ntoroko County, Bundibugyo District, hon. Roger Matte, informing you of the sudden death of our colleague, the late hon. Francis Mugarra Kabagambe that had occurred the night before.  

The death of our colleague took me by surprise, and I believe very many members in this august House it was a complete surprise, as I had no information about his health or illness or his admission in hospital.  
Once again, rude death has robbed our Parliament and the country at large, of a leader and humble servant of the people. On behalf of the entire the opposition in Parliament and on my own behalf, therefore, I convey to you and the family, relatives and friends of our late honourable colleague, and the people of Ntoroko County in particular and Bundibugyo District in general, our sincere condolences and deep sorrow at the sadden and terrible loss of our dear Brother, Francis Mugarra. 

The late hon. Mugarra came to the Eighth Parliament in the quietest way, having agreed with the then MP on succession without competition or conflict. In Parliament, the late Mugarra led a very quiet and humble life though often offering wise and very balanced counsel on all matters. Sadly in death, he left Parliament as quietly as he came, but after playing his role in the way the Almighty had planned it. 

It is true that the sudden death of the late Mugarra has robbed his family of a father, husband and relative. No amount of consolation will fill the gap that he has left behind. 

However, as we mourn our dear brother, we should praise God for the opportunity with life and for the good things he gave him in this world.

We urge his family, friends and the entire people of Bundibugyo District, to remain strong and dignified in this moment of great sorrow and grief. May the almighty God receive the Soul of our dear brother, the late hon. Francis Mugarra Kabagambe so that he may rest in eternal peace.” Signed by, Prof. Morris Ogenga Latigo, MP for Agago County, Pader and Leader of Opposition.”

Those are the written messages I have so far received. I now put the question in the terms as read out by the First Deputy Prime Minister. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

National Anthem (One Verse)

(Exit of the late hon. Francis Kabagambe Mugarra.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, once again, I want to thank you for your time and contribution bidding farewell to our friend, the late Francis Kabagambe Mugarra, Member of Parliament for Ntoroko County. It has been a consolation to those affected by this death, us, the family, relatives and friends, and the people of Ntoroko County.

Other arrangements as I understand are that the body will now be taken to the deceased’s home in Bweyogerere. It will then leave for Bundibugyo tomorrow after a church service. Burial will be on Friday at his home in Bundibugyo District.

I have received a note from hon. Kabakumba to the effect that they will provide transport for about 28 people who are able to travel to Ntoroko for burial. These will later join the rest of the group, which is leaving tomorrow morning for a retreat at Kyankwanzi. I understand this retreat is ending on 18th July.  Therefore, in the circumstances, we will not be able to sit as Parliament until this big group comes back. The House is adjourned to 19 July 2007 at 2.00 p.m. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 5.24 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 19 July 2007 at 2.00 p.m.)



