  
Wednesday 14th July, 1993

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice-Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair).

The Council was called to order.

BILLS
THE FIRST READING

THE FINANCE BILL, 1993

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Mr. Kafumbe Mukasa):  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Finance Bill, 1993, be read a First Time.  I beg to move.

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Point of order.  Is it in order to proceed when we do not realise the quorum?

(The Council adjourned for 15 minutes).

(Quorum formed and the Council resumed).

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1993

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR WOMEN IN DEVELOPMENT CULTURE AND YOUTH (Mrs. Bwambale): -(Interruption)

MR. APILA TOM:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, hon. Gasatura declared that he will not be part and parcel of this Debate, is it in order for him to be in today? (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Quite in order, proceed please.  Order please.

MRS. BWAMBALE:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman and hon. Members for having given me this opportunity to contribute to this very, very important Bill in the history of Uganda.

This Bill - Amendment Bill before us today I rise principally, to support the Motion although, I consider that this Bill is very inadequate for the reasons I am going to give.  From the memorandum - if I may refer the Members to the memorandum and the three sections of the memorandum, for example, Section 1 which clearly states the objective of Bill and I read: ‘The objection of this Bill is to amend the Constitution to cancel the abolition by Article 118 of the institution of Traditional Ruler and to remove existing barriers to the return to Traditional Rulers of assets and properties previously owned by them or connected with or attached to their offices but which were confiscated by the State when the institution was abolished’.  This Bill, this memorandum, is part of the Statute.  While this objective and the second one and the third one are good and would really protect these kingdoms which were also unilaterally abolished when the Buganda Kingdom has a crisis with the UPC Government and with Obote, this very objective is not included in the Bill, so the minority groups belonging in those other Kingdoms, like the one I belong to, feel they are not adequately covered by this Bill.

The Kingdoms I am talking about; Buganda, Ankole, Toro and others were just unilaterally abolished and I am worried.  Reinstating the Kingdom of Buganda is good because it was wrong in the first place for a State to confiscate personal and institutional property.  It was violation of institutional and human rights.  In principle, I support that these assets be returned to their rightful owners through this Bill.

This drives me to the next point where I support the Bill in principle.  Apart from the land that does not easily degrade and the Bulange that has recently been renovated, most of these assets are in a sorry state, they are a shame and an embarrassment to this nation and yet they could be utilised if owned by the rightful people to attract tourists and earn revenue for this country.  So, I support the Bill on that.

This Bill in its memorandum and inside the Statute, it is empowering the Traditional Rulers to resume their cultural customary and traditional functions.  It is prohibiting the rulers from participating in politics.  How is that going to happen, when the supporters, the advisers of the traditional rulers are politicians?  

MR. OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, since in light of Amendment to the Article 118 of the Republican 1967 Constitution that at that appropriate time, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor of the House that we had 12 Constitutional Kingdoms and Constitutional Heads.  That is to say, Rutakirwa of Kigezi, Senkulu of Bukedi, Omuyinga of Bugisu, Kigo of Sebei, Wanyac of Lango, Waprigo of Moyo, Lalonyo-Maber of Acholi, we had the Kabaka of Buganda, Omugabe of Ankole, the Omukama of Toro, and we had Omukama of Bunyoro and Kyabazinga of Busoga.  Now each - these lawyers, including the hon. Kawanga was telling us nonsense yesterday -(Interjection)- Yes, I can challenge him -(Laughter).  I am telling you, I can challenge him.  Why?  Because it is the part of the Constitution, Schedule 1(2) to the Constitution; Buganda (2) Bunyolo (3) Ankole (4) Bunyoro (5) Ankole then Constitutional Heads.  He is a lawyer, let him look at Chapter 133 of the Constitutional Laws of Uganda, paragraphs of page 2715, these are lawyers who are completely liars. (Laughter)  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.  Take your seat please, proceed please.

MRS. BWAMBALE:  Through you, Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank the informer hon. Cuthbert Obwangor for having strengthened my point mentioned earlier that the abolition was unilaterally done and the restoration should not be done in the same way otherwise there will not be any difference between the two Governments and between the two people who took the decision.  I want to think that the decision was also taken by Parliament and this is another Parliament.  

The point is, there must be consultations and a referendum carried in each of those areas affected by this Bill for this Bill to be adequately accepted as a document of Uganda.  Because, in principle, we all know and agree that for Buganda to have the Kabaka, if that can lead into unity of this country together with the other people affected, what shall we lose in this country?  This is what NRM has been advocating for.  So, let us not ignore the views of the minority Kingdoms that are also affected in this Bill.

This Bill is fantastic where it states on page 3 - I beg your pardon, objective 3 on page 1, where it is seeking to guarantee the freedom of a person to adhere to his or her culture and to their institutions.  In some of these Kingdoms I talked about earlier, the culture is not uniform.  Now if people are going to have the freedom to adhere to their culture, let therefore, be the other minority groups in each of these other Kingdom, including Buganda itself, be given the freedom and the choice to find out -(Interruptions).  I will take more information later; let me move on to another point.  (Interjection)- Okay.

MR. KAYONDE:  Point of information.  When you look on page 1, part 3 of the memorandum it says, ‘it amends article 8 of the Constitution to guarantee the freedom of a person to adhere to this culture and cultural institutions.  This will be subject to the existing requirement of that Article that the enjoyment of a person’s freedoms should not prejudice the rights and freedoms of others or the public interest’.  In other words, you are not being forced to practice that culture if you are in Bundibugyo and there would be people who want that culture, you are not obliged, you have the freedom.  Thank you.

MRS. BWAMBALE:  Thank you very much for the information.  The word ‘prejudice’ is too weak.  It cannot allay our fears and for Kasese, it does not serve the purpose, if I may be allowed to use that district.

In Bundibugyo, Kasese and Kabarole now - Kasese has about 343,000 people while Kabarole has 110,000, I mean, Bundibugyo and Kabarole has roughly 800,000 people even if you subjected this to a referendum in Kabarole, the other minorities would be defeated, so there should still be a method -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Mr. Kafumbe Mukasa):  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I want to inform my Colleague the Deputy Minister that the way the law is framed, should not really carry fears to anybody because the law says, the people in Kasese have their own culture which may be different from the people of Toro.  The law says anybody who stays in Kasese will only voluntarily exercise his culture, if he values Batoro culture and he will not enforce that culture on my sister for example, who values her own culture which is, may be different from the culture of the Batoro.  The law does not intend to make anybody in Kasese follow the Batoro culture.  In fact, even the law does not force a Mutoro to follow a Mutoro culture.  A Mutoro may decide to behave like an Englishman or an Englishwoman.  The law totally allows that one and the law is saying, those people who wish to exercise traditional culture will no longer be barred by the Constitution. 

So, because it is not also true that for you to enjoy a custom of that particular country or that culture, you must stay within the bounds or the boundary, for example, Mr. Chairman to allay her fear, for me I know Ugandans who are people of my tribe the Baganda who with Constitution or no Constitution went in exile in London and ever since, have continued with the Buganda Culture although they live in London.  But also I know a few Ugandans, I have come across a few Ugandans who are Baganda who behave like Europeans and the law is saying, each one behave the way you want culturally and the law will protect you.  So, I want to say this one that I do not envisage my sisters and brothers in Kasese fearing that time is going to come for them to be invaded to put their culture aside and be forced to enjoy any other ones culture.  Because this, I have to clarify.  I think this is causing fears that I do not see within the law.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Proceed Sister.  Additional information from hon. Kanyomozi please.

MR. KANYOMOZI:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, the information I would like to give on the memorandum and Article 8 of the Constitution which is actually being amended is sub-section 3 and below.  These are sections which give special privileges by status of birth and decent.  Those are being amended so as to allow hereditary rulers to continue.  That one is the Section that I am sure this Bill is affecting.  I hope also, in agreement with hon. Kafumbe Mukasa that it will not force the people in Bundibugyo or Kasese, Igara, Sheema and all these other places to adhere to cultures that they do not accept.  But what they will have to adhere to, is to accept that a man born of his father and grandfather continues to be a head of that tribe irrespective of the status, his mental status or otherwise. Thank you.

MR. KATUREEBE:  Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I really rise to seek clarification from the Learned Friend Attorney General at this stage given the way the debate is going. What are we re-creating in this Bill?  Are we re-creating kingdoms or are we creating cultural heads of communities?  This is very important to clarify in light of the definition that is given to traditional ruler.  Secondly, it is important to clarify why we have added the word traditional ruler in amending Article 118 in the Constitution when the Article we are amending did not have the word traditional in it.

HON. MEMBERS:  (Hear! Hear!).

MR. KATUREEBE:  Thirdly, Mr. Chairman, it is important to clarify at this stage in the memorandum, if you say in paragraph two that the Bill wants to state that traditional rulers may, where their people so wish, resume their customs and so on.  Where is it provided in this Bill, the mode by which the people may declare their wish? (Laughter)  Because, this has to be clarified at this point because, is the cultural head of the Banyankole for example, synonymous with the Mugabe of Ankole Kingdom?  Because you may find several cultures within Ankole Kingdom but not necessarily recognising a cultural head of an ethic group called Banyankole.  The Banyaruguru people would not accept a cultural head of the Banyankole although they are in what used to be Ankole kingdom.  Can we get some clarification from the Attorney General?

THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Abu Mayanja):  Mr. Chairman, that is a substantial contribution and I prefer to reserve my right to reply to the whole of the debate.

MRS. BWAMBALE:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to use this opportunity to thank the informers who have raised pertinent issues and if the hon. Attorney General responds adequately when rounding up the debate, it will really go a long way to instill the objectives for creating peace by having this Bill passed by this House, because we must be precisely clear whether we are talking about traditional rulers or we are talking about a cultural head.  I would be more comfortable with a cultural head than having a traditional head because some of these areas, districts for example, that are covered by traditional rulers are not yet gazetted.  Talk of Kasese - I am sorry to use this example, but it is a practical one, talk about Bundibugyo, talk about Pallisa and other areas that may easily be engulfed if the definition is not clear.  Because by mere restoration - you cannot talk about the Kabaka without talking about the kingdom.  They are one and the same.  You cannot talk about Toro Kingdom without talking about the already gazetted boundaries of the Toro kingdom.  And if we go down on the ground and follow the gazetted areas, then you know what happens.  

So, if we are going to have cultural leaders in such areas affected by using that example, then it is okay, all of us are going to belong and we shall be proud to belong and we shall have the freedom to belong where we want to be.  So, the people were saying, supposing by mere restoration of the Toro kingdom, the following day, everybody is there, what is going to happen?  The women and people of Kasese said this, we do not want the current Attorney General and the favourite NRM Government that they have worked for so much, and which they support so much, to drag them again into the squabbles of that notorious movement which was called Rwenzururu Movement.  That movement was fighting backwardness, was fighting for education, was fighting for health governance and they would not want to be taken back by a Bill if we just brush through it without throwing some clarification on those people lest there is confusion which I would not like to entertain as the leader of that district.  So, I really request the Attorney General to do it and clarify because the history is still fresh in minds.  The archives still have the records and I do not want hon. Colleague the Attorney General to be responsible for causing another Rwenzururu in Kasese. (Laughter)

HON. J. KAIJA:  Point of information.  This information is coming from Bunyoro, Masindi in particular.  We now look at Kibanda County.  We have 56 tribes living together in one small-parked area of a county called Kibanda and when you take the originals that are to serve under the king, we may be one or two tribes out of 56 tribes.  I do not know whether the Attorney General has something to do with that.

MRS. BWAMBALE:  Mr. Chairman, the various points of information are a clear indication that the subject is a very sensitive one and important in the history of Uganda and I hope by the time we wind up the Bill, all these questions will have been answered.  However, my next Bill which is following this one is that, it is only the properties of the Buganda kingdom that have been discussing what has happened to the properties of others.  What is going to happen to the properties of other kingdoms?  Do they not matter?  The whole House represents the whole of Uganda and we are here deliberating about properties for one sector.

THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Abu Mayanja):  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, hon. Members should not have very short memories.  This matter, when it was discussed on the 30th of April in a closed Session of this hon. House, the President was informing the House of an agreement that he had reached; that the government had reached with the traditional people in Buganda and he did not want to implement that agreement without the knowledge and consent of the House.  

Now, the government has not carried out similar negotiations with traditional rulers in other areas.  Therefore, the Bill provides that such negotiations shall be carried out and what will be agreed shall be implemented.  That is why the list of the properties in the other former kingdoms and the territory of Busoga has not been put in an Appendix because of the government and the people of those areas have not sat together and agreed on what to restore and what shall not be restored.

MRS. BWAMBALE:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The hon. Members of this House are here on taxpayers’ money.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Try to wind up please.

MRS. BWAMBALE:  I am and I will do so soon, Mr. Chairman.  I would have been happier if we did not tackle this issue piece meal and we had the whole issue tackled together.  We would have saved the taxpayers’ money because we have diverted. Therefore, in one way or another talking about something that is not relevant to the debate, which means by this time, this debate would have ended if it were clear that we are talking about only one kingdom.  

However, when it comes to other kingdoms, let all the subjects be included, specifically when it comes to Toro Kingdom, to negotiate with the President, we would like that delegation to take into account the various cultures in that kingdom.  The Batuku should come, the Bamba should come, the Bakonjo should come and the Batoro should also come and the negotiation is done jointly.  This is a humble request.  (Interjection)- Oh! The Basongora, Mr. Chairman.  I am reminded.  I think I should leave that item.

MR. BAMBALIRA:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to be guided.  I can see a stranger holding a machine like a recording machine.  I do not know whether it is in order for him to have it here.

THE CHAIRMAN:  It is not in order please.  Remove him.

MRS. BWAMBALE:  Mr. Chairman, Sir, I have two points to wind up with.  One is on page three of the Bill, Clause 118(A) that gives power and mandate to the legislature to have power to return assets and properties of traditional rulers.  I would like to request the Attorney General that while the Legislature is being given power to return, they should also be given power to confiscate in case the conditions we have laid in this Bill are not fulfilled.  There is no provision in the Bill that says if so and so - if a traditional ruler gets involved in political activities, this action shall be taken.  We are only giving one sided power to the legislature to give - they must also have the mandate to take that is my request and I hope they will give it due consideration. The final point is a gender one. The restoration of cultural heads and the writing of this Bill on page 1, section 3 and page 3 section 7, they only talk about a he, a he -(Laughter)

THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Abu Mayanja): Point of information.  I appreciate the point which is exercising the acute mind of the hon. Member, but I would like to assure her that under the Interpretation and General Clause Act, he embraces the -(Laughter)

MRS. BWAMBALE:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The information given by the Attorney General I am afraid is not acceptable in international language because even the word ‘Chairman’ has been now replaced to mean Chairperson. (Hear! Hear!) And it would be absurd, for a government that has a Ministry for Women in Development to give the Ministry a lip service and not change the language and not to change the culture and not to change the law.  So, I am disappointed on that point that, he embraces she.  

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Point of order.  Bearing in mind that we have had numerous Bills and debates on the gender issue, and knowing that we have been passing a number of Bills in the past, is it in order for the hon. Deputy Minister to raise a completely different Motion on gender issues and divert us from the subject of the actual Bill?  

THE CHAIRMAN:  She is entitled to her opinion.  Please proceed.

MRS. BWAMBALE:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am entitled to execute my duties.  Now in this administration, as I wind up, in this administration of these kingdoms, if the women are not going to be considered and the Buganda Kingdom has four million, that means that more than half of the population will perpetually be excluded from the leadership.

MRS. MARY OKER:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to inform the hon. Deputy Minister that Members here are saying in Uganda, there will never be a woman king.  So, I do not see any reason why we should waste our time as women sitting here. (Laughter)

MR. ADOKO NEKYON:  Information.  I would like to inform the Deputy Minister and the House that in the Bunyoro history there was once a Queen called Kasamba who shared the throne with her husband.  So, it is not true to say that there will never be a Queen in Uganda.  Secondly, I would like to inform her that in Buganda even the Princesses are regarded as men, so when they are being addressed they are called ‘Ssebo’ (Laughter).  

MRS. BWAMBALE:  Mr. Chairman, if that is the attitude we have in the culture of Uganda, then we are struggling in vain to say that we are going to have women emancipated because if women are going to participate, let them also participate here.  Therefore, what say do the Baganda women have in this ‘Ebyaffe?’   (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  It is time please.

MRS. BWAMBALE:  Allow me, Mr. Chairman, one and half minutes.  Thank you.  I have been all along looking around to see whether the Minister for Local Government is around.  I want to conclude like this that in view of what I have presented, let the ungazetted districts of this country that may be destabilised by the passing of this law be gazetted with immediate effect so that they are protected.  With that I support the Bill -(Laughter)- provided that other kingdoms are going to brought to the House and be debated given fair play.  Thank you very much.

MRS. RWABYOMERE (Women Representative, Kabarole):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I rise to support the Motion, the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 1993 in as far as recognising freedom of the individual in this country as a fundamental principle is concerned.  And, I would like to say that unlike the previous speaker, my Colleague, I will add an optimistic flavour to this Bill because I support in total the move to return both - to amend the Constitution and also the second Bill, the Traditional Rulers (Restoration of Properties and Assets) Bill, 1993.  Before I go to the gist of my contribution, I have two point to make.  One, I came a little late but I noticed when I sat here that hon. Gasatura is back to this House.  I just want to find out, has he overcome the tantrum that he went through on Tuesday -(Laughter)- and, secondly, I had thought that we had got a second Ziritwawula because when Ziritwawula walked out of this House, he never came back. (Laughter)

As far as this House is concerned, I also wanted to point out that in the tradition of the Batoro, a sister of the King has got a lot of influence in the decisions, in fact, she influences all the decisions that are taken so to all intents and purposes she is actually a ruler next to the King, and with revolutionary Kings and the modernisation of the institution, I should say that we are very close to having a lady Queen for that matter.  So we should not be very pessimistic about the institution.

On Saturday 6th June, 1993, I was invited and I attended a meeting convened by Princess Bagaya of Toro as the head of the ‘Obufaranya Council’, there was a meeting at the Uganda International Conference Centre.  The agenda was to consider the return of the traditional sites and properties of the Toro Kingdom.  After an exchange of views in a peaceful atmosphere a resolution was passed.  If I remember well, the Clauses in that resolution were to the following effect.  

No. 1, congratulated the national Resistance Movement Government for having created an enabling atmosphere for the people of Uganda to discuss matters affecting their lives and their property and those of their families.  

No. 2, they commended the government and acknowledged the resolution, the first one of Gulu, of the Army Council, of between 2nd and 6th of April, 1992 and the National Resistance council resolution on the same subject.   

No. 3, they urge the NRC Members from Kabarole District to support this Bill when it is presented in Parliament.  It is mostly for that reason that I am here to exercise that mandate by virtue of being a Member of Parliament from Kabarole District because I am accountable to the people of Kabarole.  

No. 4, the people argued that if we are promoting culture and tradition and would want to keep with our identity, it would be a good idea if Kabarole District went back to the Toro, to be called Toro District because we are Batoro from Toro, we cannot be Bakabarole. (Laughter) Now, as far as boundaries are concerned, those of us who should know, we know where Toro is.  Now for our neighbours if they are perturbed that they are not gazetted, that is something that can be pursued.  Well, if they are not very happy with what we want, for us we want to promote culture, we want to -(Interruption)

MR. BAMBALIRA:  Information, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you.  Through you, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that ever since Bundibugyo was created as a district, it has had boundary changes three times and every time the boundary changes, it changes pushing into Bundibugyo not outwards.  So that is the problem we have on the boundary issue.  Up to now, the Minister of Local Government has not solved that problem.  Thank you.

MRS. RWABYOMERE:  Mr. Chairman, still I will not accept to be derailed.  I will remain on track, and I support the Bill.  Freedom is a fundamental principle both in the past contribution and in the Constitution that we are going to debate.  I proudly support this Bill because Toro really is the only kingdom with a crowned King, not only a crowned King but, a King who has joined modern times.  For example, he participated in the struggle, he joined the RC system, currently he is not even here, he is an ambassador.  So, really we do not have a problem.  We look at a King as a symbol of unity, we look at a King as a pride and that is why we support the provisions in this Bill.

Now, I would like to go straight to the Bill.  In Clause 2, ‘Resume their cultural, customary and traditional functions’.  I would like to emphasise that while they resume that, functions of this institution have over a time changed.  For example, what we had in the 1960s is not what we can have today and it is for that reason that we do not have a trust, we have a corporation sole.  This argument that a king or a Kabaka does not work because a corporation sole makes this institution a legal personality district from the people who form it, it is like a company, it has limited liability unlike a trust where you have people just waiting to be beneficiaries.  So, under this, a King can work, he can transact business, and he can have an income.  

So, it is for these reasons that I support this because it takes care of the modern functions of this institution.  Then, of course, No.3 is very straight forward.  The object No.4, sounds very much like a personal comment, it is not in the form of one, two, three.  I would propose that the Attorney General adopt the language in the Bill that he is going to present later because if you start the Clause, ‘it will be recalled that both the National Resistance Army...’  And so forth, it is more of a comment by the Attorney General than the NEC laws.  So may be we could start Clause 4 by saying the Bill seeks to effect the NRC Resolution and the Army Council Resolution which resolved to that effect.  That is a proposal to the Attorney General.

In Clause 3, in the body of the Statute, 118(6) ‘A Traditional Ruler shall enjoy such privileges and benefits as may be conferred upon him by the Legislature, the Government or by the Culture, Customs and Traditions of his community’.  I would rather, since we are legislating for this institution, we do our part by adding a Schedule of privileges and benefits that we intend to confer on the traditional rulers and the institution as a whole.

And also, the Government in sub-Clause (6) because in Section 118(A) you have the Legislature, which should have the Government and the Community.  I wonder; may be the Attorney General will explain why there is government and not only the Legislature and the communities because the Legislature takes care of what the Government has to offer and the community from the cultural takes care of the culture, customs and traditions of the people.  I do not know what the Attorney General has to think about that.

The previous speaker said that we should give powers to the Government to confiscate.  We cannot legislate for illegality because we have acknowledged that this institution should not have been abolished anyway.  So we cannot come back and say that we have powers to give, has got powers to take away that are very well known. I have been very brief on this one, if given chance on the second one, I will be more elaborate because the real things are in the second Statute.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. BARIGYE (Kashari County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I had already declared my interest in this matter so I do not need to repeat it.  Now, I want to comment, if I may, on some of the points that have been touched.  Originally, I had not intended to talk but I have been compelled to say a few things about what has been mentioned here.  Now, I want to make some comments on the question of a referendum in Ankole.  There is an English saying that what is good for the goose is also good for the gander.  Equally there is a Kinyankole saying that, if a parent beats children, he must beat them all.  

Now, It would be very wrong to legislate here on the same principle and then differentiate between different areas that are affected.  We should have one principle for all.  Secondly, when the monarchy was abolished in 1967 no one first carried out a referendum.  Why should one be carried out now?  At the time monarchy was abolished it can be fairly said that, the majority of people in Ankole supported the monarchy at that time.  This is evidenced by the fact that in the 1961 and 1962 elections, the party that was supported by the King won more seats in Ankole Kingdom Parliament and several attempts to remove them from power failed.  Since the abolition of the monarchy in 1967, supporters of the monarchy in Ankole have been intimidated into silence.  Propaganda against monarchy has been showered on the people.  In the past, tyrannical regimes, supporters of monarchy were abused, discriminated and even killed.  My own parents were physically tortured by Government soldiers on two occasions.  Even female members of my family were actually raped by Government troops -(Interruption)

HON. MEMBERS:  Shame, shame.

MR. BARIGYE: Those in power hurled Insults at us on many occasions.  At one time anyone who came near us did so at his own peril.  People who supported monarchy or would like to support it are just beginning to recover from all these.  A referendum in Ankole would, therefore, not be reasonable or fair.  Those who want a referendum are still imagining the type of kings who existed before that is one with executive and judicial powers.  The one we are talking about in this Bill is, of course, merely a cultural leader and nothing more. (Applause)  What harm can a cultural leader do to those in Ankole who may not want him and why should those in Ankole who do not want a cultural leader deny those who want one from having him?  No one will ever stop my hon. Friends here who hail from Ankole or others who do not want a cultural leader from paying allegiance to one.  However, they should not try to deny those who want a cultural leader from having one. (Applause)  

The cultural ruler envisaged in this Bill is rather like the leader of the Ismalia community, the Aghakhan or for that matter any other religious leader.  It would be absurd for the Government of India or Pakistan or wherever there are members of the Ismalia community to legislate that they should carry out a referendum among their population and if the majority of people do not want to follow the Aghakhan, then he should not be recognised in that country.  Similarly, it would be absurd and utter folly to determine whether the majority of people want to follow the Muslim Religion and -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order.

MR. BARIGYE:  And if the majorities do not, then Islam should be banned from Igara County.  If the hon. Members who want a referendum in Ankole carry the day, then one day you may here call that a referendum should be carried out in one part of Uganda to determine whether or not the majority of people accept the Pope as their religious leader and if they do not, that area should not recognise him as a religious leader -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Information from hon. Tiberondwa from Igara County.

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Mr. Chairman, Sir, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that, it is not fair to compare the situation in Buganda with the situation in Ankole The people of Buganda, since the monarchy was abolished in 1966 have persistently, continuously and honestly demanded the restoration of their monarchy.  I have not heard a single voice from Ankole demanding the restoration of monarchy except recently since the hon. John Barigye went and took some drums from the Museum. (Laughter)  Sir, I would also like to inform the Prince John Barigye that monarchy in Ankole is not popular because the RC V in Mbarara, the RC.V in Bushenyi which, therefore, include Ntungamo have passed resolutions rejecting monarchy.  Therefore, it is not fair to say that the monarchy in Ankole is popular; it is not. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, Order.  Additional information.

MR. KAIJUKA:  Mr. Chairman, while I would like to share sentiments from hon. Tiberondwa, I wanted to inform the House through you that, before hon. Barigye went to look for the drums -(Laughter)- when hon. Barigye visited hon. Tiberondwa in his home, hon. Tiberondwa invited the dancers and the drummers that used to dance for hon. Barigye’s father at his home to dance for hon. Barigye. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order please.  Please give the information.  

MR. RWAKAKOOKO:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to inform you, and through you the entire House, and in particular hon. Tiberondwa, who should be aware because of his age, that the struggle for the Kingdom of Mpororo terminated administratively and legally recently into this Council granting the status of a district to Ntungamo. There has been a struggle for the recognition of Mpororo district ever since our grand fathers and up to recently as I said so I do not know what hon. Tiberondwa is suggesting that the Kingdom of Ankole nobody has ever claimed.  In any case, he never held a referendum himself. (Laughter)

MR. BARIGYE:  Mr. Chairman, before I continue with what I was saying, may I inform you that I am not surprised that hon. Tiberondwa’s memory has already -(Laughter)- lapsed.  He has even forgotten that his advent into politics was when he was a supporter of monarchy and that is how he became a politician.  Now, if I may continue, with regard to the resolutions which were passed by Mbarara and Bushenyi districts, it is only fair to point out that those District Councils were referring to monarchy as it was them, monarchy with executive, with judicial, with legislative powers.  This Bill had not yet come out and here we are talking of purely a cultural leader. 

THE CHAIRMAN:  Information from hon. Kaijuka.

MR. KAIJUKA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, permit me to inform hon. John Prince Barigye that it is not correct that Bushenyi and Mbarara Councils made the resolutions without the full knowledge of what they were talking about.  I want to take this opportunity to inform the hon. speaker holding the Floor and the House that, we support this Bill genuinely, essentially because the conditions in Buganda are such that almost every Muganda has a claim to the kingship through their clan system.  In Ankole - and I stand to re-state this because I come from Ankole and I know Ankole very well and I speak on behalf of Banyankole in this regard -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.  Give information.  But you are not talking on behalf of the group.

MR. KAIJUKA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  That means I represent Sheema County and let me say this and give information and sit down.  I am just making one point that in terms of Ankole, it would be fair to say we will support this Bill and I think hon. Barigye should appreciate that we people from Ankole including he himself will sit down and discuss very cultural values and people should not spoil issues by making generalities.  The different communities are in Ankole and they should be able to sit down and talk about their cultural value and they can discuss those who head them and those who do not.  I mean if we miss that, we miss the point.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. BARIGYE:  I thank the hon. Minister for his contribution.  Actually, I do not differ from what he has said.  I am not trying to assert that the majority of people in Ankole support monarchy or not.  All I am saying is that where we are talking of cultural leaders and it is the right of any individual to accept or not accept a cultural leader.  That is all I am saying and it is the same way as a religion, as any belief.  You do not have a referendum for religious leader.  You do not carry out a vote counting, and you do not base your acceptance of a religious leader on the majority of people.  If we did that, then minority religions would be banned from this country and the likes of those who are insisting on a referendum in Ankole would end up in that kind of situation.  Mr. Chairman, I think, let me continue otherwise I will never finish.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Try to wind up please.

MR. BARIGYE:  I would beg you to allow me a little time because I have been so interrupted.  Mr. Chairman, demanding a referendum can cause unnecessary dissentions, conflicts and strikes and can also set a dangerous precedent.  It is this kind of thinking which led to the expulsion of Banyarwanda from Ankole during the past regime.  This kind of thinking ultimately results in ethnic cleansing.  It cannot be over-emphasised that cultural beliefs like religion are matters for the individual and no one should force an individual to accept or reject them.  In fact, it is a fundamental human right of an individual that is recognised by United Nations and the OAU.  For the above reasons, I urge my hon. Friend the Council Member for Igara County to withdraw his amendment and if it persists, I urge hon. Members to reject it. (Applause)  

Now, regarding the other points mentioned here, let me state briefly. Some hon. Members have cautioned that traditional rulers should not in future carry out sadistic and crude practices.  Of course, such measures ended by and large, with the 19th Century and were a measure of those times.  Moreover, they were not a monopoly of only the traditional rulers.  Some of their subjects sometimes even went to greater extremes than the traditional rulers of those days.  An example was cannibalism that was practised by some of these people.  No one, however, would now feel it necessary to caution some Members of these communities where traditional rulers are to be established that some of them should not revert to cannibalism.  Those communities that practice such deeds stopped long ago.  Past traditional rulers should not only be remembered for some of the crude deeds they may have carried out. They also performed some good deeds.  King Mwanga to whom crude deeds are often attributed for instance, was actually a nationalist who tried to resist the advent of imperialism although here I am not of course trying to excuse what he did to the Uganda martyrs.  However, it must be recognised that Sekabaka Mwanga and the Omukama Kabalega were exiled because of their great contribution in resisting colonialism.  

Similarly, in Ankole, my grandfather Chris Igumira was exiled to Kisumu because of refusing to be a colonial stooge and one of my great uncles Prince Rwakakaiga was also exiled and he died in the port of Kisumu in what is now Somalia.  For the same reason, it should be recognised that thanks to the past Kings of Buganda, Bunyoro, Toro and Ankole.  Most of Uganda, unlike many parts of Africa, was spared from the horrors of slave trade to Arabia and America and was also spared from the evils of the colonial while settlers.  Moreover, even Republican rulers have had their share of cruelty and evil deeds even in modern times.  It is difficult to find any past king who has brought as much suffering on his people as Idi Amin or Hitler or Bokassa.  In addition, the past Kings did a lot to develop their States.  One cannot help comparing the development that took place in the kingdom areas before and after monarchy was abolished.  

Moreover, the Kings we have had, unlike those who removed them, did not loot their treasuries and salt the money away in foreign bank accounts. (Applause)  One should compare the miserable state the late Kabaka lived in while in exile from 1966 until he died or the humble state in which the other former kings lived until they died to the luxury of former Presidents; Obote and Amin now enjoy and have continued to enjoy since they fell from power.

Allow me now to comment on the suggestion made by one Member that the former traditional rulers of Ankole did not absorb new cultures and peoples.  This is of course not true.  I have already pointed out that the past traditional rulers of Ankole were derived from a mixture of Bachwezi, Bairu, Bahima, Bahororo, Bahweju and Banyaigara.  I forgot to add Batooro or should I say, Banyoro since at that time Toro was part of Bunyoro and of course Banyakaragwe.  Moreover it is common knowledge which must have escaped the hon. Member for Kitagwenda that many Baganda, Batoro and Banyoro have settled in Ankole and were fully integrated into Ankole culture and society and some were even appointed Chiefs, Prime Ministers, and even Members of this hon. House representing Ankole counties.  

Lastly, let me comment on what hon. Mateke stated wrongly quoting our leader that since I never went to the bush, he had not gone to the bush in order to make me a King.  Allow me to enlighten hon. Mateke since he could not obviously be expected to know what you and other leaders know very well, that my family contributed to this struggle and made sacrifices including loss of my brothers and cousins while fighting for and consolidating the fundamental change which all of us including my Friend hon. Mateke are now benefiting from. (Applause)  

Finally, I want to congratulate hon. Members on the spirit of tolerance, mutual accommodation and reconciliation that has characterised most of our debates including this one.  I urge hon. Members to adopt this Bill in that same spirit so that every individual in Uganda can henceforth know that his strong hold cultural beliefs can be tolerated and accommodated.  This is the only way we can build a happy and prosperous Uganda.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now call upon the Mover to wind up please.

THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Abu Mayanja):  Mr. Chairman, Sir, I first and foremost, would like to express the gratitude of the government and myself for this massive and overwhelming support given to this Bill by this hon. House. This has demonstrated the intense patriotism and nationalism, concern and commitment to the welfare, the development, progress and stability of this House that obviously involves all hon. Members in all sides of the House.  I shall not attempt to reply to all the points that have been made.  Some of them were replied to and effectively so in my submission by some of the previous hon. speakers.  Perhaps as an elder of this House, I may say something and inform my hon. Friend, hon. Asiku who wanted to know why kingdoms were abolished.  

According to the records, the kingdoms were abolished because the Buganda Lukiiko at the time passed a resolution purporting to expel the Government of Uganda from the territory of Buganda.  That was stated at the time to be the cause.  But, was this true or correct?  If it was, then obviously, the abolition ought to have been confined to the kingdom of Buganda.  There was no reason to visit with fury amounting to almost barbarism.  The other kingdoms of Ankole, of Bunyoro, of Toro, the territory of Busoga which did not or whose councils did not pass resolutions purporting to expel the Government of Uganda from their territories - moreover, I shall not take information -(Interjection)

Yes, then the Government of Uganda at that time quarreled with Kabaka Mutesa of Buganda and they fought against him and expelled him from this country to overseas where he died.  That was their quarrel with him.  It was not necessary for them to abolish the institution of King.  When we quarrel politically or we disagree with leaders or politicians or whatever or the President, Ministers and overthrow them either through elections or otherwise or by going to the bush, we do not abolish the positions which they were holding before.  Therefore, I have been trying to search my mind in order to assist hon. Asiku and it seems to me that the reasons for the abolition of the kingdoms must be looked for elsewhere than in that ill-advised resolution of the Lukiiko.  I will add that I was a Member of the Lukiiko in 1960 when it passed a resolution declaring Buganda independent.  I am glad to say that I am opposing that resolution and I did not vote for it. (Applause)  

Nevertheless, the Lukiiko did not take any step to implement the resolution.  Equally, there was no steps of any kind which were taken or which were contemplated by the Lukiiko to implement the resolution of 1966.  The resolution was merely an expression of the frustration that members of the Lukiiko then experienced as a result of the unilateral overthrow, abrogation and abolition of the Constitution of Uganda of 1962, under which they had voluntarily agreed to come together in an enterprise known as the Uganda state as a sovereign state of Uganda.  They were annoyed when one man hon. Apollo Milton Obote abolished that Constitution which had guaranteed their services, feudal status, what not and this was their way of saying that they were annoyed at it, and they were annoyed with him and they were unhappy with him.  They took no steps to do anything, they never threw a stone at him, they never closed down any offices, and therefore, it was unreasonable in my opinion for the Central Government to react in the manner in which it reached by attacking the Kabaka, using maximum force, killing people, declaring states of emergency, imprisoning hundreds of men and women, princes, the Kabaka’s wives and all that kind of thing, and subsequently, coming here to abolish the institutions of kings and kingdoms.  So, this is partly speculation, maybe Dr. Milton Obote will come and tell us some time why exactly, he abolished these institutions.

Perhaps at this junction, I may inform the House about my role in this matter that was the subject of such un-informed, and I would almost say, scandalous attack on my integrity by some hon. Members of this House.  First of all, let me make it clear that from 1947, right up to 1952, when we formed the Uganda National Congress, and in the absence of any suitable person offering to be its Secretary General, I offered my service and I was elected Secretary General of Uganda National Congress when I was still a student in Makerere University College, from that time, up to today, I have had a vast vision of Uganda (Applause).  I have refused information from hon. Obwangor - it would be invidious for me to accept information whether I want to -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Take your seat please.  Hon. Karuhanga please, stick on a point of order please.

KARUHANGA:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Attorney General to use this occasion to make a personal explanation which he is entitled to, and which we have really researched and we think he is justified; but to mix the personal explanation in the Bill, it might actually derail the job he is supposed to be doing in winding up.  I thought it would be better if he took time and made a personal explanation because his justification is so justified but if he turns this reply into a personal explanation, we shall have issues mixed up.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  He is in order.  Proceed please.

THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Abu Mayanja):  Thank you very much.  Mr. Chairman, I am grateful for your - may I say that I really do apologise to the House for not accepting the information because there are so many points we must really hold n and forge along.  The vision that I have had of Uganda has been that of a united progressive, democratic, nationalistic state, outward looking, with Pan Africans.  I give it precisely, and I have considered the question of my loyalties; my loyalty to myself as a decent human being, to my family, to my clan, to my tribe, to my country, to East Africa, to the World, to God! (Laughter) 

I see a series of loyalties so that my loyalty to that ideal of a united, progressive, democratic Uganda does not mean that I have no loyalty to my Kabaka, but the Kabaka that I owe loyalty to, has always been a Kabaka, who moves along with changing circumstances.  And this is what the Buganda Kabakas have been.  They have ever been modernising.  You can read this - all other people - people came from America, Canada and study this kingdom in 1958 and 60s.  It was very distinct.  There is a lot of scholarship in MISR, the Makerere Institute of Social Research.  There is a lot of scholarship about this kingdom.  It has been outward looking, modernising, evolving, and changing, and the moment it ceases to do so, it loses sight of its purpose for existence.  

Therefore, when in 1957 or 1958, Lukiiko passed a resolution saying that they opposed the holding of direct elections to the legislative council, merely because they had introduced a speaker from the Governor to sit where you are sitting.  I was enriched, scandalised, and out-raged.  So, I sat down in my bits and penned that letter and I have no regrets about it.  It expressed then as now, my concept of what the Kabakaship; of what this country; of where we should be going as a nation, and I would like to comment that spirit to my hon. young friends, hon. Members of this House.  

In 1967 - I came to this House in 1964 when I resigned and I voluntarily resigned as Minister for Education in the Kabaka’s Government in 1964, April or May.  In September of the same year, I was elected by the Lukiiko to this House to take over the seat that had been vacated by hon. J.T. Sympson who had been the Minister for Economic Affairs with hon. Mayanja Nkangi here.  So, I came to this House in 1964 September on the Kabaka Yekka ticket.  And as Kabaka Yekka, we had pledged to the people of Buganda that we should uphold the institution of the Kabakaship in a relieving and functioning form.  

Before we left Mengo, we were made to sign a pledge that we would do so and all the 21 Members from Buganda came to this House.  Hon. Mayanja Nkangi is here alive.  All those people who otherwise participated in the abolition, everyone of them took that oath and they signed and subscribed to it and incidentally, such was the popularity of the kingdom and I am surprised to hear what my Friends now say.  Even all the parties, the manifesto of the Democratic Party talks about preserving and upholding the kingdoms.  The Manifesto of the UPC says the same thing.  The UPC went to the extent of recording that thing as objective number two on their membership card at that time. (Laughter) 

I, therefore, came here as a Member of KY, later on, I changed my party and became a Member of UPC but when this debate came here in 1967, I was a Member on the Government side.  I was sitting there in the back and I was snot a Minister.  I sat there in the back.  At that time, there was a state of emergency.  Many people were in jail.  My hon. Friend there Balaki Kirya, they had been imprisoned in 1966.  All the people who were found in the Lubiri, who were not killed, those who were taken alive, were all imprisoned.  Even Saza Chiefs, whatever, there was a man called Akena Adoko.  He had something called General Service, and he had women with wigs in which they used to put tape recorders. (Laughter)  

We who were in Uganda at that time were living in a reign of terror here of fear.  Everyday we were afraid for our lives and liberty.  And indeed, soon after the passing of this Constitution, I was arrested on the charge that I had written a seditious article.  I was tried, Amnesty International sent a big lawyer who had been a Solicitor general of England.  They sent him to come and defend me.  I was acquitted but I was detained for two years, 14 months of which I stayed in solitary confinement.  These things have happened.  What I am trying to say is that, to talk at that time, took some courage and to vote against the Constitution was absolutely impossible.  Indeed, the people who refused to vote for Obote’s pigeon hole Constitution in 1966, were all - their membership was abolished there and them and they ceased to be Members of the House. (Applause) 

 So, in those circumstances, I have looked and I want to draw the attention of the House to the Uganda Parliamentary Debate, second series, Volume 73 for the debate that took place on the 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th, 10th, 11th July, 1967.  I spoke in this House starting on the even of the 5th of July.  I did not finish.  I went on, I spoke for the whole of the 6th of July.  I could not finish and I went on to the 7th of July.  I spoke on three days and my contribution can be found from pages 602 to page 666 of this contribution.  Now, in this contribution, there is nowhere where I said I support the abolition of kings.  Nowhere, on the contrary, there are innumerable extracts and I wish I had time but I cannot - where I said there contrary.  For instance, on page 652, I said this, ‘Mr. Speaker, with regard to the abolition of the Kings, I am entirely opposed to it.’  ‘Let me state my position clearly. (Applause)  I went on to enumerate on page 654, I said, ‘Mr. Speaker, I deny that we have a mandate to abolish the Kings for the simple reason that we all pledged ourselves, whether we fought on the DP Manifesto or the UPC Manifesto or the Kabaka Yekka Manifesto, to safeguard, preserve and maintain the Kings and hereditary rulers.’  It goes on and on and so, I challenge hon. Basoga Nsadhu if he had the decency to be around to listen to me to go and read this Hansard and the hon. Deputy Minister for Education and Sports should not just quote the voting.  During the voting I was opposed to the Kings but it was impossible for me to vote against the whole Constitution.  (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Attorney General, please turn to the Bill.

THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Abu Mayanja):  And finally, in the Hansard of 1977, no Member of this House, including the Members who were sitting opposite, the Leader of the opposition hon. Alex Latim, hon. Oder, hon. Obonyo, hon. Martin Okello, and hon. Byanyima, even they as Members of the Democratic Party, who were there sitting as the official opposition, did not vote against the Constitution.  There were no, no votes.  So, Mr. Chairman, that is the position.

I now wish to talk about the question of property rights.  My hon. Friend hon. Mbura-Muhindo there, in his contribution he said that if they came to own land in Kasese, they would not later on in the other Bill.  The question of traditional rulers or whatever you call it, first of all, as somebody has explained, this Bill is not territorial.  The king - the Kabaka and the Omukama, will be the Kabaka, the Omukama, or whatever of the community, wherever they are.  The ownership of the property rights cannot or should not, and must not be tied to a person’s status if anybody has got legal ownership of property anywhere.  We shall be landing in very difficult, political and other problems if we said that the Omukama of Toro cannot own land in Kasese.  We cannot say that.  This should be very clear.  This is ownership of land; ownership of property.  These institutions will be corporations.  So, they will be legal personalities.  They therefore will have capacity to own land here and anywhere.  They can own land in England, In America, in Dubhai, in Saudi Arabia, in Kasese, in Buganda.  The ownership is not to do with kingship. (Applause)  

So, I hope my hon. Friend will reconsider his position.  I want to say something about the objection that these will be non-executive kings.  Yes, indeed, so far as concerns matters of central government or local government, they will have no legislative, executive, administrative or judicial powers.  But they will have powers as cultural leaders -(Interjection)- yes, this can be a lot of powers.  They will for instance, here in Buganda, ever since the Kabakaship was abolished in 1966 - and this is why we are all of us coming to you and begging that please, return.  There is hardly any true Muganda - because for a person to be a Muganda, if your father died, the Kabaka must confirm you.  You must be recognised that you are a Muganda, and that you belong to the lungfish clan or you are a Muganda, and you belong to the Mutima clan or you are a Muganda, and you belong to the sheep clan, or to the Nyonyi clan, but I do not know which Nyonyi.  Now, since the Kabaka was sent away, in a sense, the Baganda have never completed the last funeral rights.  We are still in a state of mourning for the dead.  ‘Bakaaba, bali mumaziga’. (Laughter)

I want to say something about the referendum.  I think with greatest respect, this has been very effectively answered by hon. John Barigye. (Applause)  I only want to re-assure the House that the Bill does say that the Government shall have discussions or consultations or negotiations before they return properties and that kind of thing.  And that if during their discussion it seems that it is necessary to carry out processes of ascertaining the wishes of the people, such processes will be undertaken.  I shall be bringing - the Cabinet has already approved a Bill that will make it possible for the holding of the referendum in this country.  At the moment, there is no law under which we can hold a referendum in this country.  It will be an enabling Bill that will enable the Government to order or hold referendum on any number of matters on which it is necessary to ascertain the views of the people of Uganda.

May I briefly talk about the exemption from personal tax?  It is not that they cannot pay tax but it is that it is recognition if you like, of their status.  We do not want to send a tax man to go to the Kabaka, knock and say, Sir, I have come to assess your property for the purposes of paying graduated tax.  It would be disrespectful.  That is why.  It is not, we have used the same - I think formula.  The President of Uganda is under the Constitution exempt from direct personal tax and that is not because he is not in a position to pay.  So, people should not really make too much about their mothers paying and these people not paying.  These people after all are really very important persons in their kingdoms.  

And finally, a word in a lighter mood, a word about prostration.  The best way I can say or deal with this is by quoting a Luganda song.  The Baganda have sung and said, ‘kamulali gwotalidde lwaki akubaalala?’ meaning, ‘why do you get hurt by pepper?  Why do you feel the bitterness of pepper you have not swallowed?’  

The people who wish to prostrate, will prostrate.  The people who do not want to prostrate, will not prostrate.  In 1963, I was present when the then University of East Africa of which Julius Nyerere was the Vice Chancellor conferred the degree of Doctor of Laws on the late Mzee Jomo Kenyatta at Makerere.  I was there.  I was a Minister for Education in the Kabaka’s Government.  Mzee Kenyatta came and knelt down before Julius Nyerere who was then much younger and Kenyatta’s bones were almost refusing to bend.  He found it extremely difficult but he knelt down and Nyerere conferred the degree on him.  I saw recently, hon. Members saw our President Yoweri Museveni - Julius Nyerere kneeling before President Museveni, Chancellor of the University for the conferment of a degree on him.  Now the conferment of a degree is not a primitive thing. (Laughter) 

Hon. Members, when we are talking about culture, tradition, way of getting things, the other day when I was in England, I saw somebody was telling me somebody has written about the way the Baganda cook.  These people invented - do you realise this putting of food into endagala and okugisanika and steaming it.  They say it is the most hygienic manner of preparing food and those primitive people invented it over there.  Now as I say, for the sake of this Republic - and I am glad nobody has said or posed this question.  Uganda will remain a Republic after the passing of this Bill. (Applause)  

The sections declaring it to be a Republic are not amended.  They are not.  The kings and the Republic will co-exist.  The kings will exist within a Republic.  They exist within so many other Republics, such as in India, Algeria and Ghana.  They do not have powers.  The Queen does not have powers, the Emperor of Japan does not have executive powers, the King of Spain does not have executive powers, the Queen of the Netherlands, Norway, Denmark, all these Queens, Kings, we shall be joining this crowd.  Mr. chairman, with those words, I wish once again to acknowledge the overwhelming support given to this Bill by this House and I beg to move. (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that the Constitution Amendment Bill 1993 be read a Second Time.

(Question put and agreed to).  

THE CONSTITUTION AMENDMENT BILL 1993

(Clause 1 agreed to).

(Clause 2 put and agreed to).

Clause 3

MRS. MUGARURA:  Mr. Chairman, I propose to make an amendment in clause 3, Section 118, sub-Section 1 to change the word traditional ruler to cultural head and continue to change that word wherever it appears.  The reasons why it is necessary to change this, is in good faith in that a ruler is very different from the term leader or King.  If you talk of a ruler you must talk of administrative, legislative, executive, judicial powers and in sub-section 2 page 2, the provision says, ‘The Institution of Traditional Ruler may, where the people of the community for which a person is to be a Ruler so wish, exist according to culture, customs and traditions of those people except that a Traditional Ruler shall not take part in politics and shall not have or exercise any administrative, legislative, executive, judicial powers of central or local government.’  Without these powers, both central and local government, this word Ruler is misguiding because a Ruler must give directives and therefore participate in politics.  He commands accordingly.  In our dictionary definition a Ruler is one who has control and management of the people he rules over.  You cannot have control and management powers without entering politics.  The dictionary definition for ruling - it is the action of governing, exercise of authority, government or rule.  So, to separate this Bill and have our cultural king or cultural leader or as I suggest, cultural head, and to have harmonious living, we have to separate these words.  So, Mr. Chairman, I beg to institute the word ‘cultural head’ instead of ‘traditional ruler’.  Thank you.

MR. OBWANGOR:  Mr. Chairman, the hon. Lady is correct. To rule is to govern, to be sovereign.  Therefore, if we have got to give traditional rulers who are just national rulers, they must be communal heads or cultural heads.  In order - because it is contradictory because those who come before us, to judge us as a legislature we must be correct of what we say and a law must be clear, Abu should be clear -(Laughter)- because to me, if we want to give people power, we should give them power to be rulers.  But as measures cannot happen in a state in which we have the sovereignty, the best way would have been either we include those cultural heads and give them because I was refused to speak in a substantive debate.  I would have gone for the corporate body so that we give them a charter, and we give them all overwhelming power, with these we are creating liabilities and assets.  Why?  We need to give this Constitutional ruler, money with which to run their ethics and so-called sites, because the sites must be run.  How?  Economically and politically, that is my submission.  So, I agree that this should be a Constitutional head or cultural head so that he runs - because politically this law we are making, this is not the end.  Tomorrow’s government will alter it. (Laughter)

MRS. RWABYOMERE (Women Representative, Kabarole):  Mr. Chairman, I stand to oppose the Amendment -(Applause).  First of all, I do not know which dictionary my colleague used; it must have been a Michael West. (Laughter)  Actually, I got this definition from an encyclopaedia, and I can quote the number in the library, it is not in the Michael West. (Laughter)  The reason I oppose the Amendment is that if you substitute a traditional ruler with cultural heads, you are putting the institution much lower, and you are sort of marginalising the ruler.  Much as we are saying that traditional rulers be limited to cultural activities, they deserve some respect.  In the first place, the word ruler is qualified by limiting the powers.  Now, I have here a definition of a traditional ruler.  A traditional ruler is the one who participates in passing down of opinion, beliefs, practices, customs etc, from the past to the present; it could be by word of mouth or practice.  You cannot have a better description than a traditional ruler; therefore, a traditional ruler is the one who effects this.  Now, the definition of the head that I got, if you have a head it means you have somebody who is in charge of a small team.  Certainly, you cannot say that the King in Tororo is the person who is heading a small team.  I would hate to be described so.

Thirdly, I have looked at the definition of the leader. Whereas a head has no concept of direction and control, whereas a traditional ruler has no concept of directing and controlling, a leader has.  So, those are the three options we have to choose from and certainly it is the traditional ruler who suits this institution best. (Applause)  

THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Abu Mayanja):  I stand to oppose the Amendment on programme.  One, I beg hon. Members to distinguish form from content or form from substance.  We have defined what these people will do and what they will not do.  And therefore, these words do not detain us too much.  

On the other hand, as hon. Rwabyomere has said, it matters to their people what you call them, and we should not be talking away and degrading them.  Thirdly, they can be rulers in the traditional matters because we have not defined the traditions.  They can be rulers in terms of matters of ‘Ebikka’ in terms of what.  Fourthly, to say that when you say ruler, it means that he must necessarily exercising legislating, executive, judiciary and other matters, is not correct.  I was going to say, it is nonsense but people may object to that because today, we are legislators here. (Laughter)  

Members of this House exercise the Supreme legislative powers of this country, but are we called rulers?  The Judges, the true Judiciary, they are not called rulers, and the President is not called a ruler.  So, the DCs, the DAs, are not called the rulers, but they exercise these executives. So Mr. Chairman, I oppose the Amendment. (Applause)  

(Question put and agreed to).

Sub-Clause 2

CAPT. BABU:  Mr. Chairman, I have an Amendment on 3(2) and that is, I was a little bit worried when this Clause sort of locked up the traditional ruler who might wish to participate in politics.  And, therefore, I gave an alternative, and I said in Provision 2, they should include a traditional ruler who wishes to join in parties and politics she or he is free to do so as long as they renounce the leadership of the cultural institution.  The reasons are that the cultural leader is also a freeman.  He has got a freedom, and he must enjoy the freedom.  By stopping him to participate in politics you take away that freedom.  Assuming we have hon. Prince Barigye here now, he chooses to remain in politics; he should not be stopped by this Bill.  But by his heritage now, immediately this Bill passes, he automatically loses that chance of representing his area.  I would like to say that this one is a closed section, and it more or less says they will not participate in politics.  And I think there should be a provision to allow them to have that freedom if they so wish.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. BARIGYE:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  May I inform my good Friend hon. Babu that immediately this Bill is passed, I shall not automatically lose my right to be a member of this House.  I can only lose it when I have been crowned, and I have not been crowned.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Chairman, I wish to oppose the Amendment not so much that I do not agree with him, only that what he is actually amending is already taken care of in itself.  Because he says that once he is a leader, he will not be allowed to participate in politics, so if he chooses to participate in politics, he will not be a leader.  So therefore the Amendment is already taken care of.

(Question put and negatived).

Sub-Clause 3

MR. KARUHANGA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I rise to make an amendment in Section 3, Article 118(2).  The Section reads as follows for clarity; ‘The institution of traditional ruler may where the people of the community for which a person is to be a ruler so wish exist according to the culture, customs and traditions of those people except that a traditional ruler shall not take part in politics’.  Now, I would like to expand on the word politics, because politics is all encompassing, politics is the art of governance and also politics is life.  

Therefore, I would like to say an Amendment should read and I hope the Attorney General will agree that for the avoidance of doubts, politics means party politics standing for election for a political office or vastly favouring or campaigning for a candidate running for a political office and stop there.  This will not only make these traditional rulers stable, but it will equate them to religious leaders, and they will have a useful role in our culture, so that we know where they start and where they end.  If we do not separate this, it is going to be very difficult for us then to provide rules and regulations.  And it is also going to be very difficult for them when making their own constitution to know that this Parliament had in mind.  When they said politics, what did we mean?  In politics, this is what we mean, we do not want cultural rulers to stand up on ‘kadala’ and start saying ‘Karuhanga oyee!’ as opposed to Pulkol’s view or something like that. (Laughter)  That will make this cultural ruler lose respect, and he will divide our people.  

Also, if we assume that we go in for multiparty politics and a cultural leader comes and teams up with UPC, and then the people who are in his area who are supposed to call him to come and ‘kwabya lumber’ -(Laughter).  Therefore, Mr. Chairman, I think it is necessary for this House to tell these people whom we are creating in law and in fact we calling them corporations sole to know where their powers start and where they end, and what we want.

THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Abu Mayanja): Mr. Chairman, I accept the Amendment. (Laughter)

(Question put and agreed to).

Sub-Clause 3

MR. BAMBALIRA:  Mr. Chairman, I move an Amendment in good faith. Mr. Chairman, I am adding a Section to become Section 118(9).  In this Section, I would like to -(Interjection)

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Chairman, I wish to add at the end of Section 3 Article 118(4), which reads as follows: ‘A traditional ruler shall for the purpose of Article 118 (A) of this Constitution be a corporation sole, with perpetual succession and with capacity to sue or be used, and to hold any assets or properties in trust for himself and the community for which he is the traditional ruler.’  And, I am saying that I would like to add the following sentence at the end of that sentence.  ‘The traditional ruler shall in conformity with this Section and Section 118(2) make and deposit a Constitution of the said corporation sole with the Attorney General.’  The reason why I say this is that, Section 118(2) has told the traditional ruler who he is, what he must do and what he must not do.  Section 118(4), is telling him that you are now a legal person and you live in perpetuity; for ever and ever.  But we are not telling the ruler to sell us in his Constitution whether he accepts, but whether his Constitution and his regulations and rulers which govern that culture is deposited with us.  And in conformity, whether he is going to comply with the wishes of this House.  For me, I see the request; after all, most of them already as corporation sole must have a Constitution.  

All we are asking is, can you deposit this Constitution with the Attorney General so that if I would like to have a look at it or any other citizens who says that your Constitution is not in conformity with the law which you created, then we can challenge him.  But now if we do not do that, we are leaving ourselves open and bare, and it is not in the interest of the traditional ruler to operate in darkness.  It is therefore in his own interest to make sure that his Constitution is registered with the Attorney General, and this is a simple request.  

MRS. RWABYOMERE:  Mr. Chairman, I do not agree with my Learned Friend on his earlier Amendment.  I disagree on this one; I do not support his Amendment.  But may be, I should just remind him, that when he makes law - when he states a principle, there is what we call matters consequential upon or incidental thereto.  The minute you make this corporation full, it means it has a limited liability.  That means, they will have to have a Memorandum and Articles of Association.  Therefore, my Friend should not add because that is the outlay, in fact, they are not coming to the Attorney General, they will go to the Registrar of Companies.  So it is obvious. (Applause)

THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Abu Mayanja):  Mr. Chairman, it is a bit powerful but I thought if people want it - because it would make for clarity people should know the rules under which these corporations sole operate.  But I will leave it to the House.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr. Chairman, Uganda is entitled to limiting capacity of these traditional rulers to act.  And this is just done by defining for instance, the meaning of politics.  Now, beyond that, I should think that we should leave the whole thing open to the people - to whom those people belong - the traditional rulers, to be able to determine which of the cultures is being represented by the corporation sole.  For instance, in Buganda there are so many of these cultures in aspects of it, it is not necessary for us to say that once the Baganda seek or they may be want to change these cultures, we should go and somebody who is not a Muganda will also be affected but this corporation sole jurisdiction, should also demand that this corporation sole should register with the Attorney General what you think or Buganda is thinking.

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Mr. Kafumbe Mukasa):  Mr. Chairman, I do not agree with this Amendment because first of all, we have said these rulers can be sued or can sue or can own property.  But Sir, most of our cultures are not written.  Now, what makes us associate ourselves, for example, the Baganda, we have no written Constitution which we are going to register.  

Secondly, even as we stand now, most of us do not know or practice fully our cultures.  Our elders - they know certain things which we do not know but which we want to learn and evolve and pick those good things amongst them.  Now, when we evolve because culture also, I have said, should evolve, you drop certain things which you feel have been done for a long time but are no longer palatable.  Do you go to the Registrar and amend the Constitution?  For me, I think the worry of the people was not to make these people participate in national politics that causes confusion in the country, and we have limited them.  But like Britain, Britain has no written Constitution, their Constitution is customary, we have no written cultures, so what do I register with the Registrar of Companies to say we shall be governed as Baganda culturally as long as we follow the following.  I think, this is not necessary, cultures develop, they drop certain things, they adopt new things, I do not think we should register them. (Applause)

(Question put and negatived).

Sub-Clause 5

Sub-Clause 6

Sub-Clause 7

Sub-Clause 8

MR. BAMBALIRA:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to add a Section to become 118(9) to read as follows:  ‘In this Article of the Constitution should a former Kingdom of Toro restore the Constitution of the Traditional Ruler, it shall exclude the District of Bundibugyo and Kasese and counties of Kitagwenda and Kibaale.’  

DR. LUYOMBYA: Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, the Amendment circulated by the Member starts by quoting hon. Tiberondwa’s Amendment and he says that  hon. Tiberondwa’s Amendment is passed, then it will include this.  Has hon. Tiberondwa, the Amendment been considered and passed?  Is it in order for us to continue with it? 

THE CHAIRMAN:  He is free. He is free to table it.

MR. BAMBALIRA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your protection.  As I have mentioned earlier, this Amendment I am moving, I am doing it because our situation is a bit a unique situation.  I know it could be implied in the Bill, but there are reasons which I have stated here and there are other reasons.  For example, as I mentioned earlier the people in these areas express openly their dislike for the institution.  Secondly, they tended to be oppressed during the time of the institution that was there, and they do not wish to be party to it.  And if they are put to it, it will cause some commotion.  

In addition, I am still coming -(laughter)- in addition, as our districts especially Bundibugyo and Kasese are not gazetted districts and at the same time, our boundaries are not clear.  As at one time as I can mention His Excellency the Prince of Kabarole visited Bundibugyo in 1990, when he visited us, he showed interest to address a rally in Bundibugyo, but we advised him to stop because it would cause some commotion.  As a free Ugandan, he said he can travel in the whole of Bundibugyo but not cause commotion.  This is why we are saying we should actually limit that kind of situation in case it comes.  So, I seek to approve that Amendment, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KAYONDE:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I stand to oppose this Amendment.  Culture has no boundary.  A man should be a Mutoro and lives in Kabarole, in Kasese and he practices his Kitoro Culture.  Therefore, I see no reason why we should worry after all we have emphasised that the traditional Ruler is going to play a cultural role.  So, not to limit culture to a geographical area, we should - after all the Bill is very clear - it says, the freedom to practice that culture is an individual rite.  So, if one is in Kasese and another one is in - his worry should be allayed because he is not going to be forced.  The people of Kasese and of Bwamba are not going to practice it if they do not wish to.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I stand to oppose the Amendment not much that culture has no boundary.  There is what we call cultural boundary.  But culture has no geographical boundary.  So, what the Batoro culturally can do - it can be done even in Bundibugyo if there are some people who pay allegiance to Toro.  So, the issue is not a Constitutional matter as the hon. Member tries to raise it.  I stand to oppose.

THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Abu Mayanja): Mr. Chairman, I also oppose the amendment because it is superfluous.  The sub-Section 3(2) says, ‘The Institution of Traditional Ruler may, where the people of the community for which a person is to be a Ruler so wish.’  It is only where the people so wish.  If people do not wish that now, this House should really not go down into settling small local things - those are matters that should be settled by the Government with those people.  Therefore, I do not think it is necessary.  We have made it clear that Section 8 of the Constitution says that ‘The enjoyment of ones freedom should not interfere with another persons freedom of enjoyment.’ (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Section 3, sub-Section 118 be amended as proposed by hon. Bambalira Jackson.

(Question put and negatived).

(Article 118(A) agreed to).

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Mr. Chairman, in making this amendment - the amendment reads as follows:  There is in this Article and in Articles 118(A) and 118(B) of this Constitution the wish - that is expression of the wish of the people - ‘the wish of the people of Ankole to restore the Institution of Traditional Ruler shall be expressed through a referendum in which all the people of the former Kingdom of Ankole shall participate.’  Mr. Chairman, the reason why I am moving this Amendment is that in 118(2), it stated that the Institution of Traditional Ruler may, where the people of the community for which a person is to be a Ruler so wish.  

My Amendment is to express the method of expressing your wish.  How is that wish going to be expressed?  I raise this because if we do not define how to express the wish, a few people will just come and negotiate with Government.  
Recently, the Prince of Ankole, the hon. John Barigye wrote a Constitution and called a few people to debate it.  When they met some people have resigned and also those who have been following Newspapers - some people have already resigned from that Committee because not all the clans of Ankole were consulted.  So, in the case of Buganda the situation is so clear.  

MR. BARIGYE:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, is the hon. Member for Igara County in order to misled this House when he says I prepared a Constitution and called a few people when on the contrary some elders of Ankole invited me to join them in forming a Cultural trust.  It was not who initiated it but it was the elders who initiated it.  Thank you very much.  Is it in order?
THE CHAIRMAN:  That was just information.

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Mr. Chairman, I want to thank the hon. Member for that information.  All I want to point out is that the people of Igara for example, and the people of Bushenyi as a District were not involved in this Constitution and therefore it would be unfortunate if monarchy was imposed on the people of Ankole without consulting them.  I would in particular -(Interruption)- Mr. Chairman, can I finish?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Finish please.

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Mr. Chairman, this amendment does not apply to other former kingdoms outside Ankole.  I have made this very clear because in Buganda there is no problem and I definitely support this.  I have already pointed out that RCV in Mbarara, RCV in Bushenyi have rejected this thing openly in their submission and they have said they reject monarchy in whatever form and by whatever name it may be called.  I am making these points passionately and I would like Members of this House to respect the views of some communities that have no interest in monarchy.  So, I am now moving that the method by which the people may express their wish in Ankole should be done by Referendum because properties for example, which were paid for by the tax payer in Ankole cannot just be given to one family or to one person without consulting the people who paid for them.  So, I am moving this so that it is on record that the people of Ankole do not want monarchy and if it is instituted, it should be known and I want it to be on record, Mr. Chairman.

THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Abu Mayanja):  Mr. Chairman, I oppose the Amendment.  It is not in the spirit of the Bill.  It is sectarian.  I have already indicated in my reply how I feel that referendum could be organised without putting it into the Constitution.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 118, Article 8 be amended as proposed by hon. Adonia Tiberondwa.

(Question put and negatived).

Sub-Clause 118(A)

MR. KANDOLE:  Mr. Chairman, I wish to move an Amendment that is after Article 118(8) to add 118(9).  This amendment is a bit similar to the one moved by hon. Tiberondwa but instead of Ankole Kingdom, I am talking of Toro Kingdom.

THE CHAIRMAN:  It is the same thing.

MR. KANDOLE:  They are a bit different Mr. Chairman.  Mr. chairman, the reasons are a bit different.  Let me state the reasons and you will see that they are different.  Already we have been told that the Bakonjo and the Bamba, that is the people in Kasese and Bundibugyo have nothing to do with Toro culture.  Some people have defined Toro Culture as to belong to the present day Kabarole District.  But in that same Kabarole District which has as you know about 800,000 people, 30 of the sub-counties out of 33 sub-counties said and this is well recorded in the archives of the Constitutional Commission - said that the monarchy is not part of their culture.  Now, if we impose a monarchy on them, what culture will this king be presiding over?  What culture is this cultural leader going to be leading if that culture says that a monarchy does not belong to the culture?

MR. NDEGE:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, it is in order for the Member to continue on the Floor - to continue deliberating an issue that we have decided that it is a local issue that if the Bakonjo do not want to be part of Toro, the Batoro should not force them, but they should sit and let them go?  Otherwise, what I am trying to say is that the Member is not in order because it is a local issue. (Laughter)  

MR. KANDOLE:  Mr. Chairman, we are trying to use a Buganda model over other areas of the country.  Mr. Chairman, we are dealing with peasants and for example, during the ‘twarire’ days, the people who were singing ‘twarire’ and who caused a lot of trouble in the villages never ate anything, and I believe that King Kaboyo will be aware of his roles.  But the simple Mubito in the village will not be aware of his role and the simple peasants in villages in Kabarole and even in Kasese and in Bundibugyo will not be very well versed with what we have decided upon here.  I have a fear, Mr. Chairman, that if we do not offer these people some protection, we may have some problems erupting in these areas.  Thank you very much.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr. Chairman, if the people of Bundibugyo do not want Traditional Rulers, then I say to hon. Member in our moving this Motion, that he should look at Section or Article 118(2) which says; ‘The Institution of Traditional Ruler may where the people of the community for which a person is to be a Ruler so wish exist according to culture.’  Now, if the people do not wish it and these people are in the majority, then there is no problem.  It seems we are really covered here about this provision.  So, I oppose the amendment of course.

THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Abu Mayanja):  Mr. Chairman, I oppose the amendment for the same reason that I opposed the Amendment proposed by hon. Tiberondwa. 

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Article 118(8) and Article 118(9) be amended as proposed by hon. Kandole

(Question put and agreed to).

Article 118(A)

Article 118(B)

(Clause 3 agreed to).

(Title settled and passed).

MOTION

THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Abu Mayanja):  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the Council do resume and the Committee do report thereto.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to).

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE HOUSE.

THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Abu Mayanja):  Mr. Chairman, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled ‘The Constitution Amendment Bill, 1993,’ and passed it with one amendment.  I beg to report.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE

THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Abu Mayanja):  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to).

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Abu Mayanja):  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitled ‘The Constitution Amendment Bill 1993’, be read a Third Time and do pass.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Title settled and Bill passed).

THE CHAIRMAN:  With that we have come to the end of today’s Session, we adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.


(The Council rose at 5.15 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 15th July 1993 at 2.30 p.m.).

























































                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

