Thursday, 18 July 2002

Parliament met at 2.13 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, it is a known fact that the Uganda contingent to the Commonwealth Games in Manchester will soon be leaving Uganda. Speaking on your behalf, I know that they carry our prayers and blessings, so that on their return they are victorious.  

But today, honourable members, in the Distinguished Visitors’ Gallery this afternoon is an outstanding Ugandan, Mr Ali Tomusange, who recently projected a positive image of Uganda at the World Cup 2002 held in Korea and Japan - (Applause). His spouse, who must have been behind his success, accompanies him and officials of FUFA and the National Council of Sports also accompany him. You are most welcome!

Mr Tomusange, a referee of the Federation of International Football Association (FIFA), was born on 12 December 1964, and he is the first Ugandan referee to officiate at the World Cup - (Applause).   His career as a referee started in 1987 when he qualified as a referee, Grade Three. He was appointed a Grade Two referee in 1990 and Grade One referee in 1992.

Mr Tomusange was appointed an international assistant referee in 1993, and from then on, up to 2002, he was privileged to participate as a referee in various international football tournaments.  Eight of these tournaments have been in Africa and three have been in Brazil, Sydney, and the latest, the FIFA World Cup in Korea and Japan.  

At the recently concluded World Cup tournament, Mr Tomusange handled four matches, including a quarterfinal game between South Korea and Spain.  The others were Spain and Slovenia, United States of America and South Korea, and Turkey and China.  

Mr Tomusange has portrayed a spirit of determination, which is not easy as a referee, and he has done us proud. You are most welcome. (Applause).

On the same occasion, we expected to have another prominent Ugandan, Miss Dorcus Inzikuru. I think you have read today’s papers and you have seen what she has achieved in Stockholm. Unfortunately, she was not able to travel to Uganda because at the same time she is expected to be part of the Uganda contingent in Manchester.  But all the same, we are proud of Dorcus Inzikuru for what she has achieved. (Applause)

MR CHARLES BAKKABULINDI (Workers’ Representative): Mr Speaker, arising out of your good communication, and also knowing the importance of the Commonwealth Games that are due to take place in Manchester, I would like to move a motion in recognition of these two important people of Uganda, Mr Ali Tomusange and Ms Dorcus Inzikuru, for their good performance in this nation. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, it has been seconded. So, proceed.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that: 

Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, duly convened and sitting on this 18th day of July 2002 in Kampala; 

Recalling the tremendous pride that the Late John Akii Bua earned Uganda in 1972 when he won a gold medal in the Olympic Games, an outstanding performance that has not been repeated by any other Ugandan; and

Mindful that Ugandans who have excelled in various fields of human endeavour deserve appropriate recognition;  

Now therefore, Parliament of Uganda, duly convened and constituted and sitting in Kampala on this 18th day of July 2002, do resolve as follows:

1. That it registers its recognition of the honour that Mr Ali Tomusange and Miss Dorcus Inzikuru earned this country at the recently concluded World Cup finals in Japan and Korea, and the World Junior Championship in Santiago, Chile respectively.

2. That it urges other Ugandans, especially the youth, to emulate the example of the above two mentioned Ugandans.

3. That copies of this resolution, suitably engrossed, be transmitted to the two Ugandans mentioned above.  

I beg to move.

MR OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have great pleasure to support the motion. In supporting the motion, I have two remarks to make. One, I want to congratulate Mr Tomusange and Miss Dorcus Inzikuru for the great achievement which has put Uganda on the map.  

While we congratulate Tomusange for being a good referee in the World Cup, I think we cannot fail to notice that the Ugandan team was not there, but a Ugandan was there to referee - (Applause). I think this is a very important point, and this House cannot miss that important point; when are we going to have a referee as well as a team reaching there?  

The mover of the motion, my colleague, mentioned Akii Bua and the others. Those of you who were privileged to know how sports was handled in this country during the colonial time, and also during the 60s -what I call during the old good days- you will realise that the infrastructure of sports used to start from the national level, right to the villages. People like Akii Bua, who was behind me in my primary and junior school, were already stars right from primary school, and they were identified and then recruited in the Police, and their talents were from that time encouraged and built on.  

It is unfortunate that you as Members of Parliament who are right down to the grassroots have certain schools and certain areas in your place where even one football is not in your primary school. I have such cases in my constituency where a ball costs about 30,000 or 40,000 shillings; small balls which we used to play in the 50s and 60s -nearly every child used to carry that ball in his pocket- are not there any more.  So how are we going to build the Akii Buas’? (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Do you mean those balls made of fibres?

MR OMARA ATUBO: Yes, they are not there!  The tennis ball we used to carry in our pockets and play with after five o’clock, these boys don’t have them!  Some primary schools, even secondary schools do not have footballs, leave alone netballs for girls.  

In brief, I only wish to say that the great stars, which we have produced in the likes of Tomusange, in Akii Bua and others should not just be allowed to die away.  I think Uganda has a great potential but we are not able to exploit it because we are not building our youths right from primary schools and so on.  People like Julius Achon come from my village in Otuke; he started also in a humble way by getting involved in sports competition in primary school.  I was personally privileged to encourage him and he is now doing very well for Uganda, and we have so many of such but the problem is how do we encourage them? 

I can assure you that if you look at the way the World Cup was played, and the pride of the countries like Senegal, Nigeria, Cameroon, Brazil and so on, it was a great diplomatic event and uniting factor for these countries.  I do hope that sports is not only going to be something restricted around Kampala where there is money because sports is expensive, and those who can afford it now are clubs around Kampala.  Let the Government find a way of making the budget, which we pass here, to take care of sports for our children, and for the good of our country.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.  

MR BAKKABULINDI: Mr Speaker, when I moved the motion I was yet to back the motion, but then I was interrupted.  

MR SULAIMAN MADADA (Bbale County, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I stand to support this motion, first of all, by appreciating the Speaker of Parliament for having accepted honourable Tomusange- I call him ‘honourable’ for what he did for this country. 

I also stand on a point of challenge to my colleagues in Parliament and to Government at large.  Iam mindful that sports is a very strong mobilising factor, even at times of our campaigns.  I believe a few have missed using sports in mobilising for votes.  I would like to challenge colleagues that we should not stop at that level of campaigns when the youth ask for balls and then they are given and after there people forget about sports.  We should be able to support sports right from Parliament here up to our constituencies. 

It is a big challenge that there are a lot of talents untapped upcountry and through the structures of Government, which we need to tap.  You realise that few people who have an advantage of being near the city will progress well in sports, yet there are many other young youth upcountry that need a lot of support from political leaders.  

When this Parliament and the central government comes out to support sports, then the decentralised governments, the LC Vs and IIIs will take an example of what is happening here.  But, apparently, what is happening at the district headquarters, the sports officers are almost left to rot; they do not have what to do!  They are there as sports officers but there is nothing down there. I think they are copying an example from the centre.  So, it is a challenge to us as Members of Parliament and as Government that we go down to sensitise people. 

Sports have stopped being an entertainment and it has gone ahead to be a healthy instrument where bodies must be healthy. It is also intellectual building; it also promotes international understanding; it creates peace and harmony.  So that is why I stand to support this motion by challenging colleagues and Government at large to put in efforts to support sports.  Thank you.

MR PATRICK MWONDHA (Bukooli North, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I do support the motion, but before I do so, I wish to take the opportunity to welcome back to this House, Dr Chebrot, who has been away for quite some time.  

As we were coming into this Chamber, I noticed another great sportsman talking to the Minister of State for Sports, the Bronze medallist in Olympics, which were in Atlanta, Davis Kamoga, who I think also fits very closely in the need for recognition from this House.  If the mover of the motion does not mind, we could add his name on to the list.  

I would like to observe that sports has now become almost an investment.  Soccer, for instance, makes money; it is a moneymaker, and without investment in it we will not be able to get the return.  It is a big money thing. If we invested properly in soccer, we could have as many as 100 Ugandans playing all over the world and bringing in important foreign earnings to this country.  Nigeria is doing well in that area, we can take a leaf from many countries.  In fact, it is even more important than AGOA, I think it is a bigger export.  It is unfortunate that the country can be asked to be at a standstill when the national anthem is sung in the observance of 100 sewing machines. I think that is not fair.  But the National Anthem will be sung every time the flag of Uganda is up in the sports area.

I would like to end by thanking Ali Tomusange for representing this country so well and showing the best of Uganda, at least by way of strictness, discipline and steadfastness.  Thank you.

MR KASSIANO WADRI (Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to very closely identify myself with the motion that is on the Floor of the House.  

There is an English adage, which says that an idle mind is a workshop of the devil. Today we have got crime rates rising high, especially among the youth. One of the factors that have contributed to that sort of state is the idleness in which they find themselves. These are youth in the urban areas who are never kept at their base in order to cultivate the God-given talents.  

Today we are here to recognise the fame that our sons and daughters have brought to this country, but one thing that we must also be able to recognise is that, much as we are grateful and happy to receive them, we do not seem to do enough for them thereafter.  It is not the first time that we have had people who have brought fame to this country, whom we sooner or later forget about.  

We have had men and women in this country, even to the extent that though today we are talking about the late Akii Bua, he died living a miserable life.  We only recognised him after his death; that was when Parliament really realised that we had lost a son of the soil.  What are we going to do for these men and women, the likes of Tomusange, who have come here?  

Today we are praising him, what happens thereafter as he reaches his geriatric age when he is not strong enough to participate and fly throughout this globe in order to go and referee?  What programmes do we have for their welfare thereafter? – (Applause)    

I think there is also one thing that we must address ourselves to, as we go onto the issue of debating the resource allocations to these ministries. Today we are saying we have a Minister of State responsible for Sports in the Ministry of Education and Sports. I think it is one thing to have a ministry and another to have a state minister responsible for a department or a section of that ministry –(Interjections). But if this person is not facilitated, it is as good as not having him at all.  Last Financial Year, what resources did we allocate to that limping section?  - (Interruption)

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank hon. Wadri for giving way.  Much as we have the Minister of State in-charge of Sports, the country itself has no sports policy. So, I think we should think of a sports policy before we even think of deploying a person.  

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, hon. Charles Byaruhanga for that enrichment to my cause. You will realise that even in the absence of the sports policy that my colleague is talking about, identification of talents is a problem.  

I have said this before, and I will again repeat it for the sake of emphasis, Uganda is well endowed with talents in the countryside.  I would like to share with you a few weeks’ experience that I had when I was in Cameroon. In Cameroon, every Sunday in the afternoon has been declared sports day. Every parish, every village throughout the country is busy playing soccer or netball, and in the evening they are receiving reports from every other part of the country. It is through that mechanism that they are able to identify talents, and when Cameroon goes out of its own boundaries, it goes as a solid team.  

Unfortunately in Uganda, it is as if all the talents are identified and are found within Kampala and its suburbs. I have said this before. I am not happy even with the manner in which the Uganda national team is composed. We have forgotten the days when we used to have the Oumas, when we used to have people from every corner of this country. 

Can we, as Parliament, pronounce ourselves on such an issue so that when we are allocating the budget, we look at Uganda in its totality? There are a lot of talents out there.  That is what I am emphasising. We should be able to be very pragmatic rather than zeroing in and around Kampala, and thinking that all that we have here is the best.

Lastly but not least, for purposes of emphasis, I would like Government to come up with a very – (Interruption)

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, I thank my honourable friend, Wadri, for giving way for me to give this information, just to emphasise the fact that talents are all over the country.  

One time we had a very good athlete called Judith Aya; she was not from within the suburbs of Kampala. But again, to reinforce his earlier point, what do we do for these people when they are of age? I would like to inform the House that Judith Aya, when she ceased to be a sports woman, died a pauper.

MR WADRI: Actually, I would like to improve on that; Aya died after living from crashing stones for survival, and yet this was a person who brought a lot of fame and respect to this country.  And that is exactly what I was saying.  The likes of Tomusange are here today, the likes of Dorcus Inzikuru are going to represent us in Manchester, what programme do we have for their maintenance thereafter when age catches up with them? 

It is on that note that I would like to say that as we go into considering the resource allocation or the policy statement for Ministry of Education, we should be able to urge them to make a purposeful arrangement. People who have been identified as having contributed to this country should get a sort of social security, as it were, so that they can be able to take up sports in a professional manner. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MS ANIM ANGUPALE (Woman Representative, Arua):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for picking me at the very time when I have come in to contribute. I would like to thank the rest of the Members of Parliament who have contributed since the debate on the Budget started. I would also like to thank the Minister – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Angupale – (Laughter)- what we are going to do is this: when we start on the general debate on the Budget, I will pick you first – (Laughter). Now let us give the Floor to hon. Ssebalu.

MS ANGUPALE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

MR MIKE SEBALU (Busiro East, Wakiso):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank my colleague who has just contributed for her contribution.  I would like to add myself to the rest of the Members of Parliament – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  Maybe before you proceed, I think I heard someone ask where the Minister is.  Actually, the Minister has been here, but because he is travelling with a team, he excused himself. 

MR SEBALU:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I would like to add my voice to those who are supporting the motion. First of all, I will start by thanking you, Mr Speaker, and your office for having accepted this ritual to be performed in honour of our distinguished son and daughter, in the names of Ali Tomusange and Dorcus Inzikuru respectively.

I would like to add that I am supporting this motion in three capacities:  One, as a Member of Parliament who is interested in developing sports in this country, two, as a sportsman, who is also a member of the Parliamentary team, which I have captained twice and it has brought trophies, three; as an old boy of Ali Tomusange. In fact, we went to the same school -and do not ask for the school- that is Kings College Buddo.  So actually, when I say I went to school, I mean it.  But the issue is - (Interruption) - Mr Speaker, protect me.

THE SPEAKER:  You are protected.

MR SEBALU:  Mr Speaker, one thing I would like to say about Ali Tomusange is the issue of consistency.  Even at college, Ali Tomusange -in fact when they said that his refereeing career begun in 1987, I was wondering here because even at college he was already at that game. At one time we joked and I said that at that rate he will be a top referee in this land, and it has come true. So I would like to thank him for his consistency.  

Among the people he came with, there is a lady called Catherine Adipo, she was also at college with us and she is a very good referee; she is going to Djibouti. Also, there is Nelson Mubanda, he was also my year-mate; there is Mayanja also the same; so, basically I know the whole team.  

The issue is that Tomusange has done us so good.  When we were watching TV, all of us were closer to Japan and Korea just because one of our own was there, and this goes a long way to challenge Government to invest in sports.  Imagine if we were so happy by having an individual there, what would have happened if we had a full team there?  So, Government is challenged that when you invest in something, you get good dividends, and Ali Tomusange has showed it. 

We do have our national team; like my colleagues have said, we do have the talents, but you find that we have not invested enough in this enormous talent and yet we have all the capabilities of doing so well.  Parliament is honouring Ali Tomusange at the time when we are considering the budget, and I think that should influence us to make sure that we give sports its rightful share so that we develop more of goodwill ambassadors. 

You have heard of people like John Fasahanu, who is a good ambassador, trotting the whole globe in the name of making peace and ensuring that the community we live in is peaceful.  So, I think we have the talents and we must always come out to support sports. This is a gesture of goodwill to the sporting fraternity of this country. 

The teams that went to Korea and Japan made the whole tournament fetch a profit of 600 million dollars and some of them were shared out to the teams and the people who were officiating.  I look forward to a day when Uganda has excelled to the level of even hosting such a big sporting event.  Already, so many countries are looking towards the same, but that ambition can only be thought of, if you can invest in sports and get our team there; it should not be far-fetched.  

I would like to honor and congratulate Ali Tomusange for having given us that honor as a country. That is the closest we have come to the world cup; it is the closest by having one of our men running on the line. So, we should do better than that.  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I would wish to give an opportunity to as many Members as possible, so, make sure you do not exceed three minutes.

MRS MARGARET BABA-DIRI (Representative of PWD, Northern Region):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to contribute towards this very important motion. Today, we are honoring our two excelling young man and woman in sports.  That is, Tomusange and Dorcus Inzikuru.  I would like to start by congratulating them for bringing pride and fame to Uganda.  This shows that Ugandans can also produce champions in the sports world. 

I remember at that time when she arrived from Chile to Arua, she was welcomed even more than the President in Arua!  It was a big pride for the people of Arua to see that young lady elevating the name of Arua in the whole of the world.  Inzikuru, we are very proud of you.  Inzikuru Dorcus is a young lady, who is an orphan and has not even completed her studies. I remember the honourable Member of Arua Municipality sponsored her – (Interruption) no not Angupale, but the former one, Ajeani Yoramu. She is really a lady who is actually in need and she needs to be developed both educationally, socially and economically – (Mrs Angupale rose_)

MS ANGUPALE: Thank you very much for giving way.  Mr Speaker, and hon. Members of Parliament, I would like to inform the House that the first time when Inzikuru was going out for athletics, by then I was the deputy speaker, I personally contributed for her transport to go to these athletics.  Thank you.

MRS BABA DIRI:  Okay, I can add that she was the deputy speaker of Arua District Council.  I am talking on Dorcus Inzikuru because I know her more however, I do congratulate and appreciate what the other colleague has done.  Dorcus needs now support to complete her education and to develop her career so that she can bring more gold medals to Uganda.  I understand that when she returned from Chile, the Government had promised her some facilities -I do not know how far true that is- in form of a house and money. I hope those things were given to her or they will be given so that she can get the courage to continue with her career.  

In general, very little has been budgeted for sports, and yet it is very important because it helps you physically and academically.  When you perform well in sports, you can even afford to go to Makerere even if you fail to raise the other four points.  Therefore, it is important to allocate enough funds to support the sports men and women in Uganda.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, congratulations Inzikuru and Tomusange all over there.  Thank you very much.

MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disability, Eastern Region):  Thank you very much Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity to associate myself with and support this motion. I want to salute Ali Tomusange. 

Ali Tomusange, Members do not know, comes from the Musu clan. Members will also know that the Musu clan is the clan from where the Nabagereka of Buganda comes (Applause). I am personally privileged to be associated with that clan -(Laughter)- because I married from the Musu clan -(Laughter)- and I could not miss this occasion to associate myself with this motion. The fact that Tomusange was one of the officials at the World Cup - even my wife loves football, she followed every single thing that was happening. So, Mr Speaker, I think Tomusange made us proud. But I want to make two or three points.  

The first point is that there are many Ugandans who distinguish themselves in various fields, and we make speeches like we are making now. We have made many other speeches in this House during the 13 years that I have been here, and that is the end; nothing happens. We must have a culture of showing a good example to the other people who may want to excel in those fields by having a state that can actually support the person who has distinguished himself.
 
Secondly, the sports infrastructure in this country is in an appalling state. If you go to Namboole -Namboole cost this country a lot of money, I understand, but Namboole is falling to pieces. It is mismanaged! I hear even the chairs are breaking down and there is no effort being made by government to ensure that Namboole is properly managed and properly maintained.  I would have said much more on that one, but I do not have time.

The National Council of Sports is also one of the departments of government, which is very poorly financed; really very poorly, and unless we do something about financing the sports infrastructure, we do not have a chance in hell to continue producing the people who will distinguish themselves in sports like the person we are here to honour. I hope that we have a law of giving honours, and I hope the Committee responsible will find it fitting to find an appropriate honour to be given to Tomusange.

But before I sit down, even the disabled persons play sports, and when you look in the budget, there is hardly any provision for sports for disabled persons. The blind can play sports, the physically disabled and other people. I would like to appeal to government to make some provisions so that even the disabled people are provided for in the budget as far as sports is concerned.

I conclude by saluting Ali Tomusange. You have done us proud, I support the motion. Thank you.

MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia Bugwe North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for according me this opportunity of supporting the Motion. I am proud to say once again that Uganda has appeared on the world map of sports in the name of Tomusange. Congratulations! 

Mr Speaker, I thank you for according us this opportunity of honouring him in this august House. I am also proud to note that one of our girls, Dorcus, has done us proud, although she finished ninth in the games in Oslo the other day. She set a Ugandan record. I am speaking as a former athlete who represented Uganda in 1960 and 1964 Olympics. Those were the good old days of sports -(Laughter and Applause).

At the same time I am sorry to say that in my old age, I am still holding the Ugandan record in the high hurdles for 40 years. This is a shame! It is time that record was broken, especially at a mere 13.9 seconds for 110 metres. That is now standard world wide, and yet in Uganda it is a national record since 1964. It is a shame!  

Speaking out of experience, sports is no longer a mere recreation, it is an industry. People are making billions in terms of shillings and millions in terms of dollars.  

The other day we were watching boxing: Tyson, by appearing in the ring for 21 minutes, made US$17 million.  The one who defeated him made US$30 million. That is even a bigger budget than our parliamentary budget! 

I would like to encourage our sons and daughters not to look at sports as an item for those who cannot perform intellectually. When I was at Harvard, I was very keen at sports - One small school in the college called Harvard.  I recall the son of one of my schoolmates, who is now a doctor, used to try to follow his father’s footsteps. Immediately he finished the medical degree, he decided to play professional golf. He could have decided to become a doctor and make money, but he said, ‘Daddy, I am making more money in Golf than I can ever make in my lifetime as a doctor’. So, nobody should look at sports just for recreation.

Coming back home again, I note with great concern what has been said by my honourable Colleagues, the neglect sports is suffering in this country. Namboole Stadium is a good example. During our time, we used to have two sites for training; in Sebei and Kasese for the high altitude. In professional sports, you cannot train at low altitude for certain types of events in athletics. You have to train at high altitude. It works on your lungs, on your capacity to hold oxygen for a longer period and also for a shorter period if you are to burst out. This is being neglected.

My colleague has mentioned sports for the disabled people. In this country, all the facilities we have put in place - the few that there are - do not have facilities for people with disabilities. If you go right now to Namboole Stadium, a person with a physical disability can barely get to the major stand. Architecturally, it is not even accommodative. 

Mr Speaker, there are Special Olympics for people with disabilities; we have never sent a team from Uganda.

I am proud to say that one of my constituents, a lady in the balcony there, is the only woman of international stature as a referee. She can stand up. (Applause). In the old days, the Police and the Army used to provide the people in sports, both boxing and what not. Nowadays, they box us -(Laughter).

Lastly, I would like to appeal to this House that in order to encourage sports in this country, let us make all sports equipment duty free. I also urge that instead of devoting so much time in “chakamchaka” learning how to shoot and kill each other, let us use that period or capacity or opportunity for sports, and not to kill each other -(Applause).  Mr Speaker, I support the motion.

MR LARTIF SSEBAGGALA (Kawempe North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to support the motion, and I also congratulate Mr Ali Tomusange and a sister colleague who managed to represent us worldwide. If you can recall the support that Ugandans gave to African countries in the recently concluded World Cup, it is indeed a clear manifestation that the people of Uganda love sports extremely well. 

I believe that our concern and love for sporting activities in this country could be supported, first and foremost, by His Excellency the President. You can remember that sometime back he was in Namboole, and then he did some bit of training. But it was not enough.  It is high time His Excellency the President came and sat together with his ministers and some senior sports men and women of this country to forge a better way for the sporting activities in this country.
We have had so many Presidential Advisors on different aspects; I believe that we even tend to forget some advisors at times but since Ugandans love sporting activities very well, I think it will do us good if some of these political advisors are terminated so that we can have another special advisor on sports in the names of Ali Tomusange of this country -(Laughter). I think we can do really well in uplifting all the talents we have been talking about.
Lastly, it is my also wish to thank our Parliamentary Team managers, hon. Sulaiman Madada and hon. Bakkabulindi for the good initiative of honouring Ali Tomusange and others for the fame they have brought to this country.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.
MR BENEDICT ETONU (Amuria County, Katakwi): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the chance to talk about sports. I would like to join my colleagues who have congratulated our current athletes and sportsmen who have given this country glory. 
I suggest that the government should try to identify good athletes and give them some scholarships to go to Europe to study, not only sports, but also other fields in which they have interest. I say this because in other countries where people have excelled in football, most of the players, you recall, were coming from Europe to join their home teams 
Even back home here, I remember in the ‘60s, my colleague, hon. Aggrey Awori will recall, in 1960 to be precise, I was in Namilyango College when he was in Kings College Budo. We were brought from all secondary schools to compete in Nakivubo. That is when the sportsmen were identified. Hon. Aggrey Awori remembers that. That was the time I captained Namilyango College Team and I took the Senior Secondary School Cup -(Laughter). I beat them.
Now that we are recognising our honourable here who has brought us glory, we should also recognise the first people who excelled. I did not go to the Commonwealth like he did, but here at home - I am talking about a person like Patrick Etolu who was the first high jumper in Uganda. I accompanied hon. Awori there and he excelled. Now, Patrick Etolu is rotting away in Teso -(Interruption).
MR AWORI: Patrick Etolu held the Commonwealth record in high jump for a period of 18 years.
MR ETONU: Thank you very much. People like those, if the government could recognise them, would encourage others who are coming up, because they would know that after they have retired, they would still be looked after by the State. 
It is perturbing that there are no footballs in secondary schools in my constituency. We have tried to buy a ball or so in the Constituency, but that is not enough. I request our Sports Ministry to supply footballs to enable these young athletes to continue to develop their talents. 
Sports officers at the district headquarters are also are not facilitated. I remember, when I called at our district headquarters there was a new young man who had been appointed. He told me he could not go around the district. There are no footballs, nor even the whistles. I wonder how they are going to play football! I suggest that Government comes in because sports are the – in other countries, you find Presidents ­–(Interruption)
THE SPEAKER: But if the balls are not there, what is the purpose of the whistles?
MR ETONU: - even the Presidents take keen interest in attending the matches their country teams are playing in.  I would like to encourage our President also to participate. He played once in Nambole, but he should play every week. (Laughter). Thank you very much.
THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, we are, I think, to conclude this one by the Minister, and then hon. Dombo and we call it a day.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Tom Butime): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mr Speaker and honourable Members, you know how much I love sports. When cabinet played against FUFA, you remember that I scored in two minutes.(Laughter). That was at Nambole Stadium.

I played number ten. 

Mr Speaker, I think our country has actually tried to recognize some of our famous athletes. You know of Akii Bua Stadium in Lira, it is named after an athlete. The state in which it is now is not what I am talking about; I am talking about it being named after the famous 440 meter hurdles’ world champion, the late Akii Bua. 

What I have realized is that we need a very strong football league in Uganda. The ones we have are very weak. You could see at the World Cup that it was the Spanish League teams that dominated the South Korea and Japan World Cup finals. All the famous players either came from Real Madrid, Barcelona, Inter Milan or Deportivo La Coruna. And some of them, in the case of Britain, came from Manchester United, Liverpool, Chelsea and the other main teams Of course I have not forgotten the famous German one, Bayern Munich. 

You can see that all the famous footballers are coming out as a result of the strength in the league system of those countries. I have not seen a strong league system in Africa, and that is why Uganda ends up having only a linesman instead of having a fully-fledged referee to take charge of a match. We ended up at that level only.  

I would have loved, to for example, to see the quarter- finals being officiated by a fully-fledged Ugandan referee. I would have been happier then. Despite that, what we did is commendable. And, of course, I congratulate our representative. I hope that at the next World Cup finals we shall not end at that level. We need to go beyond, and preferably manage the quarter and semi-finals, if not the finals themselves.

You also saw that the most famous referee is the one who managed the final match. There is need to invest in sports by the private sector, government cannot do it alone. The private sector of Uganda must also take the bull by its horns and invest in the –(Interruptions)

CAPT. STEVEN BASALIZA: I seek clarification from hon. Butime. He is a senior officer, my old boy, a senior member of the Toro Kingdom and a colleague in the Defence forces. I would like to ask you, what happened? You told us you were a member of the football team in the 6th Parliament and you are so strong. Lately we started playing soccer and we are lacking players of your caliber. Could you clarify? What happened to you?

MAJ. BUTIME: Mr Speaker, I had a discussion with the hon. Member of Parliament for Burahya County, Capt. Basaliza, on this matter. We agreed that every day after 5.00 p.m he would remind me –(Laughter)- but since we agreed he has not managed to do so. I am however reminding him again so that if there is practice this evening, he should tip me and I will appear. I thank you very much.

MR STEVEN BAMWANGA (Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Mr Speaker, thank you very much for allowing me to add my voice to those who have congratulated Ali Tomusange, for having brought fame to Uganda. There is a Chinese saying that, “if you want to harvest for a season, you plant a seed; if you want to harvest for ten seasons, you plant a seedling; and if you want to harvest for generations, you invest in people.” 

Mr Tomusange, I want to congratulate you. I also want to disagree with hon. Tom Butime when he says that you were only relegated to being a mere linesman. What you did was no mean achievement, both for Tomusange and for Uganda as a country.  

Mr Speaker, we tend to pay lip service to our people. The fact that Mr Tomusange, on his individual merit, young as he is, was put on that list means that he is highly regarded. I am told there were only two of them taken out of Africa. 

I also agree with hon. Awori; we should dismiss the belief that anybody who goes into sports is not academically alert. There are families that have produced children for a purpose, and the Williams family is one of them. He produced his daughters, he trained those daughters as tennis players and they have been bringing a lot of money into his family. There is also this man, Tiger Woods, the world champion of golf. He has made a lot of money for his country.

We had the budget read recently, and we were told that the Ugandan nkuba kyeyo have brought in more money than the total exports of the country. If we had Ugandan professional footballers, tennis players, and cricket players, we would have a lot of foreign exchange inflow into this country.

When we were watching Senegal play, that is the time I realized that Africans have now become united. We now qualify for a “United States of Africa”. Everybody was cheering Senegal on. One person told me, “I wish the President of Uganda was watching this match too.  He would be so happy and he would wish it were Uganda playing.” So I want to tell this government that investing in sports is something that can be a rewarding venture.  

We have the UPE programme; we should incorporate sports activities into the UPE programme. And talking of which, someone mentioned Namboole Stadium. It is a very shameful thing that Namboole has been left to go to ruins despite that we got a lot of money from the Chinese for it. I was actually about to propose that in my view, all sporting activities should be taken to Namboole. Nakivubo Stadium should be abandoned and we could do something else with the place.  

As Members of Parliament have taken to football, after our deliberations, let us not stop at playing football. We can lead by example, and the President can lead by example too. We should really insist that the school curriculum involves very active sports activities at both O’ and A’ levels.

We have the Army, and the Police too. A lot of money is being spent on the Army’s Recurrent Expenditure. Last year it was Shs 230 billion. We have got a lot of young officers and men who can engage in sports. When they are not fighting, why can they not do something productive, like sports?

There was a time when Simba Football Club went up to the Africa Cup finals. I think it was during Amin’s time. You sometimes find a policeman sleeping on guard because he is not paid. Why can we not spare some little money to keep these policemen fit?  

Mr Speaker, I want to join the rest of my colleagues to salute Ali Tomusange. His achievement was not merely for himself but it was a big achievement for Uganda. We should learn from it and head for the next World Cup finals. I thank you.

MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (Bunyole County, Tororo): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. During the 6th Parliament, I toured my constituency and I visited the schools. In the process, I asked the school children, “What would you wish to be when you grow up, or after your education?” Many of them said they wanted to become taxi drivers, and I cared to find out why the children wanted to emulate the taxi drivers. I found out that those are the people they see excelling in terms of wealth and in what they were doing on the ground. 

I want to tell you that right now, many people in Uganda have excelled in two things, robbery and killing. When you read the papers, everyday you read of a father killing a son, you read about the UPDF killing somebody, and you read of robbers shooting somebody dead! These are the areas that many people in Uganda have excelled in. To get an opportunity to highlight the likes of Tomusange and Inzikuru and the glory they bring to us, punctuates the monotony of murder and robbery. It is a great achievement and I want to thank them.

Honourable Members, recently we hosted the President of Senegal in Uganda but nobody noticed. But I want to tell you that if Diouf, the player of Senegal, had visited Uganda at that time, you would have been overwhelmed by the crowds that would have turned out to welcome him. This is the level sports goes in the mobilisation of our people, and in creating the desired unity we always talk about, of the African people. 

Honourable Members may not know but lately, the children of Uganda have been excelling in football in Sweden and Norway in the Kid’s League. They have so far beaten all the teams and the world has come to know about Uganda through those children, more than they have done through the Ambassadors that are resident in those countries - (Applause). That is the level that sports can go in pushing up a country’s image. 

When the World Cup started I was in the US, and every time I met people and told them I was from Uganda, they would ask about it. Many people did not even know where it was situated, despite that the President of Uganda had just been to their country. But when we were watching football, Mr Ali Tomusange was an official in one of the matches and he put up a wonderful performance and everybody was now keen to find out more about Uganda. This was just because they had seen Tomusange on television then. Although Dombo was there, nobody was asking about him!

May I say that this type of contribution has done us proud? I therefore make an observation that because of the limited funding that is coming from government, Ugandans have chosen to excel in goat races in Munyonyo. The goats do not require much; they only eat grass and banana peelings. These are the areas of sports that many feel they should excel in now. 

I want to tell hon. Members that setting records costs money. Participating in sports and becoming excellent sportsmen costs money. It is high time we became more committed. Members of the front bench, we need to see a sports policy coming up from you and being developed. When they come and begin lamenting together with us, then you wonder what they are doing there! (Laughter)

I wish to conclude by telling the honourable Members that in the 1990s, when the Uganda Cranes brought the East African Challenge Cup from Nairobi, at that time there was terrible rebel activity in the northern part of Uganda and some parts of Teso. But as the Cranes team was playing, there was unilateral declaration of ceasefire. This was because even the rebels were supporting the Ugandan team, just as the UPDF soldiers were also supporting the Uganda team - (Laughter).

With such background, Mr Speaker, I want to thank members, and I want to join the entire House and associate myself with the motion to thank Mr Ali Tomusange, Inzikuru, and all the sportsmen and women who are struggling in this country on meagre resources and personal contributions. 

I also strongly recommend that it is high time we removed taxes from sports and sports equipment. Why do we go to Nakivubo, for goodness sake, to collect VAT when the teams are raising their own money to even buy the boots that they are using?  

I want to thank Ali Tomusange again, and all the sportsmen, and say that we need to do a little bit more than just talking. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
FIRST READING 

THE PUBLIC FINANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY BILL, 2002.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Mr Isaac Musumba): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Public Finance and Accountability Bill, 2002 be read for the first time. 

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament.

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

DR OKULO EPAK (Oyam County South, Apac): Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for allowing me to make this statement.  I am making this statement in response to the statement made by the hon. Minister in the Office of the Prime Minister, hon. Prof. Mondo Kagonyera, during the sitting of this Parliament on Thursday, 11 July 2002 as recorded on page 2541 of the Official Report. 

I am also basing my statement on sub-rules (6) and (7) of Rule No. 51, on the manner in which Members are supposed to be addressed, and on sub-rule (2) of Rule 53 which states, inter alia that it is out of order to make personal allusions; and because I was not present to rise on a point of order on that day.

I consider the allegation that I usually speak and go away because I do not want to listen to others, and that that is the reason I make the kind of utterances I made; and his comparing me and my style of presentation with that of hon. Kamuntu, utterly uncalled for. In my statement, I sought no clarification, so I was not expecting any answer. 

Secondly, the honourable Minister is neither my supervisor nor adviser on how to speak in the House – (Laughter)- but he is entirely free to dispute or counter the substantive points I raised in my submission, which, unfortunately he did not. Instead, he resorted to discussing my personality and my so-called altitude. 

In my opinion, and I repeat my opinion, the honourable Minister in his enthusiasm to defend the Executive, went overboard to reflect a high degree of intolerance and prejudice. He even went as far as implying that my style of debate was bordering on insanity.  I want to assure him that the hard-hitting delivery was intended. We have tried soft approach for the last 16 years and it does not seem to have effect. This approach, indeed, is far better than going to the bush.

My advice to the honourable Minister is that he should discuss issues and not personalities and attitudes. He should accept difference; there must be differences. We cannot all be the same, and he should know that differences are there to be managed and to be tolerated.  Some of them are very enjoyable indeed. On my part, I dismiss the honourable Minister’s opinion of me and the other insinuations he made, but I am glad he was able to bring them out.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF: 

(I) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2001/2002.

(II) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2002/2003 ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE.

(Debate continues.)

MRS AANIMU ANGUPALE (Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker for giving me time to express myself on the budget debate. I am going to comment on some sectors, and I expect some ministers responsible to respond later, though it is unfortunate that the Frontbench looks vacant.  However, I believe the ministers present will explain to their colleagues.  

I would like to thank, first of all, the honourable Minister for the budget presented before this House, and I am going to give my comments according to the pages in the document. 

On page 3, bullet 7, the Minister puts emphasis that the GDP is estimated at 5.6 per cent, and Uganda has been able to sustain strong growth.  Economic growth has been evenly balanced across agriculture, industry and services. High rates of increase are recorded in tobacco, cotton and others. Mr Speaker, I stick to these strong phrases, which are put by the Minister because of the following reasons:

It is very unfortunate for a country like Uganda to always register a constant and sustainable development as stated by the Minister while other parts or other regions in this country are still lagging behind. I would like to emphasise on this point because of the following: We have been talking of production and here we are stating that there is a strong growth. It is a very dangerous statement particularly when the people from my region produce cotton and cotton has got no market. 

When we were going for our recess, the Minister in charge openly informed us to go to the population and emphasise the question of growing more cotton. To my disappointment, when I was trying to address the people, they were telling me that they had grown cotton but there is no market.  When I was trying to convince the people that there is market, they even took me to the stores where the cotton products are lying un-marketed.  What are we talking of here?  

We are registering very strong economic growth and there is no market for the products, which are being produced by the people we represent!  I thought that for effective economic growth or strong growth, there should be produce equals to market; but if there is produce and there is no market, we keep on singing that sustainable growth of 5.6 per cent?  It is very disappointing. I would like the Minister concerned to address that.

In my second point, I would like to talk about the salary arrears as stated on page 7, bullet 22. The Minister has clearly pointed out that they are not going to address the issue of salary arrears this financial year, but they shall do so next financial year. In Arua District, we have had a problem of unpaid salary arrears for about 4 months, which was caused by a shortfall in conditional grants, which are meant for paying salaries at the district. But when the district presented the issue to the central Government, the letter we received was that the central Government is going to rectify the issue soon in this financial year. 

But now the statement I am receiving says next financial year. Can the Minister justify that? 

I would also like to thank the Minister of Transport for the effort put in the construction of the Karuma-Pakwach road.  I would also like to register my thanks to the Government for the work and the effort put in to see that that road is really constructed. However, I would like to commend the excellent work done in the construction of the Nebbi-Arua road. Even if a minister or a Member of Parliament is flying in a plane, you can see that the work on the Nebbi-Arua road is being done excellently.  But when you come to the Pakwach-Nebbi road, the contractor has taken over 11 months to compact only five miles of murrum!  

Right now, the only portion of the road tarmacked is two miles, and the little compacted murrum; the rains have washed half of it away. I wanted to ask the Minister, what were the terms of contract between Government and that contractor trying to delay our road, knowing very well that this money we are using for the construction of this road is borrowed, and our children will pay it?  Now, 11 months later, you are compacting only five miles of murrum road and the Minister does not even caution the contractor about the type of work he is doing?

MR WERIKHE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, thank you my colleague for giving way. It is true the complaints have reached our offices and we have even dispatched some of our engineers to go and look at the work. In fact, we have even summoned the consultant who supervises that work to our offices. I wish to assure the honourable Member that we are actually going to see to it that the quality is improved and also the speed. I think there were some initial problems, but those are being corrected.  

MS ANGUPALE: I thank you very much, honourable Minister for that information, but I would really propose that the contract between that contractor and Government be terminated because he has taken over 11 months to compact only five miles. Really, if we are serious on that road, that is not the type of contractor who is supposed to construct that road. He is even making a sub-standard road, which may not last for five years. Mr Speaker, I am -(Interruption)-

THE SPEAKER:  The information may assist you.

MS ANGUPALE:  Okay.

MR BUTIME: The information I wanted to give to the honourable Member is that between Pakwach and Nebbi, five or six kilometers, that is the worst part because it is clay and if you do not compact it properly and remove the clay first and put there top soil, which can stabilize that section of the road and you tarmac, then you will have done no work. After the five kilometres, actually there may not be need to tarmac and you will go as far as river Nyarwodo if you want. The whole of that area is a good section, it is murram and, therefore, you may not need as much work to do there at the first five kilometres from Pakwach towards Nebbi. That is the information I wanted to give.  Thank you.

MS ANGUPALE:  Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Minister for the information given.  I believe he is an engineer. But me as a Member of Parliament from that very region, I have been moving in my vehicle and what I have seen is that even the compaction the Chinese people are doing is very poor compared to the compaction of the road done by the Israelites. Let me give a clear example here.  We should not deceive ourselves. 

The Israeli contractors stated clearly that the type of roads and surface soil we have is very poor therefore, they have three types of compaction. They have loose surface pour, and then the second loose surface pour using the real tarmac and then finally the compacted. But these Chinese are compacting the surface using the same loose soils that are bad.  Now, really, what can we do here?  Even a laywoman like me who is not an engineer was in position to analyze and see this.  Where are we leading this country? (Applause) If the Government is not in position to terminate the Chinese contract, let it take them for capacity building; let them use the Israelites to train them so that they take over the job!  

Mr Speaker, before I finalize, I would like to talk about security and good governance in reference to Arua District.  It is very disappointing that in Arua District, one of the counties, that is Koboko, is full of the SPLA. These are Sudanese. I do not know whether they are civilians or what. You find that these SPLA move with guns and their big officials move with pistols; and you know the type of people we represent. 

For us in Uganda, we like socialisation. People sit, they drink their sodas in the evenings and what have you. So, in the process of socialisation, there is rampant shooting and we are losing very many businessmen in Koboko.  I believe that is due to the excess and free movement of the SPLA with arms I thought they are supposed to be in the camps!  I would like the Minister for Disaster Preparedness and Refugees - (Mr Wadri rose_)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, honourable Member for giving way. I would like to inform the House that the SPLA are not only indiscriminately moving with guns in Koboko and Terego where I house large refugee groups from that part of the country, but even here in Kampala, at their pseudo embassy along Sir Apollo Kaggwa road joining Nakulabye –(Interruption) - that is where their embassy is. When you reach there, to enter into that building, the checks that you go through are very horrendous.  Thank you.

MS ANGUPALE: I thank you very much for that information. Mr Speaker, if this country is really to maintain internal security, then the Minister concerned should really address the case of Koboko because I personally I am bored.  Whenever I go to the radio, they are always asking me the question about the security of the people of Koboko.  What has Government got to do about that?  

Mr Speaker, I would like to talk about taxation - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You had just five minutes but now -(Interruption)

MRS ANGUPALE: Give me just two minutes because my time was eaten up - (Laughter). I would like to thank the Minister for the policies he has put in this year’s budget like imposing taxes on items, which are very hazardous to our environment. However, I would like to caution the Government on the taxes imposed on second hand clothes. 

I believe most of the policies we pass in this House should have impact and what type of impact are we looking at? Here, the country is putting taxes on second hand clothes; the people of Arua District, over 60 per cent, rely on second hand clothes. And these second hand clothes are not only cotton, some are “polythene” –(Laughter). If the Government wants to impose taxes on the real goods and to benefit, we should stop imposing taxes, which will have negative impact on the rural poor. Why does Government not impose taxes on imported shoes, which honourable Members of Parliament are putting on?  

Mr Speaker, that is the comment I would like to put because taxes are there to promote the local industry, but our textile industry died some years back; I do not know what we are trying to protect. The Minister should also comment on that one. It is better we revive first and then protect; we cannot revive something which is not existing.

Finally, I would like to comment on health and hence, thank the Government for renovating all the health centres and referral hospitals, but I have only to put one caution.  As we are talking here, Government has been injecting a lot of money in reconstruction, renovation and a lot of money has been spent on drugs. But if you go to my district, maybe even to other parts of this country, in a referral hospital they still refer you to buy drip water from a clinic. Very many antibiotics, which are necessary, are being bought in clinics. What is the fate of this country? 

Here we are, saying we have scrapped cost sharing, but the poor is now sent to go and buy the drip in a clinic! In the real referral hospital the drip is not there! Does a referral hospital need to refer people to go and buy drips in clinics? The Minister should find a policy to address this serious issue, which is affecting the community. Mr Speaker, I thank you very much for giving me that time. 

MR ASANASIO KAYIZZI (Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to join my colleagues who have thanked the Minister of Finance and Economic Development.  

Mr Speaker, I will be very clear and precise in my presentation. My first submission is on page 2, “Performance of the Economy”. Year in year out, our Minister of Finance and his predecessors have been able to tell us how the economy of this country is doing well in terms of sound economic policies and reforms, in terms of micro-economic stability, in terms of growth in our GDP and low steady inflation and adequate levels of foreign currency reserve.

For the last 16 years, this has been presented to us year in year out but what is happening down there, especially in my constituency, that is Kassanda North? Poverty is trying to eat and encroach more and more on the pockets of our people. This is to say, Mr Speaker, that they have even stopped listening to these budget presentations because they do not meet their expectations. They would expect to hear of availability of markets for their produce like coffee, cotton, maize and beans, and may be reduced prices on some of these manufactured goods.  

So actually, much as our economy is doing very well in these terms as elaborated by the Minister of Finance for the last 16 years, there is need for the Minister of Finance, as my colleagues stated, to address the issue of markets of our produce. There is no need even of coming up with these PMAs and whatever, but once you set up markets for maize, beans and coffee, our people are ready to grow any type of agricultural produce, provided there is availability of market.

My second comment is on page 14, “Higher Education”.  Mr Speaker and honourable members, for the last 16 years, our people have continued to invest a lot of their money in education, especially in higher education like universities and other higher institutions of learning, where in most cases they even go ahead to sell off their small pieces of land and bibanja and in return, their children fail to get employment. This is very unfortunate, and this has also added to some of the problems, which have led to impoverishment of our people in the villages. They have invested a lot of their money in education, but in return their children do not get employment, having sold off their pieces of land and bibanjas. The Ministry of Finance and the Government itself should put in more effort to see that these graduates are provided with employment.

The other observation is on page 15, and this is about defence and security. I would like to add my voice to that of the people in Northern Uganda where there is such insurgency, and in fact it is very unfortunate. But I would like just to get a simple clarification from the Minister of Defence. 

Before I can commend the efforts of the Minister of Defence to provide total security in Northern Uganda, I would like to get informed whether for the last 16 years the Lords Resistance Army has been able to have an LC or a parish of a sub-county, which they have managed to control administratively and militarily. If that is not there, then we should commend the Army. If for the last 16 years the Lords Resistance Army has not been able to control administratively and militarily a single village, a parish or a sub-county, then we should commend our Army for their effort, much as there is still killing - (Applause).

Mr Speaker, we can also borrow a leaf from our friends, the Americans and the Israelites.  In USA, when they were hit by the Afghans -(Mr Wadri rose_) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, somebody wanted to give information -(Interruption)

MR KAYIZZI: In USA when they were hit by Afghanistan, I heard that in their Senate and other legislative bodies, they sat down and moved a motion to raise the Defence money up to a tune of 400 billion dollars to hunt this man Osama Bin Laden.  Much as they have hunted for this man and failed to get him, they are still voting more money for Defence to hunt him wherever he may be, but they have not concluded that Bush has failed to get this man.

So, much as these people of ours have also failed to curb the insurgency, we should agree and beg honourable members to increase on the Ministry of Defence budget.  I do not support this idea of cutting down two billion shillings from the Ministry of Defence, because they still have a lot to do if we are to be very serious.

To wind up, on page 30 they talk about fuel. When the Ministry of Finance raised certain taxation on fuel, it only increased it by 30 shillings, but to my surprise, the pump prices were increased by 50 shillings. I do not understand the logic where they only increased by 30 and for them they increased by 50, from 480 to 530.  So, I would also like clarification from the Ministry of Finance. What logic is behind this? You only added 30 and for them they added 50 shillings, which is actually very painful.  

With those few remarks and observations, Mr Speaker, I beg to stop here and thank you very much -(Applause).

MR ISAIAH IMUMET (Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I stand to support the motion, and I thank the Minister for his Budget speech.  In the Budget Speech, there is a provision for a census, which is supposed to take place in September this year, but because of the Karamoja operation and the incursions of the Karimojong incursions into my constituency, I fear that if proper precautions are not taken, there might be a disturbance, and my constituency will not have a census. In fact, in the whole of Katakwi District, we might have a problem of getting the exact number of people, and this will be disastrous because we know that allocation of resources is determined from a census. In the process, we shall be cheated of whatever Government is giving us.

On the road sector, I have seen that there is nothing about the Soroti-Moroto road. This is a highway connecting the whole of Karamoja region, Soroti and Katakwi. Development is lacking on that side because the transport network is not properly addressed. So, I request the relevant ministry to address the issue of a road network to Moroto through Katakwi. If there is no development in Karamoja, the Karimojong will maintain their way of survival, which is a disturbance to the neighbouring districts.

There is that aspect of modernisation of the UPDF. I request that when we are modernising the UPDF, we should take into consideration other factors like being broad-based. Being broad-based means we shall be able to pick talents from other parts of the country, just like we mentioned with sports.  

The welfare of UPDF must be taken care of, because when you look at the way UPDF is at the moment, I believe one of the reasons for the low performance at times is because of welfare. Without welfare, the morale is down, and once the morale is down, the performance will be poor.  

I tried to work with the NRA for five years, but one of the reasons for which I pulled out was related to welfare. When I compared it to the UA, where my uncle was from 1967 up to 1980, I found there was a big difference. So, that is one of the reasons why I also pulled out of the NRA - (Interjections)- yes, I worked with NRA for five years! 

On the mineral sector, I see that the prospecting of minerals is taking place in some places, but when you look at a place like Moroto, there is nothing! In the ‘60s, in the Atlases in primary they used to indicate that there was oil in Karamoja, there are minerals in Karamoja, but I see there is no provision for that. I know there is a security problem there, but given the chance that prospecting takes place there, we could develop -(Interruption)

MR OGWEL LOOTE: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform the hon. Imumet that currently Moroto exports limestone to Tororo, and marble is also being transported to Jinja.  So, it has actually grown. What is lacking is a factory, which can begin there, if only the Ministry of Energy can give us electricity. This will go a long way to occupy and provide employment for those who have been disarmed, who are now many in Moroto Municipality looking for jobs.

MR IMUMET: Thank you, my colleague, for the information. I presume since you are the owner of the home, you are satisfied. 

On public service, there is the issue of pension. In my constituency, and in most parts of Katakwi District, people have approached me saying that since they were retrenched long ago, they have not been paid their pensions. And when they come to Wandegeya, they can spend a whole week and go back without anything. So, I request Government to address the issue of pensions as much as possible –(Interruption)

MR OKUMU RINGA: Mr Speaker, my ministry has done everything within the policy framework to ensure that all persons who are supposed to benefit from pensions do benefit from pensions. The Ministry of Public Service carried out a census of all pensionable persons. We have also made it clear that those who might have missed the census are supposed to submit their particulars through the normal channel -through places where they worked so that they may be included.  So, it is not true that there are people who are supposed to be paid pension and are not being paid their pension. 

In addition, my Ministry has validated pensions and has made pensions more meaningful for our senior citizens who rendered service to this country. So, I would like to call upon my colleague and all members of this House that if there is any issue, follow the normal channel and these matters will be addressed.  I thank you.

MR IMUMET: Thank you, hon. Minister. But as a representative of the people, this is the channel that I have used -(Laughter). On education ­-(Interruption)

LT COL KATIRIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the honourable member for allowing me to seek clarification from him. I thought the record should be set right in the Hansard. 

He informed the House that he was serving the Army, which I am still serving, and because of welfare problems he had to leave, and probably that is how he ended up in this august House. The clarification I want to seek from him, for the record, is whether his departure from the Army, which I am still serving, was official or whether he deserted. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR IMUMET: Mr Speaker, I have my discharge certificate from NRA, which I got in 1994. So, I am outside comfortably. That is why I was able to qualify for this House.  

On education, several times people have asked me about scholarships, mainly for outside this country, and the way it used to be in those good old days. People are asking, what is happening with the scholarship scheme? They are not hearing about it. They only heard about it during the time of the reform agenda by Col Kizza Besigye. They are asking me, what is happening? 

I would like the Government to address that issue, so that the public gets to know what has happened to the scholarship scheme. As for me, I do not have ready answers for that. So, I request Government to explain to the population what has happened to the scholarship scheme.  

On good governance, Mr Speaker, before I came here I was an assistant CAO after I had left the army.  Now I am here but the problem I witnessed is that CAOs are not safe in their duties, especially during the time of elections. This is because they are presumed not to accept the results the way the results are expected. Now the CAOs are saying, Government must transfer this responsibility to another body.  

A CAO takes so many years to groom in order for him to become a full CAO. Now, if we are going to endanger these people by sacking them because they are not following the whims of what is expected of the results of the elections, that will be dangerous. 

We are not able to afford to educate our children; if I lose a CAO from my constituency and yet there is no proper education going on now, where shall I get another CAO? So, I feel that the CAOs must be protected very well by handing over that job of returning officer to another body.

On electricity, my friend from Terego sometime back said that during elections, UEB lorries carried poles and dumped them there. For me, the lories were there during elections carrying poles, but they never dumped them; they were coming to survey.   Now the people have asked me to ask Government what is happening with the poles. They want them to be dropped there and something should be done, as the President had promised. Development in our place is also hindered because, there are people who are willing to do some things there, like welding and so on, but they cannot do them because those facilities need electricity. 

As I end now, I would like to state that the people of Katakwi, and in particular my constituency, are not party to an article which was raised by one of the Members of Parliament from Katakwi District, that he was inviting the Bakiga to Teso. They have told me that to them that land looks vast because they are in the camps. If they went back to their homes, that land would be too small for them. So, there is no invitation to the Bakiga. We would not like that matter about Katakwi to come to Parliament again. They have already rejected it before hand.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

CAPT. FRANCIS BABU (Central Division, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wanted to start right from the beginning to say that the man who sowed the seeds of divide-and-rule in this country must be laughing wherever he is, because what he did seems to be the order of the day, even in this great House of ours.

These people sat in Europe, divided the African continent, came to this country and sowed the seeds of discord of divide-and-rule, and they found our weaknesses in our very strength of ethnicity. They have worked on it, and until today, our countries have been weakened because of these divisions.  

I hear the same song being sung after the year 2000. These seeds came here in the 19th century and they brought them through different channels. They used our own ethnicity to weaken us; they used religion, they used politics, they used the rich and poor and they made sure that we fought against each other. Today, we seem to be having the same affinity that others have had, and our African continent is getting weaker and weaker, and our own country is being weakened.

What is happening in this country is very unfortunate. What is happening anywhere in this country, be it in the north, the south or the east is unfortunate. We need to make this country feel that it is one nation and we are all the same. Whatever weaknesses we have, we must find a solution to those weaknesses and the conflict must be resolved –(Interruption)

MS KIRASO: Thank you, hon. Babu, for giving way.  The information I wanted to give is that when you sow a seed, the seed can either die or survive, depending on the ground or the soil on which it has been sown. If the seed is sown, for example, on sandy soil or on a rock, it will not germinate and it will not spread. But if you give it manure and continue watering it, definitely the seed is likely to germinate very well, flourish and mushroom and continue growing. Thank you.

CAPT. BABU: I would like to thank the honourable member. That is exactly what I am saying. We must desist from giving it water and manure. And I am saying that the security problems we have in this country can be resolved without us dividing ourselves even further, because it affects our budget, it affects our country, and it affects the future of our children and our grandchildren.  

It is, therefore, very important that the whole country and all of us must now get together, find solutions, rise above these weaknesses and make sure that we work hand in hand to resolve the problems that we have.

I am also going a little bit further to talk about this opportunity that some people have given us in the international market.  

I have heard a lot of people alluding to these international markets, but I think we better come out very clearly.  What the Americans have done and the Europeans and the Japanese -all the G-8 countries- is to sit down and say, “let us allow these Africans to go into our markets”. They have opened small windows and they have called them opportunities.  The Americans have gone to their Congress, they have passed an Act; we have termed it AGOA but basically we should start by thanking the Americans for having allowed us to go into their market under these competitive international circumstances.  

Therefore, AGOA, EBA -which is “Everything But Arms”, the Japanese agreement; we must appreciate it.  Somebody is talking of subsidies. We are not going to run other people’s countries.  Let us first run ours by taking the opportunity they have given us and then we talk about their subsidies, because you see, if you start talking about America subsiding their farmers, they are not going to stop because it is their political centrepiece.  

I am now going to the point of our Government taking large pioneers in investment: how about the small ones?  What innovation can we do to help our small businesses to market?  I give an example -and I was talking to a colleague this morning; there are ladies in this town who are making buttons for shirts out of horns of cows. Can Government get an innovation fund to give them money and make these factories produce these buttons and supply the same factory going to produce the clothes we are going to export to the United States?  Can we get some money from Government to give it to these women who are putting honey in little bottles; give them packaging, better marketing strategies and we sell this honey to the United States?  These are the innovations I would like to see, because it is in here where they are talking about an innovative fund.  

In the United States, Mr Speaker, there is a small business agency, an SBA, which was set up in 1953, and in Britain in 1980 they had the Bolton’s report on small businesses to try and give the impetus to the small businesses started by their own citizens.  We have got people in this country who have got small businesses that can be given funds and they can become the seedbed of big companies tomorrow.  To me, I think this fund will help these small businesses become the AGOAs of tomorrow. 

I give you a case in point in Kenya, the Kiondos, the small little bags, which are made by ladies is being sold in the United States and today it is being found in fashion houses in the United States.  You go on the Fifth Avenue in Sax and you will find the kiondo there. This is extremely important.  

As I end, Mr Speaker, I would also wish to talk about security. We must find a way using all sorts of methods to try and reduce the problems we are having in the North for the benefit of the people who live in that area.  Whatever methods we have, be it to fight the gentleman and defend the country, or use other methods of coming around the table.  It has happened in Mozambique; it has happened in other countries; it has happened in Northern Ireland; it has happened in every country.  Therefore, we must find every possible avenue to try and stop this insurgency so that our people can feel part and parcel of our society.  But at the same time, the people of that area must come and join hands with everybody so that we can find that solution.

I was very happy this morning as I walked in the boardroom of the Prime Minister, there was a group sitting and from what I saw, I thought that was about Karamoja. So if we can do that and find solutions to problems that are happening in different areas, we will be able to solve the problems of this country.  We can no longer afford to go to Kenya as refugees.  

When I was young, Mr Speaker, I left this country, I joined the East African Airways in 1968/69 onwards. In 1971, I saw a wave of refugees, in 1979 I saw another wave of refugees, in 1985 I saw another wave of refugees.  We cannot afford to become refugees.  You have just heard a few minutes ago how they talk about refugees.

Let me, therefore, ask this House that these divisions which are being created, let us fight them and let us rise above them. Let us find solutions to this country; let us look for everything possible to make this country one, no matter what it takes. It is not a big price to pay to make sure that we have peace.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR ODONGA OTTO (Aruu County Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity.  I want to commend the Minister who has just been on the floor for such a good comment.  I only told my colleagues that I thought you were in Cabinet where the ideas about AGOA should be digested, but then one person quickly told me that AGOA is not a Cabinet business.  But I think it was a fair comment.

I just wanted to make a few comments about AGOA.  I have been given an opportunity to study AGOA for the last 17 months at a Master’s level.  I want to make a simple declaration to this House that it appears we are set for an argument of “between the egg and the hen, which one came first”?  AGOA began long ago in 1979, it has just been discovered a few months ago by our Head of State.  

To me, the question I would always ask passionately is, why should we politicise and militarise every activity in the country?  Fish farmers are being chased – (-Mr Musumba rose_)

MR MUSUMBA: I just want to seek clarification, Mr Speaker, because I have read the African Growth Opportunity Act 2000. I want to seek clarification from my honourable friend, hon. Odonga Otto.  What does he mean when he says AGOA begun in 1979 but our President just discovered it in 2000 or three months ago, when I know for a fact that the African Growth Opportunity Act is an Act of 2000?

MAJ. KAZOORA: Mr Speaker, hon. Otto said that he asked his colleagues about AGOA and they told him that it is not a Cabinet affair, and he was referring to hon. Babu after he had made his presentation.  I had thought that hon. Babu or the Prime Minister would either confirm or deny, if really it is not a Cabinet affair, whose affair is it?  

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much Mr Speaker and my colleagues, especially the Minister of Finance who paused that simple intellectual puzzle.  I would say, my comrade, that there is a distinction between AGOA and “Agoaism”. You see, we have just chosen to call it AGOA for this particular time but I will refer you, and I will take the honour to give you a text to enable you enter the world of academia.  But what I want to say is that, there is one aspect I want to raise that is the militarisation and politicisation of every activity.  

Last year we passed a law telling Government to pull away from business, today we are appearing in style in the name of AGOA with 70 billion shillings.  A question still remains, whose business is it, because at least it is not a Cabinet affair?  
Yesterday, I was in Bugolobi where these girls are staying.  Of course I went there in my capacity as a Member of Parliament, not as a bachelor – (Laughter)- or both.  I do not refute- (Mr Okumu Ringa rose_)  

MR OKUMU-RINGA: Mr Speaker, I want to set the record straight, particularly with regard to the issue of AGOA.  AGOA, as my colleague has stated earlier, is an Act: it was a law passed by the American Congress called “African Growth and Opportunities Act”, and this Act empowers African countries to access the American market, and this is a fact known by all of you.  Now, in as far as the Government of the Republic of Uganda is concerned, the Cabinet discussed how well Uganda Government could take advantage of that enabling law to ensure that we access the market.  So, what His Excellency the President has been articulating in as far as AGOA is concerned, is to energise the private sector and all the people of Uganda to take advantage of that law.  So, I would like my honourable colleague, hon. Otto, just to take advantage of the opportunities of this law.  I thank you.

MR ODONGA OTTO:  Thank you.  When the US Parliament passed a law on terrorism, it had an equal force pushed in all the Third World Countries in an attempt to utilise the opportunities of the opening in the American Senate; it made us pass the “Suppression of the Terrorism Bill”. So this is a kind of opening the Minister is advising us. 

I still pause a simple question, whose business is AGOA?  
Fellow intellectuals would note that in 1974 after the Dependency School of Thought came of less use, there emerged a new international economic order, and that is where I back my authority for saying it is the basis of the emergence of AGOA. 

But when I was in Bugolobi some few hours before the Minister Abel Rwendeire came, I found that something funny is taking place in the name of AGOA.  To me the interpretation is that it is the first military convent in Africa. I stand by my words.  These ladies are mobilised politically using RDCs, they come with the highest level of expectations that they have got an employment in the President’s Office.  I was discussing with an MP, some parents have even come and pulled their daughters out.  So, are we seeing AGOA in the real sense of an economic opportunity?  

The western world is giving subsidies to their farmers.  AGOA would produce a trouser at 7,000 shillings, the western world is subsidising their farmers to make their trousers of better quality to be at 3,000 shillings in the European Market.  What are we doing with our 70 billion in the Budget?  It is like a comedy!  

I will just urge the minister that let us tighten our belts that these ladies are being trained, they are being fed and after three months, they will be employed by the Sri Lankan, where the Government would have already invested 70 billion with the loud political paucity and mobilisation.  This is my argument and this is how I think.  

Let me summarise by saying that the moment Government tries to politicise every single economic activity in the country, the cost of production rises.  A few months ago, we mobilised for the establishment of co-operatives using the RDCs.  Politicised!  There were very many other forums You know the way people perceive Government activities in the rural areas is that it is time for us to eat something also.  So, we have run out of efficiency and we are heading towards effectiveness.  I think this is a third-world country, we should think over the cost of producing a service.  So, to me, that military convent, whether it belongs to who - because I have already confirmed it is not a Cabinet agenda – (-Mr Musumba rose_)

MR MUSUMBA:  Mr Speaker, these young girls have been voluntarily requested to come and train and get professional skills in tailoring and be able to have a profession that they can utilise in the village or wherever they will be for the rest of their lives.  The young girls in Bugolobi have been mobilised by Government through senior public servants called Resident District Commissioners, because by Constitution, the RDCs are actually public servants.  Is it in order for the hon. Odonga Otto to refer to them as people who are in a military convent?  Is it a military convent? Is the hon. Odonga Otto in order to use language that is inconsistent with the spirit of the programme going on in this country?  Is it in order?

THE SPEAKER:  Well my assessment of the situation is that you need to educate more people about it, and may be he is one of them – (Laughter and Applause).

MR ODONGO OTTO:  Thank you for your wise ruling, Mr Speaker. I will be one of the candle bearers of the sensitisation.  I think to me it is unfair, something wrong is happening somewhere.  It has been proved worldwide that Government in anyway cannot be efficient in service delivery; that is why we sold the Bank.  With the behind pocket, we are pulling 70 billion and now we are saying we are giving skills to these ladies who will go back to help in their towns and municipals with the skills.  Then what is AGOA?

THE SPEAKER:  But how long are we really going to spend on this AGOA?

MR ODONGA OTTO:  In conclusion, a political leader once arrived to a consensus with the people he leads, and the conclusion was that, you say what you want and I do what I want.  I think that is not the essence of politics because what we say must be heard.  To me it appears everything has gone wrong.  

Lastly, you know there is a notion we call in politics “national interest”, which can easily be interpreted as collective selfishness.  The other day we spent 30 minutes talking about a house of a magistrate, yet 7,000 Ugandans are in camps and their huts have been burnt!  Where is the national interest?  If my presence in Parliament cannot make a difference to the people of Aruu county, then perhaps my absence would make a service. I still want to repeat, if my presence cannot make a difference in this national Parliament, then my absence should do so because whatever we say is not heard.  

In conclusion, I would say, let us develop something vaguely called national interest – (Interjection).  Thank you for that fair comment, and I would like to say that at all the battlefronts with the NRM, 90 per cent are Acholis.  On the Government side, 90 per cent are Acholis, and one person comes to the House that let us fight; let us have more SMGs and then you say you are a legislator in a country?  Are you trying to suggest that this war cannot end peacefully?

Are we trying to say it is impossible? We come and talk in Parliament and then they march away with it by giving a statement. Mr Speaker, I don’t have much to contribute. May God help Uganda. Thank you.

MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU (Makindye Division West, Kampala): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker, because I have been standing about a week now, but it has been very difficult to catch your eye. Mine is local, but I have to repeat it because I have repeated it several times and it appears the Minister concerned - I would not like to say he has turned a deaf ear - but he has not assisted me very much. The police are still complaining. 

Two married couples live in one uniport; how they share it is a secret between them. I would have thought that after 15 years, these people would have had their accommodation improved! On top of that, they complain that they are tired of being called dishonest. Their salary, they tell me, is Shs75,000 a month; their children who go to school also live in the same uniports. They want the minister concerned to assist them. The sewerage system and the water system broke down and if you are to move through their quarters, especially at Nsambya, you would be surprised.  So, when I went through the budget speech, I was surprised that it did not very much show that there would be an improvement either on their salary or on the accommodation they have at the moment.  

On the question of poverty, I think as far as the government itself is concerned, it is getting exhausted of how the people of Uganda can become rich. We were provided with black beans. These failed to take off and the taste was not good, even for the local market.  Then we were asked to plant G. nuts. These did not even leave the fields because there was no market, although very many people had resorted on growing them. As if that was not enough, we were advised to “cultivate” silk worms Up to the present day, Mr Speaker, I have not heard of a ton of silk which was sold somewhere. Then after a time, they advised us to “cultivate” rabbits, while other people –(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  To rear rabbits.

MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU: No, I know. People are advising me to say, “to rear” or something like that, but I am speaking in terms of farming or cultivating. I am not saying it without knowing where I am getting it from, because I take these to be much more related to agriculture. So, we have cultivated rabbits but still, we looked for the market and failed, until one minister advised us to eat them so that the market would be universally obtained.  

At the moment, we are being urged to cultivate cotton and coffee, but each year they tell us that the market is not large enough, and is not profitable. The poor men and women who grow cotton do not know what price the cotton they are growing will cost per kilo. (Bell rings) - Is that a mistake or what? We do not also know how much a kilo of coffee could cost. 

In His Excellency’s speech, he said that he could not afford to subsidise these crops because IMF would be after him, but I am requesting this House to note that we are really very poor. We cannot run at the same speed as the Americans or some other rich countries. To help the farmers grow these crops, surely we must subsidise the crops because at the time of selling these crops, some buyers take pieces of soap and kilos of sugar which, I consider to be -(Interruption)

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of subsidising farmers is extremely pertinent, but it is important to understand the argument and problems afflicting us. The argument of IMF and World Bank is that if you are being subsidised even to manage your budget, where do you get money to subsidise farmers? That is the issue before us. That is why it is incumbent upon us to work hard so that we can manage our budget. I think 52 per cent of our capital budget is subsidised by external friends.  

Secondly, we have argued that, why should the developed world subsidise illiterate farmers When their illiterate farmers are not being subsidised? So, we are now putting pressure to the developed countries to cease subsidising their farmers so that there is at least parity between the farmers abroad and the farmers in the periphery countries.  I thank you. 

MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU: Thank you very much hon. Prime Minister, but I do remember the law, which was passed by OAU not allowing some people to go to South Africa. But Dr Banda at that time said, “Will it be in the interest of my people if I prevented them from going to South Africa to look for money?”  What do we really prefer? Do we prefer to stand on our own or to remain borrowing? I think this is the time for the World Bank to be told we are very poor. We cannot run at the same speed as some other countries are running.  You cannot encourage somebody to cultivate coffee or cotton unless he knows how much he is going to sell that crop for! 

I ask the Minister of Finance to tell the Bank of Uganda that the system of liquidating these banks is really harsh and undemocratic. You cannot close a bank and all the accounts and you continue charging interest!  If a man fails to pay rent of Shs2, then you say next year I am increasing it, you put it to Shs4? It appears it is another way of trying to take peoples security!  I would have thought that once a bank is closed, everything ceases. It will be a question of correcting banks but not again to run the same bank as if it was in business! I think this is really very unfair, and I beg the minister to work on it.

I would like also to ask the judiciary not to appoint each Tom, Dick and Harry to be court bailiffs. These people have turned out to be open thieves! You cannot sue them because they are court messengers, you cannot sue the court nor can you sue the other person. People’s money has been stolen in millions, and nothing is being done!  Sometimes they charge even more than a lawyer himself has received. I cannot understand what is happening in the judiciary with these people. I am sorry that the head of the judiciary has gone, but I very much wanted to see that he has picked this thing when he is present.  However, I know Members of the Front Bench are there, they will let him know what I have said.

Lastly, the question of fees at Makerere is causing a lot of concern among the people. We know that gospel saying that ‘he who has not will be deprived of even the little he has and it will be given to the rich.’ It is very funny that the government - my information is that they pay about Shs125,000 and yet you find another student paying Shs650,000 for the same course. How come? I would like the Minister of Education to tell us what the independence of the University meant. I am not stating these things of robbery, but dishonesty. These private students are very poor people, and if only Shs50,000 is remaining unpaid, the boy or girl will not be allowed to sit for the exams, which I think is really very unfair.

However, I do not know whether the Minister of Education - these days hon. Speaker, the Minister does not want to sit here -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  No, no, please, wind up.

MR NSAMBU: I will stop here, but thank you very much indeed.

MRS TEOPISTA SSENTONGO (Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for affording me this opportunity to combine my gratitude to that of the rest of the House to thank His Excellency and the Minister of Finance for the speeches that they delivered to the nation. I am using this opportunity because I did not have the opportunity to say something about the state of the nation address by His Excellency. 

I stand to support both His Excellency’s address to the nation and the minister’s speech. It is very gratifying to learn that our economy has really grown at the latitude of 5.6 per cent. However, both documents have not depicted the unemployment or employment rate so far.  So, it is difficult for anybody to have a better comparison. It would be better if in the next documents we could have these two statistics to enable us compare and find out whether the exact growth, which is being indicated is on the ground.

Secondly, I also want to applaud the President for directing the district officials to work hard towards the revitalisation of the Co-operative Movement in this country. I think you will bear with me that when the Co-operative Movement was in full act, it bore very good fruits in alleviating poverty for the peasants, and also creating employment for our children. I hope that if the Co-operatives are really put into proper trend with the assistance of the department of Co-operatives in the Ministry of Tourism and Industry, it will do a good deal.  

I also want to appeal to the ministry to make sure that the personnel in the department is increased from five people to a reasonable number that can help to revitalise the Co-operatives and make them functional. 

I also appeal to the Ministry of Agriculture - okay, I have heard the Prime Minister saying that it will be difficult for the government to subsidise the peasants, but I do not think that the Co-operatives will be functional enough with the current poverty, if the Co-operatives or the peasants are not subsidised. I do not think if we continue using our normal hoes, the peasants will be able to sustain the market and feed the AGOA as we expect it. So, I just appeal to the government to think seriously about subsidising the peasants to make sure that the co-operatives are properly functioning.

I will end by seeking clarification from the Minister of Finance, and probably also the Minister of Public Service, as to when the public servants who were affected by the restructuring exercise would be paid. I am worried. 

When you open page 17 of the budget speech, paragraph 65 indicates that it will be difficult to pay the arrears this financial year. That is tantamount to not even paying those people, and they are now languishing on the streets of Kampala and elsewhere in the country. On that note, I want to thank you hon. Speaker, for giving me this opportunity.

MS JOYO MINDRA (Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to express a few points. First of all, I congratulate the President for his State of the Nation Address, which was very comprehensive. I am also grateful for the Budget Speech presented by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I have a few points to make concerning some omissions. 

When the President went for his campaigns in the last presidential elections, he did make it clear that the road between Moyo and Laropi will be tarmacked. Now I see nothing presented about it among the roads that are in line to be constructed. This road was under construction by a Chinese company called Sietco, but the work came to a standstill in the late 1990s because of some insecurity. Currently there is no insecurity as such within the district. So, I would like to know from the minister concerned, when will this road be worked on? It was a presidential pledge and I would like to urge the community responsible to look it up. What is the plight of this pledge? Has it been forgotten or has it been put up for a later date? 

Also, the President promised a ferry to connect Obongi with Adjumani District, where is this ferry? We need it because it will assist us in moving between the two districts. Not only that, it will also be a shorter route if we want to move from Gulu via Adjumani, or from Obongi to Arua District. It will ease the transport problem for the people there. 

I would also like to know about the road between Atiak and Ayuge. This road is under the central Government. Would the Minister of Works, Housing and Communications enlighten me as to why this road is not being done? It is a whole stretch of road as you travel from Gulu to Adjumani, and it causes a lot of time wastage when we move because there are a lot of potholes. The road surface is also very bad, and the sides are bushy.

I would like to draw attention to the water problem in one of the sub-counties called Meto, in a parish called Pajakiri. This is a mountainous area, although it is endowed with some water for gravity flow. Contrarily, the water originates from Pajakiri Parish, but they cannot use it there. It is the parishes that are at lower sea level, like Pameri and Pamoi, which are benefiting from this water.

We are very grateful to the government because through funding from EDF, the parishes at lower sea levels are enjoying the water from the gravity flow. I urge government, Mr Speaker, to use some technology so that the people at the water source can also benefit from this water.

These people from Pajakiri still, live in a mountainous area. Their farming land is so fragmented that it would be advisable for them to use other means of earning other than their small plots. I am of the opinion that if they could be assisted with some bee keeping incentives, for example loans, they could improve their income. They could even put up beehives on the rocks or the trees that are there in plenty. So, bring in line these people of Pajakiri so that they can also improve their income. I urge the government to look into their issue.

Recently, people from all over Uganda were mobilised about the revival of the Co-operative Movement. In Adjumani there was a meeting, which I attended, about trying to revive the growing of cotton and we were urged, everybody from LC I up to Members of Parliament, to mobilise the people to grow cotton. But now, where is the immediate market for this cotton? Shall we not be called liars if we mobilise these people again and they grow the cotton this year when there is no market for it? 

This AGOA business, many girls have been brought here. Well, from which textile are they getting the yarn? We do not have it. We see somebody importing the yarn from somewhere else and they are just making the cloth. So would we be assured of market for the cotton that would help boost the income of the common man in Moyo and Adjumani Districts? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS BETTY AMONGI (Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament. I want to direct my concern to the question of security in Northern Uganda. For the past two weeks I was in my constituency and we have the persistent problem of conflict. Since the Movement system of governance came into power, we have had this problem. 

We had a brief from the Minister of Defence, and it is really unfortunate that the he is not here now. When we Members of Parliament from Northern Uganda were briefed about “Operation Iron Fist”, we were told that its objective is to search and destroy military forces of the Lords’ Resistance Army in Sudan. Another is to search and rescue all the abducted children and other Ugandan captives from the Lords’ Resistance Army. These were the two major things that the minister said had taken them into the area. 

After going there, they say the mid-term review indicates that it has been a success. It is a success in that they have managed to capture equipment worth Shs 3 billion, which they have returned to the Government of Sudan. Twenty-five rebels have been captured, 30 rebels willingly surrendered, and 250 Lords’ Resistance Army rebels were killed.
  
When I was in my constituency, I managed to speak to three of the people who were in southern Sudan, fighting as UPDF. They said that unfortunately, the Minister of Defence does not tell us the casualties the UPDF is suffering in southern Sudan, not even deserters. It is very unfortunate for honourable Members of this House to learn that our sons and daughters who went to southern Sudan are dying, from the papers. 

People who are running away from there tell us that many members of the UPDF have been killed by the Lord’s Resistance Army. These are our children.  We want to know from the ministry, how many of our sons and daughters have been killed in Southern Sudan? We have not been told that. Even the high-ranking Army Commanders who have been buried, we only hear of their death from the press! We have not been told about it by the ministry.  

Mr Speaker, I think this is not justice. We have to see whether this Operation Iron Fist is really achieving its objective. If it is not, then we have to analyze and change. If there is no capacity, it is good for the government to tell us so. At one point we were told that Kony is already surrounded and, “he is going to be killed soon.” At another time my constituency was in problems and I reported to the Ministry of Defence. Then two weeks later, at the same spot I had reported about, we were attacked again.

MAJ. KAZOORA: Mr Speaker, the honourable Member holding the Floor is raising serious matters about the security of the country and the operations of the Army. In this House we have representatives of the UPDF. We are lucky to have one of them around right now. I expect him to put the record straight for the House. Could the honourable Member representing the UPDF be of use to this House?

LT COL KATIRIMA: Mr Speaker, I am not the Minister of Defence, and I hope that at an appropriate time he will be able to respond to some of these issues. If I recollect very well, however, it is a standing position of this august House that the Army is not under any obligation to give its list of casualties out, if any. If you check the Official Report, you will find that in the proceedings of this House, the outstanding position is that the Army is not under obligation to give out its list of casualties. 

It is on the basis of this that I do not want to divulge those details. The Minister of Defence will, however, at an opportune time in the near future, be able to take on this issue. Members should realize that matters of defending this country are very sensitive ones involving a lot of sacrifice. We sacrifice a lot to defend this country and it is not in the interest of national security for us to come here and start saying, “this is the extent to which the enemy has been able to inflict damage on us.” That can be picked and used by our enemies.  

THE SPEAKER: I think you have made your point.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think as a Member of Parliament of the constituency that has this problem, I have a right to that information. The people in my constituency have these concerns, and for the interest of this country, even we as national legislators, need that information to some extent. Because if the country is in danger, I think we are the right people to know that there is a problem somewhere.

Another issue I want to talk about is the one that I saw in the press recently, when the President raised it for the first time. If the press is correct, it indicated that the President said there should be a probe into the exaggeration of the payroll of the soldiers in Northern Uganda. This indicates that some Army Commanders have been benefiting from the war in Northern Uganda. They have been exaggerating the payroll and underestimating the strength of the UPDF.  

If this is true and these Army Commanders have been falsifying the number of the army officers and men, then it is unfortunate. I know the UPDF is good enough to contain the insecurity in the North. It therefore means that these Army Commanders are the major cause of the persistent conflict in Northern Uganda.

MR DOMBO: I want to thank the honourable Member, and the Speaker, for allowing me to seek clarification. Hon. Member, you have said that there is an investigation currently being conducted to find out what could have caused the exaggerated number of UPDF personnel in the North. May I seek clarification from the relevant person as to what payroll is now being used in the meantime that the investigation is being conducted? This is a serious matter; it could mean that our soldiers are not being paid in the process of the investigation of the problems What is exactly happening? Could we, as a Parliament, know?

LT COL KATIRIMA: Mr Speaker, I have already pointed out that some of these matters would best be handled by the Minister of Defence, at an appropriate time. If I may give a little information, however, what I know is that recently, a head count was done, in addition to using the system of paying soldiers through banks, to establish the exact numbers existing in the UPDF. It is on the basis of this that salaries to officers and men have been paid.

MS AMONGI: Thank you for the supplement, honourable Member. I am not at all satisfied by the answer given, and I request honourable Members representing the UPDF to listen and take the message to the minister. I think he is incapacitated and cannot answer some of the queries we have.  

This is a painful period for some of us who represent the people who are in chaos. People are having problems because the UPDF cannot protect the lives and properties of the people we represent. For over 16 years, our people have not been protected, and their property has not been safeguarded. I want to seek legal advice from the Attorney General. If he is not here, I know he delegated his powers. I want to know what legal remedy the people of Northern Uganda can get from government for not protecting their lives, and for not safeguarding their property. These are inherent and fundamental rights for the people of the country. I want to know because this is a serious issue. 

You cannot tell me that this government does not have the capacity to contain the war in Northern Uganda when the same government could go help Rwanda get a democratic government. You cannot tell me this government cannot contain the war in Northern Uganda when it could go and remove Mobutu and replace him with a new government. It is cheating the people of this country!

Recently, the SPLA factor, which some government officials denied and others accepted, featured again. Why can you not come up with a policy that we can understand? The SPLA factor we have all understood and we know it has been a factor in exacerbating conflict in Northern Uganda. 

Mr Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, I also want to know why the people of Northern Uganda continue to pay taxes when we know very well these people never settle down to do any developmental activity. The people live with their bags, because in the evening they go to sleep in the bush. They come back in the morning to cook and eat whatever little there is. So, they have asked me to come and find out why they continue to pay taxes. 

Those are the issues I wanted to raise, but before I go, Mr Speaker, I am begging the Attorney General to give me his legal opinion so that I can go and sleep when I am settled. Thank you.

DR MATOVU BYATIKE (Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable Members. I have got a few points to mention, and I will be brief. 

The first is; I would like to thank the government for its policy of partnership with Non Governmental Organisations. I think this is a very good idea and a very sensible kind of policy. It has helped this country in major areas, for instance health and education, especially in the extension of aid. It is very sensible indeed. I encourage the government to continue like that, knowing that it cannot take on everything. In that spirit they look for allies who can do some of the work for them. 

I move on to the bilateral assistance the government is encouraging in institutions. If I can talk about Makerere, government has been assisting it to get bilateral agreements or contracts from which the institution has been benefiting quite a lot. For instance, the Norwegians, the Swedes and the Japanese have extended a lot of assistance. But that should not replace the assistance that government should be giving such institutions. 

If the Norwegians are putting up a building at Makerere for instance, that should not make government say, “well why do you no use the little money you get from privately sponsored students to rehabilitate Lumumba Hall?” That should not be the issue at all! Let the government fulfil its obligations and continue assisting the institutions.

Thirdly, I am going to talk about the municipalities. Every time we talk of poverty alleviation, our mind rushes to rural areas. There are poor areas in the municipalities, or call it the urban areas. This is something that the government has to think very seriously about, and help them with. 

For instance, in Entebbe I can talk about the fish industry there. I know that government borrowed money for the fish industry just before we went on recess, but I would like to see more. Why do we not assist those factories that are processing fish in Entebbe to such a level that they can export more quality fish? I know the product is very much on demand in Europe, for example. 

Why does the Minister of Tourism, Trade and Industry not help the tourist industry in the urban areas; advertise them in our Embassies, in our High Commissions and so on? This is the type of thing that the government can do for the urban areas at least, and people will benefit from such arrangements.  

I would like to tackle the question of security. I am just wondering why the government cannot enter into a kind of collaboration or partnership between the government security organs and the private ones? That will go a long way in checking the thuggery and robbery that is going round. If the private and government agencies work together, they could come up with a working scheme that would definitely check the crime that is taking place in our urban areas!

Finally, I would like to talk, very briefly, about the micro finance system in this country. Some of these micro-financing agencies, especially the women’s groups, have turned out to be a nightmare for the women in our constituencies. They are badly sensitised, and they give them conditions, which they do not understand. If you lend a market woman Shs 200,000 and you expect her to pay back after one or two weeks, that is a real nightmare and a nuisance. They cannot get the money to pay back after only two weeks. So, I think government has got to study the workings of these macro-financing institutions a little more closely. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MS ALICE ALASO (Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In my simple understanding of the Budget Speech, it should indicate how government policies are finally going to be implemented. Along that line, I am going to make about four observations. 

The first thing that I noted is the aspect of fiscal decentralisation and strategy, and transferring resources to the districts. Mr Speaker, it has become common that the Ministry of Finance, I do not know whether by default or design, sends some monies to the districts a few days before the end of the Financial Year. Then they expect the districts and their accounting officers to use that money by the end of the month. 

Money can, for example, be sent on the 25th, and they are expected to have used and accounted for it by the 30th if not, then the money goes back to the centre. I am grateful for these provisions because I hope at the end of the day it is going to save the local councils, and even politicians from the serious embarrassment.  But I also wish to state that I think the strategy can be there but most of these I think are a result of some kind of inefficiency in Ministry of Finance. 

We have always had a feeling that money should be sent in time and accounted for in time but then, how comes money is sent and within two or three days you expect these people to do some magic? I think it is a deliberate way of encouraging people to be corrupt in one way or the other. Take this money; hide it somewhere and you know - because there is that temptation. I pray that Ministry of Finance tries to become a little more efficient when it comes to the transfer of resources to the districts.

The other thing is that I know in this country we have the national gender policy but the guidelines Ministry of Finance gives, especially when it comes to the PAF funding to the districts - the way it is presented, it is as if there is no national gender policy in this country. The guidelines are so strict that if you are thinking of a district, for instance, trying to sensitise the community on the girl-child, on school dropouts, you cannot use the monies that are sent.  

You cannot even get your donor partners - in Soroti District we have the Netherlands funding. You cannot even get the partners to help you to go into the community; but this is a country with a national gender policy. It is self-defeating, unless maybe I am educated otherwise, it is self-defeating to build so many classrooms, talk about such a high enrolment and then you are doing nothing to ensure that the girl-children stay at school.

Mr Speaker, my colleagues have talked about promotion of strategic exports, especially the marketing bit of it. I just wish to add briefly that it looks like there is very little that is being done to research on markets. The information flow is so inadequate. All the peasants hear in this country is that “grow Vanilla”, and then after two days suddenly Government discovers there is no market for Vanilla.  The following morning they will tell all the peasants to grow maize, and then the following morning there is no market for maize!  Nobody is held accountable for some of these statements.  Now, they are telling people to grow Cotton! 

I come from Soroti, where people are being told to grow cotton but if you look at the expenses involved in the growing of one acre of cotton, and the final outcome from that exercise, honestly, Mr Speaker, you will see that this is terrible robbery on the life of the peasant because, if you are going to put in Shs100,000 and then you get Shs50,000 after you have sold the cotton, you would rather not have gone into cotton growing!

I still want to see a situation where we are assured that these are the market projections, and if you go into cotton growing between this time and the next one, you are going to have this.  Otherwise, it becomes like playing on people’s minds, taking them for a ride and not even considering what will come of their efforts, their little labour, their time and all that.  

The other thing I wish to comment on is the provision in the Budget Speech on page 14, which talks about higher education, and focusing specifically on the financially disadvantaged students. The majority of the disadvantaged students in this country are orphans, and Government is yet to come up with an orphan policy.  One thing I am so sure of is that nobody knows the total number of orphans in this country. Nobody has bothered to document the causes. 

We only hear “approximately this out of HIV/AIDS”; nobody is telling us “approximately this out of wars”!  Nobody is saying “this out of the raids”. Nobody is saying we have so many orphans in this country that if nothing is done to come up with a policy on orphans in this country, the orphans are likely to turn into a major disaster situation. By the time we will realise what is happening, I think it will be beyond our ability to cope with the magnitude of the orphan problem in this country. 

I really want to appeal to Government to give us the basic data. How many orphans are we talking about, how are we planning for them, how are we looking at the future?  Otherwise, without that, it looks like we are just groping in the darkness.

Mr Speaker, the other thing I wish to mention is on land and natural resources. In the Budget Speech we are talking about the security of land tenure.  What does this security of land tenure mean to the Ugandan woman when the Co-ownership Bill is lost somewhere? (Applause) Nobody is showing us where this Co-ownership Bill disappeared from and the Ugandan women continue to toil day and night. We produce but we do not have control, we produce but we cannot predict into the future. If Government is committed to this statement of security of land tenure, why doesn’t it come up with that lost bill and clause so that the women are encouraged to make their input into production? (Applause)

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I wish to make a very simple and brief comment on the issues of insecurity. I think the inception of this Operation Iron Fist missed out a very important thing.  My colleague, hon. Amongi has told us the two objectives. I think the first objective should not have been arresting Kony; it should not have been any other thing but protecting the lives of Ugandans. Arresting Kony, demobilising him would have come second or third, but now in the obsession we have of arresting Kony, many more Ugandans are losing their lives. We appeal to Government, and especially the Ministry of Defence, to revise this strategy, and think that the protection of life should be objective number one.  I thank you.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA (Kabula County, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me this chance also to contribute. I will make a few remarks and observations about the budget.  

My colleague yesterday talked about tariff barriers, I will talk about non-tariff barriers that have affected revenue collection, and this has been a problem, which has not been addressed. For instance, you find that the exchange rate of URA is the same as on the open market.  For a businessman buying a dollar on the open market bringing goods at the same rate, you find it causes a high price. In doing so, nobody is buying; this businessman cannot go back to bring more goods.  

The second area I want to comment on is taxation and tax administration. The problem within taxation is that there is a tendency of over taxing some areas. For instance, motor vehicle importation. If you analyse from 1996 up to 2002, there has been excise duty on particular motor vehicles, which the Minister of Finance calls “luxury”. You have been seeing some Dudu vehicles imported.  They are introducing excise duty of 20 per cent on them. They are targeting about three billion shillings but since 1996 up to 2000, that excise duty could not be introduced. We could expect a revenue collection of more than the 3 billions shillings targeted because when you check the statistics of URA, we had an average monthly importation of these Toyota Dudus of 200 per month, and each Dudu was paying over 2.3 million shillings as tax. 

Two, the conflict between URA and SRPS:  SRPS do a very good job but the problem is, they are not trained to collect tax.  You find a businessman has imported goods, he goes to a proper revenue officer who assesses the businessman, he releases him to go but on his way he finds an SRPS man, he takes him back to the assessor in URA. The URA man says to the businessman, I have released you, why don’t you go? Then the SRPS man refuses. What happens next?  The businessman goes to the Court of Appeal, which takes time and in the process, he is delayed.  

When you look at page 9 of the President’s Address on the State of the Nation, the President is complaining about delays in importation.  So, this is an area the Finance Minister has to address.

Another point on that is the motivation of our officers.  SRPS is paid highly but the motivation for URA is not there. I remember, in 1992, these were the highly paid officers by then. The last one was paid 800 dollars by then but now when you compare it with 350 dollars it is little money!  So, we need to review that area so that the tax collectors are motivated to collect.

Another area is over protection of our industries. Here I will talk about chapter 17.03, sugar imported here.  Why put excise duty of 20 per cent, import duty of 10 per cent, put VAT, put withholding tax, Import License Commission, all that for importation of sugar?  Here you know it is a must to import sugar because our industries cannot satisfy the demand. So, if you put strict tariff barriers on importation of sugar when the local industries cannot satisfy the demand, then there is a monopoly. 

Secondly, the Minister of Finance has not found out why, as they are complaining, that when you import sugar that the other factories out are subsidizing their business community.  Maybe the technology we are using here is not monitored in order to be improved on.  With all that, Mr Speaker, I thank you.

PROF. EPHRAIM KAMUNTU (Sheema County South, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I want to add my voice to those who have thanked the Minister of Finance for the presentation of the budget, and I also want to concur with the general issue. Security is a pre-condition for development and macro-economic stability and development.

THE SPEAKER: But please, restrict your speech.  You have four minutes.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Yes, I am just going to be very quick.  I have a couple of areas, which are critical, and they have not been sufficiently raised on the Floor. The first one relates to the personal income tax threshold.  

Mr Speaker, the threshold has been held at Shs130,000 per month for nearly five years, and the consumer price index during this period has increased to over 15,16, 20 per cent. For the threshold to be kept at Shs130,000 when the consumer price index has increased, it means the purchasing power of the income remaining is diluted or eroded to the extent of the consumer price index. And if it is not increased, it means the people - in fact, the whole exercise is going to counter the objective of fighting poverty because the income cannot be sufficient to buy the people the basic needs.  

I think, Mr Minister, you really need to look at that threshold. The threshold is too low; we need to increase it. In fact, if you wanted to go by proportion, if the consumer price index goes by 16 per cent, at least the threshold should shift to 160 or 180 in order for the purchasing power of the income group of that category to be maintained. This is the real issue; there is no debate.  I mean this is obvious. This is point number one.  

Point number two relates to second-hand vehicles.  With effect from September 2002, all second-hand vehicles imported in the country will have to be inspected and certified by a competent authority in the country of origin. Mr Speaker, I am not against control of second-hand vehicles imported, but what the Minister should specify is, to whom are we going to pay, if the authority certifying these vehicles is in the country of origin? 

It means Ugandan importers will be paying to the authority outside and, therefore, increasing the prices here when we are paying outside. You are taking us to the time when we had SGS and importers complained.  I think if you want, just put a year’s limitation but do not allow us to pay a foreigner to increase prices here when the foreign exchange is going outside the country. It goes counter to your effort to increase the balance of payment position, it goes counter to the price control here, it goes counter to the inflation exercise, and I think you do not want us to do that because you are taking us where we came from with SGS.  

The third point relates to export strategy. You have in the Government, strategic intervention for exports. You really want to encourage exports in order to increase the balance of payment support in order to increase your reserves, and indeed for stability and growth.  Now when you impose 15 per cent levy on prices of all raw hides and skins leaving the country, you are putting an export tax, which means it goes counter to your strategic intervention. You want to export and at the same time you are putting a levy on what you are exporting, is that not going against your export strategic intervention? Mr Minister, you need to explain to us why this one, and of what importance is this one.

Finally, I would like to comment on the duty you have imposed on petroleum prices. If your interest is indeed – and we commend you for controlling inflation - fuel is an input literally in every economic activity across the country. The moment you put these taxes on transportation, you increase the price literally of everything, and it works against your effort in controlling inflation.  

Mr Minister, I want to thank you for all that you have done. I think you should also look more at accommodation in hotels and tourist lodges as another area if you want to promote tourism as a source of your exports. This is another area, which you really need to look at.  

We are making these contributions, Mr Minister, to compliment your effort and to draw attention to those areas that really require your attention.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR NATHAN NANDALA MAFABI (Budadiri West, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I saw the Budget for 2002/2003 with high expectations. First of all, the Budget of 2001/2002 was never attained, but we increased the one of 2002/2003 to a higher value. What market forces are we going to apply to see that we attain the Budget estimates? Is there theft going to be done? Are some people going to bring in money? I do not see where we are going to get it. 

We are talking about URA increasing revenue. I would suggest that we look at expenditure leakages before we talk about the URA collections.  What should a modern Government do?  It should have at least an economic policy, which has the following: 

1. One, which aims at improving the standard of living of the Ugandans. We are talking of poverty, 35 out of 100 are poor.  When you go to Sironko, the reverse is true, 95 out of 100 are poor. From where do you compute the 35 out of 100 being poor?

2. A policy, which ensures full employment so that the people and resources are used very well.  Ugandans are finished walking on the streets! We have grown maize and we are not selling it, what are you talking about on full employment?

3. One that lessens economic inequality. I do not know how you compute your GDP here. You are talking of 6.6 per cent, now an average of 7 per cent, when there is a lot of inequality. You look at houses, maybe in Kololo, Naguru and Muyenga and you measure GDP. You price maize at 150/= when we are selling it at 30/=, and you increase your GDP. The inequality is so high.

People in the villages are dying of poverty, they are dying because of lack of health services, lack of water, and UPE is a disaster; we are producing people for quantity not quality! Where are we going? Do you want to rule we who have not gone to school? Is that a deliberate policy to rule the people who are not educated? 

You are supposed to provide social security, where is our social security now? Even NSSF is going, people in the north are dying; I do not know where we are heading. 

We are supposed to ensure that there are sufficient exports to pay for imports; this means favourable terms of trade. Professor has just talked about taxing exports. Now, how are we going to get the money to pay for the exports, because the exports are going to become more expensive?  

How do you compute GDP? Of course, GDP is the total services and goods produced in a country.  Now, for us we overprice our maize so that we get a very high GDP, and we use the two percent to get the Defence expenditure. Instead, the rate of GDP could maybe be two per cent! You could talk of negative inflation because we are using crops, but the rate of inflation is higher. 

This economic growth, which is repressive, which we are talking about, which looks impressive is assuming that there is an economic downturn for the effects, which took place in the 70s and 80s. Is this true? These are just paper figures; the reality is that there is a problem. 

Our budgets are donor-funded to the tune of 52 per cent. If we really have economic growth, why should we have a total percentage of donor funds for recurrent and about 100 percent for capital expenditure? Is that economic growth? -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: What is the way forward?

MR MAFABI: I am going to mention the way forward.  We should have realistic figures of Gross Domestic Product so that we are sure of it.  Instead of talking of seven per cent, let us get the real one, which should be two per cent, and live with it other than talking about a lie.

Now let me talk about poverty. We have got micro-finance and it is good that it has come in place, but this is serious robbery. There are organisations called FAULU, FOCUS and others; they lend money to the peasants at six per cent per month, which is 72 per cent per annum. 

We are borrowing money here from World Bank and giving to the rural micro-finance projects at 0.75 per cent per annum, and for us now we are lending at 72 per cent. What do we mean? Is that not theft of our people? 

I will refer to the previous Budget, paragraph 56 where the Minister said that every parish is going to get at least 10 million shillings as a revolving fund; that is, 5000 parishes will request for 50 billion shillings. Members of Parliament, which parish got 10 million shillings? And the Budget was made for 50 billion! 

You are telling us we are fighting poverty, when we are making budgets and not fighting the poverty we are aiming at. Is this Government for us or for itself?  Now you are talking about –(the bell rings_)- oh, Mr Speaker, I am about to finish, do not worry -(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I am not worried. I am only checking you on time.  

MR MAFABI: On the destruction of forests, I never saw anything from the Minister about forests.  Forests are being destroyed at a very first rate in Uganda, on the average of 50 hectares per annum. This is from a NEMA report, which says in 2000 and 2001, 50 hectares of forests were destroyed, and we lost 5.7 million dollars because of that destruction. 

There is no deliberate move here on how to handle forests. Even recently we gave away Butamira; again further destruction of forests. Are we really pro-people or what?

On privatisation, in the PAC report -(Maj. Butime rose_)- I do not need information; I am well informed. The PAC report I saw for the year ending June 2001 says that 111 enterprises were privatised by 30 June 2001.  Now, I am seeing in the Minister’s speech that by 30th June 2002, 110 had been privatised. Are we going up or are we going down? Are you retrieving? This means there is a big problem. You are not even giving us -(Prof Kasenene rose_)- well I can take yours –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, no, you wind up because you should have wound up.

MR MAFABI: Okay.  When you talk about it, you are not telling us how much money we have got or how much we have spent. But I remember, the PAC report of 2001 said that we had sold enterprises at 224 billion shillings, we expended 152 billion and we had borrowed 48 million dollars to also be used in privatisation. In effect, we were at negative by 30 June 2001. Where are we now?  

Why don’t we continue selling; instead we rather give them away by making loses in privatisation!  We have the former Central Tender Board, we have budgeted 5.3 billion shillings for it, a body that is illegally here. We have bodies, which exist illegally –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, I have really given you extra time, now you are starting new points.

MR MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am about to wind up. I am summarizing. We should see no reason why we should budget for the former CTB, which does not exist, and leave bodies that exist without money. 

I suggest to the Ministry of Finance that you go to the drawing board, get right figures rather than coming up here with wrong statistics about poverty, about GDP.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

COL FRED BOGERE (Army Representative): I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the House as well.  Mine is about three points, and I will be rotating around the speech of His Excellency the President and the Budget speech by the hon. Minister. I ought not to repeat issues that have been raised by my colleagues, but probably I have a few questions or clarifications that I will seek from the honourable Minister of Finance. 

In regard to poverty, I was wondering whether the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Agriculture could devise a way, in spite of the liberalisation policy, to protect our ordinary peasants from the exploitation of the middle men, particularly in regard to food crops like maize, beans and the rest. 

The reason I am raising this is because at least three or four months ago, there was a time when our maize was down to 40 shillings or 50 shillings. I would have imagined that given the fact that the World Food Programme has declared us a regional basket, the rationale was that we are assumed to have a lot of food around here. 

I would have expected that in spite of the liberalisation policy, Government would come in and at least set some basic minimum prices for these food crops. So, if I am a middle man and if I cannot buy at a particular rate, in that case Government would come in and at least utilise the silos in Jinja, in Kawempe and probably the ones in Lira and the rest. After that, this grain could be sold to World Food Programme, since most of the regions are now disturbed areas, so that at least our people are not extremely exploited by the business community.  

I have seen some figures, and I have seen 215 million dollars as investment projects in 2001. I request that we be informed, and the various echelons of leadership in the country be informed, because it helps in the dissemination of this information. We would also know exactly which projects are being talked about, rather than coming here and contradicting ourselves as to whether they are there or not. At least it would be good if we were informed that such a project is in such a place for so much money and it has so many jobs.  

Again, related to poverty, there is a programme, which has been talked about, about equipment and machines from EADB and DFCU. I assume that this is supposed to be through hire purchase. If my interpretation is not at fault, my understanding of hire purchase is that it normally operates in highly monetised economies. 

Two, such equipment is better utilised in large plantations. I wonder what Government is going to do in view of the segmented land policy in the country, and lack of ownership of large portions of land by the farmers.

Another point I wanted to raise is about UPE.  Certainly, UPE is a very good programme, but my concern with it is about the automatic promotion.  I would suggest that Government revisits the element of automatic promotion because it is being misunderstood and over politicised in the villages. 

At times when you look at the reports in the rural areas, you see a child who has got 12% in one of the subjects, then 04%, 06%, 11% and the word down there is “promoted”.  I think we should revisit that also, so that they do not over politicise it, and we move on quality. That could help us achieve at least qualitative results from the programme. Otherwise, it is a very good programme.

I would like to end up by dwelling a bit on the issue of reconciliation. You heard the remarks on this Floor, and you have heard what is going on in talk shows and in the electronic and print media. More so, I will refer to the remarks that have been made on this Floor of Parliament.  

I have the view that it is high time all of us, at our respective levels of leadership, considered a very serious attitude towards accommodating each other. We must accept our differences and accept to co-exist -(Applause).  

I would, therefore, wish to support vehemently, the position by hon. Babu. I also wish to appeal to members of the House, particularly the Executive, to consider seriously the deep-rooted sentiments that have been expressed here. They are not coming out of the blue. This might not only be a military question but also a political question, which we ought to address.  

I will not go beyond that, but I will suggest that probably we could consider funding the Amnesty Commission to become a truly truth and reconciliation commission. I thank you - (Applause).

MRS SALAAMU MUSUMBA (Bugabula South, Kamuli):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is very interesting to address an empty House on the matter of the Budget. Nevertheless, I am glad that I will add my voice to many of my colleagues and be registered in the Hansard as having made the contribution. (Applause). So, this is very –(Interjection)

THE SPEAKER: At least the Minister of Finance is here. (Laughter).

MRS MUSUMBA: I am glad about that. Mr Speaker, I really want to congratulate the Executive for implementing the Budget Act. The experience I have had in this Parliament is that 50 percent of the contents of the laws that we make here is disregarded. I am so impressed that the Executive has been able to deal with the deadlines, and the Budget Committee has also been vigilant in ensuring that this relationship in allocation of resources between the two arms of government has been healthy. I want to address myself to very few issues since many of the matters I would have wanted to raise have been dealt with. I want to talk about taxation and tax measures.  

When I recall my Economics lessons, I do not remember that the purpose of taxation was to get money from the rich and re-distribute it to the poor.  When I look at this budget, it seems to be doing the opposite.  The focal point of the budget as stated on Page 28, is to stimulate the economy, to strengthen tax administration and to raise tax revenue.  

When you look at many of the proposals made, which are so scanty, you wonder what Government contracts are being given to people with VAT registration means in stimulating the economy.  Because, I thought that was obvious that everybody was being monitored to pay VAT. But this admission by the Ministry that there are some companies that they have not supervised effectively and now they are going to do so, to me it looks like they are regularizing something that they have known for so long.

Likewise, I want to add my voice to hon. Kamuntu by wondering aloud, whether the Government of Japan, where most of our secondhand vehicles come from, has asked for extra revenue from the Government of Uganda for us to think that we could actually do business for other people, except for the people of Uganda.  Using these secondhand vehicles in whatever state they will be in, I think it is good for this economy.  It is good because we are able to buy spare parts even from these junk things.  If it has worked for helicopters, I am sure it can work for vehicles. And I would like to see that this is removed so that we leave Ugandans to enjoy the little life we have –(Applause).  All sorts of things have killed us, and I think whether junk or what, we would gladly take it.

So much has been said about secondhand clothes and I do not want to dwell more about it, but there is a missing link within the social development of this country by us not looking at the impact of this tax, which the Government has merely said is modest.  They wish it away by saying, “a modest five per cent”; five per cent is high! I wish it were a modest of one per cent.  

In my constituency I know that used clothes are not in competition with the textile industry because the children in my constituency actually are not able to afford a blanket made of cotton.  So, they rely on used clothes which are torn by the mother to cover these children.  Even then, they have not been able to be covered fully, and so we have the highest percentage of infant mortality. 

When the Government says now they are increasing by a modest five per cent, I think they are not in touch with the people they lead, because it means this is a tax against children. I will not say women because I have never seen a busuuti – it is the only thing that is not in the used cloths, the traditional busuuti we wear.  But the children of this country will go naked. I know millions of children who are not able to wear underwear from birth because they cannot afford. So, I would like the ministry to look at the social implications of this tax because it is going to hurt the children of this country, and I do not think we want to achieve that.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, hon. Salaamu Musumba, for giving way for this information. I would like to inform you that if the Government increases taxes on mivumba by that percentage, we are going to have, looking at the economies of scale, the locally produced textile here increase the sales.  Once the sales have increased, then we shall employ more Ugandans.  Once we have employed more Ugandans because of the increased economies of scale – large production – the price of locally manufactured textile material will go down, even below mivumba.  So, I want to inform and encourage you to support this small tax.  Thank you.

CAPT. MUKULA: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform my very good friend, hon. Musumba, that I had been a Chairman of the Uganda Importers, Exporters and Trade Association for five years before I got to this position, and also a patron. I would like to inform the House that one container, for example, of 40 feet is in the range of about 23,000 to 24,000 pounds.  When you have taxed fully the amount of revenue you generate, the total cost here, CIF, after paying taxes is in the range of about 82 million shillings, depending on what you have imported - whether shirts, mixed products, whatever.  

I want to inform the House and my honourable colleague that the profit being made by the importers - and I have been in that trade before and I know I am talking with honesty - the profit you make in one 40 feet container as an importer has always been within the range of Shs10m to Shs12m.  With this tax now that has been imposed, the margin as I talk today has reduced to between Shs8m to Shs9m.  

If anybody doubts this, I am prepared to take you down and you go through anybody else who imports things, and you get the correct value.  I am talking about this with due honesty. The margin has now been reduced for the importer, and most of the money was going to the importer, not the beneficiary.

THE SPEAKER: There is one issue which did not come up – I think it came up from the contribution of some Members to the effect that the type of cloth you find in mivumba is not competing with the cotton production you are going to get here.  You do not expect these people to produce a cotton coat or trousers or a tie. I think that is something you need to explain.  Is there a competition?  Because the type of the products of the mivumba is not the same with what you are going to produce here unless you are going to restrict them on cotton shirts, cotton ties and something like that.

MR KAKOOZA: I think the real information is what the honourable colleague, Mukula, has said.  This Chapter 63 of worn-out clothes is not classified. You find that somebody who imports shirts of cotton mixed with coats is put at the same level with a man in the village who is interested in a shirt and a man in town who is putting on a coat. You have not helped them; you are putting them on the same footing.  

So, the best way to do it is for the Ministry of Finance to bring a classification that at least if you put a tax on suits, it is put on there as excise duty on suits and then on shirts it should be removed because we have no manufacturers here who can satisfy the demand of our poor peasants.  So, if it is five per cent increase on secondhand clothes, it is too much.  

You put import duty of 15 percent; you put excise duty 15 per cent; you put 17 per cent, that is tax on tax; you put four per cent; you put two per cent and then penalty of 2.5 domestic VAT.  Where do you expect the businessman to get profit?  It is a matter of classification; the Ministry of Finance should help.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Salaamu Musumba, would you like to complete your contribution?

MRS MUSUMBA: Yes, I would like to complete, Mr Speaker. It is the failure of Government to do a social analysis of the impact of this economic taxation policy that is bothering me.  Because you are not taxing trees but you are having an impact on the general population. If their incomes are so low that they have in the past failed to buy a used cloth of 100 shillings, now add five per cent; really, are you doing justice to the young people of this country?

I want to give another example of uniforms When UPE had just started, the President gave a directive that no child should be sent out of school because of lack of a uniform, and we know in our villages the Sunday best of every child of an ordinary Ugandan family is a uniform.  Now, if we have accepted as a country that an average family anywhere cannot afford a uniform, then where do you get the notion that the textile industry you are promoting today will thrive, when actually there is nothing to protect?  

I want to propose that the taxation system should be very friendly, because you cannot be on one hand talking about poverty eradication and on the other hand increasing the burden on the cost of living of an ordinary Ugandan.  I would have been happy if the public was informed that actually this revenue would help to feed the children of UPE; that this additional tax would help to improve the people in the villages because over 60 percent of UPE children countrywide are malnourished. So, I wish to propose that if we cannot change this tariff, can we channel that money to UPE schools and give food to these children, because it is a crime against humanity to educate children that are not fed?

I want to talk about two ministerial policy issues in the Ministry of Health.  We are basking in the glory of world acclaim of how we have succeeded in fighting HIV/AIDS, and really I want to applaud the President and all the people who have worked.  But, continually I see that this acclaim we are getting worldwide is instead becoming a liability to this nation.  

Mr Speaker, without being misunderstood, I think HIV/AIDS has become just a political matter; there is politics around HIV/AIDS.  It is about how to get aid into this country, it is a tourist attraction of late because everybody is coming to see the success story of Uganda; everybody is coming to do consultancy about HIV/AIDs.  It has even attracted the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States to come to Uganda to see this success story. 

Having worked in HIV/AIDS for ten years, I was disappointed to go to Mulago where the Secretary to the Treasury of the United States was said to have visited and been impressed, only to find that it has not moved from where I left it seven years ago.  This success story we are talking about is only in Kampala. But then, even the quality is falling.  AIDS has migrated to the villages and there is little service, if any, to the people who are dying daily of HIV/AIDS.  Now we are busy basking in this glory and forgetting to use this opportunity to build health infrastructure.  

I was equally disappointed to hear the Ministry of Finance saying that we cannot accept aid in the health sector because it is going to upset the macro economic picture.  What a contradiction! You cannot have so many people dying and undocumented because you failed to take the opportunity to restructure the health infrastructure in this country.  I do not want to lament about Kamuli Hospital; it is seven years now since that story of Kamuli Hospital.  

THE SPEAKER: Wind up please.

MS MUSUMBA:  Mr Speaker, I want to say that can we turn this resource on HIV/AIDS to improve the general well being of our health in this country.

Finally, sometime ago my people who served in World War II told me that they were being registered for a package. Some even sold their cows to come and make the journey to Bombo.  Is this part of the money that somebody ran away with?   What has happened, Mr Speaker?  I thank you.

Lt. GEN. TUMWINE: Mr Speaker, I wanted to give the honourable Member who has just been holding the floor information on the issue of the World War II veterans.  

There are two categories of people who were serving the Uganda Government: those who were serving in the Kings African Rifles and those are under the British High Commission, and they are the ones we have been looking after as opposed to those who were serving under the armies of the Uganda Government, who are supposed to be looked after by the Uganda Government.  

I am in charge of the Veterans Association: I am explaining that while all the others are being considered, those under the Kings African Rifles have always been taken care of, and the British Government, if anything, was the one responsible.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lt. Gen. Tumwine, the issue is this: some people came in the country and started registering them. I think they must have come in the country with the permission of the Uganda Government, or with the knowledge of Uganda Government.  They went to all districts registering these people.  Now, when hon. Salaamu Musumba goes to the constituency, people say, “these people came, they registered us and promised this and nobody is there to inform us what happening”.  That is why I think she is raising it so that she can go back – so is she going to say you served the British and they registered you, it is not the concern of this Government and the British are not here to give the explanation? I think that is her concern.  

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and hon. Musumba. What General Elly Tumwine was saying is what used to happen and it was stopped.  The President was approached by these kawonawos: those are ones popularly known as the ex-servicemen. He was approached by so many people from almost all the districts of Uganda and he decided to include them amongst the ex-combatants who fought in Uganda.  When he accepted, the pressure was too much and the Ministry of Defence had little money. 

We had paid some people in West Nile, the people of Kiboga heard that we paid them; those of Kamuli also heard that some people were paid. So, we paid those people before a conclusive documentation was made.  We decided to carry on with the documentation because this was a requirement by Ministry of Finance.  You cannot budget for people whose number you do not know. 

We had concluded the documentation but we found out that our list was not conclusive. We included FEDEMU, FUNA, FOBA all those organisations, which I cannot even name, because we knew that it would be raised on the Floor that ‘Why did you leave out such and such a group?” So, that was the dilemma in the Ministry of Defence. 

We think we have concluded the list, including all those groups of the ex-combatants who fought in Uganda. We hope that we shall get the money from the Ministry of Finance.

I want to apologise that maybe we put people’s expectations very high. People sold their animals to travel to Bombo to start chasing these payments that were not ready. We tried to give out information, but from what I have gathered from the Floor, this information did not reach the deepest points in our constituencies. So, I pledge that we shall endeavour, first of all, to write to all of you MPs. I will put the explanation in your pigeonholes so that when you go back to your constituencies you will help us disseminate the information, and that will save the situation. Thank you very much.

MR OGOLA: I just want to know from the hon. Minister of State for Defence about the remarks she has made. In the event that some of those people you have registered may have died, would their offsprings benefit by obtaining the funds due to them?

MS NANKABIRWA: Yes. This is not the first time that we pay money to people who have died. We have been handling pension for the deceased. You get a letter from the Administrator General and from the family members recommending you as a person who will be in charge of receiving that money.

CAPT. MIKE MUKULA: Mr Speaker, we in the Front Bench really endeavour to come in here and respond to certain questions that we think are important and sensitive to the nation. We also take concern that hon. Members must be given time to articulate their position, and there are points we sit back and take note of. But sometimes when we rise up to give information and we are denied that opportunity, sometimes we feel that our service here is not appreciated.  Mr Speaker, I feel that as a matter of procedure, you guide us on the way forward.

THE SPEAKER: Well, it depends - In fact, sometimes you have been coming up, and the Members have been accepting the information. Sometimes they have not been accepting information, and sometime the Chair may notice that the information is going to prolong the contribution. 

Somebody has been talking for ten minutes, once you come in, then it can take some extra five minutes. Then another one comes in, you take another five minutes or so. But you are right. Actually you are here to assist us to get information when it is necessary and that will be encouraged. But sometimes the person on the Floor may refuse the information, and that is his right according to our rules. 

According to our Rules the information or clarification is in the territory of the person on the Floor. So, that is why you see sometimes because they are aware of this, when you say information, you are ignored simply because he does not want to - maybe she/he will be distracted, then he refuses. That one, really the Chair has nothing to do. But we shall encourage the ministers to be present and to give information whenever it is necessary. She has gone?

AN HON. MEMBER: She has taken leave Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Oh well. It is now almost half past 6.00p.m.  But before we end, we had a problem in running our accounts. Because the financial year had started, certain things are to be done by the Secretary to Treasury. But those things have been finalised and now we are in position to have our funds disbursed. Therefore, I think the cheques, which should have been paid sometime ago, will be ready and so you should not worry. However, we regret that we were not prompt in making these payments as we used to do. But you should not be worried now.  

We have now come to the end of today’s business. I thank you for the contributions you made, both on the first motion and then on this one. I think it is now time to adjourn. 

The House is adjourned until Tuesday, 23 July at 2.00p.m. I thank you very much.

(The House rose at 6.25p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 23 July 2002 at 2.00p.m.)

