Tuesday, 13 July 2010

Parliament met at 3.02 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)
 
The House was called to order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you. Today in the visitors’ gallery is a delegation of Members of Parliament from the Republic of Malawi. I have hon. Prof. Donton Mkandawire, MP; hon. Ralph Jooma, MP, Leader of Delegation; hon. Christina Chiwoko, MP; hon. Alfred Mwechumu, MP; hon. Makala Ngonzo, MP; Mr Renard Mapemba, Deputy Clerk of Parliament, Corporate Services;  Mr Dumisani Banda, Principal Human Resources Management Officer. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are welcome to the Parliament of Uganda. (Applause)

Hon. Members, it is a very sad moment when we reconvene. The entire country is in tears because of the senseless act that ended in the demise of over 80 people - Ugandans who were simply watching the World Cup but some senseless person just ended their life; and a number of them were seriously injured; they are in hospital. 

The Minister of Internal Affairs will be making a statement on this matter. But I thought that I should also make a brief statement on what happened.  We are really very sorry and we condemn those who did this senseless act that killed Ugandans. 

 I have received a message from the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association; it is addressed to me. It reads as follows: 

“I have learnt of the sad news in the media about the explosions that tore through crowds of people watching the World Cup finals at the Rugby Club and a restaurant in Kampala resulting in loss of life and injuries.

These painful and unfortunate incidences have left us with an immense feeling of sorrow for you … - you know they changed the system, sorry. Should I repeat or I continue? “… and the people of your good country. 

On behalf of the chairperson of the CPA, ministers in Malaysia, members of the Executive Committee, staff and on my own behalf, I wish to convey our heartfelt condolences to you for the deaths that have been caused by the explosions and for the injuries and any loss of property. 

We wish to join you in your prayers for the quick recovery of the injured and peaceful rest of the departed. 

Please, convey our condolences to Members of Parliament, Government Leaders and staff of your Parliament and the public of Uganda at large. 

Signed by Dr William Shija; Secretary-General.”

That is the message I have received. 

Hon. Members, I think it is proper at this time to stand up and observe a minute of silence.

(Members rose and observed a minute of silence.)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Rt Hon. Speaker and hon. Members, as you are all aware, on Sunday, the 11th day of July this year, three bombs went off at two public venues in our city. 

The first device went off at the Ethiopian Village Restaurant in Kabalagala at around 10.45 p.m.; 18 persons have been confirmed dead from this venue.

The second and third bombs went off at Kyadondo Rugby Grounds, Lugogo, at around 11.30 p.m.; 56 persons have been confirmed dead from this venue. This comes to a total of 74 deaths so far. 85 persons sustained serious injuries and others minor ones and are being treated at various hospitals in Kampala. Among the dead and injured ones are Americans, Irish, Ethiopians, Eritreans, Ugandans and other African nationalities. 

Mr Speaker, the Police responded immediately on receipt of these sad events and managed to rescue the survivors and take them to the hospitals. The bodies of the deceased were taken to Mulago hospital mortuary for preservation and for post mortem examination. 

The Police, assisted by other security agencies, promptly launched investigations into the bombings. You are very safe, don’t worry.

Colleagues, Government is determined to establish the nature and type of devices used; the persons behind these criminal acts and bring them to justice no matter who they are and no matter where they are. 

Government deeply regrets these sadist incidents and wishes to convey sincere condolences to the bereaved families and great sympathy to the injured, wishing them quick recovery.

In the mean time, the Government calls upon all persons to be vigilant and exercise maximum caution in their daily activities and co-operate with the Police to prevent recurrence of such regrettable events.

The public is encouraged to cooperate with Police for the provision of security for any planned public event as well as inform the Police of any suspicious activity or objects in their vicinity.

Indeed Government wants to thank the people of Makindye for their vigilance and co-operation that enabled the Police last evening to recover a potentially dangerous explosive device suspected to be of the same type as those that went off last Sunday night. Had this device gone off, it would have caused similar or more catastrophic damage! 

The Police have intensified public awareness drive on counter terrorism measures and these include, among others, the introduction of access control systems at all public places and physical searches.

Hon. Members, I wish to beg forgiveness for any inconvenience that may be caused to you; I hope you will understand why we are doing what we are doing, including coming in here in Parliament.

Security in all urban centres and all vulnerable installations has been beefed up, in addition to increased physical presence of security personnel in these areas. 

Indeed, Police has arrested about five suspicious characters since yesterday and they are being interrogated and you will be informed of the outcome of those interrogations.

A week of national mourning has been declared by the government starting today the 13th July and during this period, flags will, as usual, fly at half mast at all public buildings. 

The Police have set up the following toll free lines and I wish to appeal to the media to advertise these lines. For any person with useful information, either of what took place last Sunday or any suspicious characters as we said, volunteer to give us this information. 

We have one line at the CPS and the number is there in the statement. We have one at Mulago Casualty Unit -(Interjection)- Oh, for the Hansard? Okay, one at the Incident Room at CPS 0800 199088 and one at Mulago Casualty Unit 0800 199188; one at Uganda Media Centre 0800 199288.

Mr Speaker, this marks the end of the statement from the Minister of Internal Affairs in regard to these sad events. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

3.18
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Mr Speaker, I thank the hon. Minister for the statement from Government. The Opposition met this morning to consider the events of Sunday and subsequently prepared a small formal statement that I request to present to the House.

On the evening of 11th July, Ugandans of all walks of life joined their African brothers and sisters and the whole world to watch the 2010 World Cup Football final and to celebrate the historic and great success of the tournament that was held for the first time ever in Africa.

Unknown to our people, evil doers had chosen this very joyous day to cause mayhem, kill and maim ordinary Ugandans and football revellers and inflict fear and uncertainty among our people. That night, the evil terrorists detonated bombs amid revellers at Kyadondo Rugby Club and Ethiopian Village, Kabalagala that so far resulted in the death of 74 people, most of them Ugandans but also including Ethiopians, Eritreans, Americans and other unidentified foreigners and the injury of over 50 others.

We, the opposition, join Ugandans and all foreigners who lost loved ones in these devilish attacks, in mourning the untimely and tragic death and injury of these innocent people. We convey our deep and sincere condolences to the bereaved families and communities and we pray that the Almighty God grants eternal peace to the deceased and speedy recovery to the injured.

We condemn, in the strongest terms possible, the heartless, inhuman, cowardly and senseless attacks on our land and people by the bombers and their murderous Somali Al Shabaab sponsors who claimed responsibility for the bombings.

We reject all attempts by this despicable group to use violence to intimidate and divide us as a people and country and reaffirm our support for meaningful efforts to bring peace and unity to Somalia.

We commend all ordinary Ugandans, the medical personnel of Mulago National Referral Hospital, International Hospital Kampala and the hospitals and health units who responded patriotically and selflessly to the bombings and did everything possible to save the lives of our people.

We also commend the Police and other security agencies for their response to the bombings and for their collective efforts to save lives, maintain order and ensure security.

Be that as it may, we the Opposition note that on 05 July 2010, the leader of the Al Shabaab, Mohammed Abdi Godane, restated their threat to hit Uganda and Burundi and that this threat was well known to our security agencies. 

We also note that in spite of the standing threat and the extreme vulnerability during the World Cup final, no formal warning and security appeals were made by the Police or Government to alert Ugandans and to urge them to maintain caution.

We would like, therefore, to register our deep disappointment on the failure of Government to keep Ugandans on alert, and to honestly apologise to the country for the security lapses.

We also totally reject and condemn the callous attempt by the Inspector-General of Police, Major-General Kale Kayihura, to shift the blame for the bombings on the management of the two places bombed, and by hon. Amama Mbabazi, Minister for Security, on the delay in passing the Interception of Communication Bill – (Interjections)- We hold these two people fully responsible for the security lapses and demand that they do the only honourable thing and resign their positions. (Applause)

We the Opposition also note the fact that the deployment of the UPDF into Somalia was based on the collective commitment of Africa to support peace in that country, and on the pledge by countries such as Malawi, Ghana and Nigeria to provide troops for the peacekeeping. 

We further note the failure of other countries to deploy in Somalia that has made Uganda the focal country in this conflict.

In view of the above, we:

•	Urge Government to urgently review the country’s security in light of the Al Shabaab threats.

•	Urge the Government to formally petition the African Union meeting due in Kampala this month on the contribution of the other countries to the AMISOM Mission in Somalia in order to spread risks. (Applause)-(Interjections)-

Lastly, we seek an urgent formal meeting with the Government to review Uganda’s deployment in Somalia. We also urge all Ugandans to remain united in light of this tragedy and grave threat to our security and peace. I thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: I thank you very much. But you forgot to welcome the delegation from Malawi.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: My apologies. When the Rt. Hon. Speaker welcomed the delegation from the Malawi National Assembly, I had sought under communication from the Chair to formally welcome them. This is because two weeks ago, there was a Ugandan delegation, of which I was a part, to the Parliament of Malawi and the Speaker and Members of Parliament and Members of the Parliamentary Commission of the Parliament of Malawi gave us a great welcome. We felt extremely at home and we thought that at this moment, we should recognise their presence and welcome them. (Applause) 

We yesterday had a luncheon with this delegation and earlier on they were supposed to meet with you. I did convey your apologies and that of the Deputy Speaker for not being able to meet them yesterday. I thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Yes, my Member of Parliament –(Laughter)- hon. Kamya represents me here in Kampala.

3.27
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for informing the honourable members. In case they did not know, I absolutely enjoy being your Member of Parliament. 

I wish to thank the Minister for his statement. Mr Speaker, in our constituency Lubaga Division North, we lost six people; four of them at Kyadondo Rugby Ground and two in Kabalagala. All of these people, now deceased, were between the ages of 22 and 27. All of them had graduated between two to five years ago. They were young people who were all gainfully employed. As you know, the bulk of our constituency - most of them are from fairly simple backgrounds; from families that went the extra mile to educate their children to university level. 

These are very sad days for our country and particularly so for the bereaved families, some of which actually lost more than one person. I have heard of a family which lost four children who had gone together to watch this football match. My heart goes out to these families. 

What happened last Sunday could happen anywhere in the world. Indeed it even happened in the USA. So, it should not be time for pointing fingers at Government or anything like that -(Applause)- -(Interjections)- but, that does not take away the misgivings we have. I have three problems for which I need answers. 

Government’s capacity to investigate the horrendous acts given the number of non investigated crimes in this country. We have unresolved criminal acts; the bombs in Kasese, the bombs in Kampala, school fires and murders. There is so much –(Interjections)- and Kasubi! There is so much crime that is on the table of the Police and their investigating units which are not investigated to conclusion. What is the Police’s capacity to investigate this and therefore give us assurance that the minister is trying to give us? 

If the Police cannot even tell us who the Kiboko Squad are and yet they have even been seen in pictures – the Police tell us up to now they do not know who the Kiboko Squad are. It gives us a lot of sleepless nights when we get assurance that they are going leave no stone unturned to investigate and resolve this matter.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I stand up on a point of order. Our Rules of Procedure are very clear and says that the Speaker shall be heard in silence. Is it in order for the Minister of State for Security, hon. Amama Mbabazi –(Interjections)- -(Laughter)- no, Minister of Security, hon. Amama Mbabazi, to interfere with the environment of the Speaker when hon. Beti Kamya is making her contribution in contradiction of the rules that say that the Speaker shall be heard in silence, and yet a Member is making a very substantial contribution. Is the Minister in order? 

THE SPEAKER: I am the one – because there was some term here which I could not understand –(Laughter)- which is a security term and I wanted to find this out from him. Proceed.

MS KAMYA: Mr Speaker, we really need assurance that there is capacity in this country to investigate what happened which will lead us to finding a solution and perhaps protection for what is going to happen. What measures do we have for our children in school, churches and in other public places?

The coming times are difficult times. There are going to be a flurry of political activities. What should we expect? We have nominations in two months’ time – these are going to be times of great public attention and big numbers. We need to know from the minister – it is hard enough for any political activity to go on without the interference of police – whether this is not going to be an excuse for stoppage of every political activity or increase of harassment of political activists. We need answers; we need to know what the immediate future holds as we together mourn this death. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you too. Okay, can we hear from the shadow Defence minister? Okay, let us hear from hon. Alaso. But maybe we need to give ourselves time. Can we do four minutes or five? Five; that is okay.

3.34
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I join the rest of my colleagues in mourning the death of our beloved people who were brutally killed by these devilish people.

I would like to reflect on the events, in my view that preceded these attacks on our people. For the last one year or so we have repeatedly heard warnings from these terrorists groups – the Al Shabaab and whoever cared to speak. We heard that Uganda was under threats; that they were going to hit us. This is not coming as a surprise; it is going as something that Government knew about and which our security agencies too, knew about. Actually our Inspector-General of Police is on record to have said yesterday or today that they were even aware that there was going to be an attack on the people of Uganda. 

What bothers me is the fact that even with that full awareness, the security agencies in this country, the police and everybody else mandated with the responsibility to protect our lives did absolutely nothing. Every other time we engage them on media talk shows and even on the Floor here, they could just tell us that they were on top of the situation. Where are you now? Our people have died with you doing absolutely nothing to stop this death.

True, the entire world is under a terrorist threat, but good governments usually warn their people. They tell them about a looming terrorist attack so that people cannot go around drinking and playing. In this situation, we were not warned; our people were not warned. Even now, the government does not want to warn or assure us of full protection. That is very unfortunate.

Secondly, on 07 February 2007, the Minister of Defence came to this House seeking leave to pass resolution to deploy on Somalia. Yes, we supported this position, but it was on an understanding that there would be five other nations in this peacekeeping mission: that this would be an AU endeavour; he actually said that this would be a mission for the AU and we would build it with the rest of the countries making contributions, unfortunately, it has become a Ugandan mission.

I would like to support the position articulated by the Leader of the Opposition. We need to sit down with the Government of Uganda –(Interjections)– yes! No, I am building on that position, which says that we need to sit with the Government of Uganda and share our views with you over this issue. We would like to refocus on the African Union commitment. Without their commitment it makes us a very vulnerable group. 

I also would like to ask the Minister of Defence – because I have not seen any motion in this House seeking leave for the troops to be in Chad or the Central Africa Republic yet as we talk there are Ugandan troops in those countries. What are they doing there without the authorisation of this House? We have not authorised the deployment of any troops to the Central African Republic though to the best of my knowledge the troops are already there. I think we need help.

Finally, let me implore the Members of this House – maybe some of you are not abreast with the pain. In Soroti District, we have lost people. The Speaker of Soroti District Council was in Mulago. Some of you are treating this as a joking matter, but when this pain reaches you, you will feel so bad.

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I would like to raise a point of order in respect of what the honourable member holding the Floor has just said. She has made a statement, which is going to remain on the Hansard of Parliament that some Members of Parliament are handling the issue we are debating as a joking matter, which is unfortunate. I wonder whether she is in order to make such an allegation without substantiating who of us is doing that. Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: No, there is no one joking here; everybody is concerned with what happened. Yes, hon. Okupa.

3.39
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Kasilo County and on my own behalf, I want to send my deep and sincere condolences to the families that lost their dear ones and to the country.

I first got the information on this incident from an Old Boy of mine at Makerere University, a one Mr Benon Rukundo who called me saying he almost had died. He then went to give me the details of what had happened at Lugogo.

The next call I got was from the High Commissioner of South Africa to Lebanon. That was around mid night. I know that it took all of us by surprise, but I am a bit disappointed by some of our media houses especially the Government Uganda Broadcasting Corporation because I expected them to be the first media house to break this news. 

However, even after the President announcing a week of mourning - Al Jazeera is full of news about what happened in Uganda, but UBC is busy screening other films like, “That is Life Mwatu.” This broadcast house should be running Church music to show we are mourning. It is so disappointing that some people are not taking this situation seriously. 

When a head of state declares a week of mourning, programming should change. The tone of the presenters should change too. Minister of Information, please take this seriously – that is a national broadcaster. It is so disappointing and I had to register it.

Secondly, I would like to point out that African leaders have let Uganda and Burundi down. They made a commitment to help our brothers in Somalia, but they have only left Ugandans and Burundian soldiers there alone. And now we cannot even pull out. 

I would like to call upon the Africa member states to join us in this effort and help Uganda. This is now an Africa problem though it is also an international problem. They must join hands with us to help Somalia. 

I was happy with the statement made by the US President, Mr Barrack Obama, though the US Secretary of State also yesterday stated that the US is ready to offer any help to Uganda and all those other countries. But maybe they should have helped us long ago. Anyway, better late than never. We call upon the international community to come and help us here. I have read in The Daily Monitor of today that the Minister for Security said that we were caught off guard. I do not know whether that is true or not. We are all touched by what has happened. I want the Minister for Security to clear this from my mind; we got news that you had the information that these people entered Uganda about a month ago. That should have sent signals for you to swing into action because the Ministry of Security understood this month to be full of excitement for the World Cup. They should have helped us to tie the loose ends during this time.

We are also hearing that there was struggle within the security forces and that is the reason there was this laxity. I want it to be clear as to whether that is true or not. You have apologised and admitted blame but we have lost Ugandans. Most of the people who have died are young and some of them are soldiers.

My friend called me to say she lost a friend aged 29, a solider from Bombo and they are waiting for the body to arrive in Rukungiri. If you are in charge of security in this country, let us minimise this, although it can happen anywhere as it did in the US. Let us be committed to ensuring that there is maximum security. A friend, Benon Rukundo, told me that when they were entering Lugogo Rugby club, there was no security check, not even by private security firms. I think it is high time these places started to prioritise security in handling these matters.

3.45
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): I would like to thank the Minister for the statement and I wish to send my sincere condolences to those who lost their dear ones. When such tragedies occur, they should give Ugandans reason to reflect on what unites us rather than what divides us.

When 11 September 2001 and its events occurred, Americans stood up as one; there were even those voices that alluded to the fact that September 11 was an indicator of intelligence failure. That notwithstanding, Americans stood up as one and faced the challenge. 

What has happened, therefore, does not call for to us engage in a ping-pong apportioning blame to our security. Who knows that could have happened yesterday or one month ago? And who stopped it? To me, we should look at this tragedy, own it up but learn lessons from it. We need to prescribe what kind of capacities we need our agencies to have. No one has spoken about the need to empower our casualty ward at Mulago. We have a report from the Executive Director, they are still complaining of not having enough needles and not calling for the removal of our troops from Somalia. Removing our troops from Somalia is pushing for isolation -(Interjections)- Can I be protected from the intolerant voices in this house?

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, we are focusing on three things; the tragedy, the statement by the minister and the statement by the Leader of the Opposition. The hon. Member had all the liberty to discuss with in those limits. Is he in order to meander and go beyond those statements? What we said as the Opposition is in the statement of the Leader of the Opposition.

THE SPEAKER: I think the point I got from him is that some people who may be thinking of withdrawal of our troops - it will be funny because doing that in light of what has happened, would mean that they have paid a consideration to us to force our troops to come out. Can we accept the murder of people as a consideration to persuade us to withdraw our troops?
 
MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the wise ruling. There is no way we can discuss the tragedy when the Leader of the Opposition has alluded to the warning of the Al Shabaab. Al Shabaab is faulting our Government on deploying in Somalia. It is true there are voices that are calling for the withdrawal and I am sure it would not be wise to go for that.

The more you isolate yourself from the international community, the more vulnerable you become. To remember the words of the late Brig. Noble Mayombo, “Terrorism is a global challenge and, therefore, its response should be global.” That is why I would partly agree with the Leader of the Opposition that we should jointly use the regional blocks such as IGAD and the AU to make a strong statement to compel the African countries to equally deploy in Somalia. The challenge is not a Ugandan burden or a Burundian one, but an African one. We all need to face the terrorism challenge as a collective force. Withdrawing, retreating and shifting blame will not solve the problem. I am calling upon the members to make sure that we realise the need to give adequate capacity to the referral centre of Mulago Hospital. If it means building as much as we can by using, say NAADS funds, we should do it.

I am not saying that we are anticipating more terrorists’ attacks but we had Bududa the other day, which was as dangerous as the bomb blast. We should be united and put politics aside and mourn our loved ones, as we focus on the kind of capacities we can give our security agencies.

MS KAMYA: While I agree with the togetherness in the mourning and hard times, I just want the honourable member to clarify whether this togetherness should only apply in bad times while it is absent in good times. We do not celebrate together; there are people who are well off and people who are very badly off. Should we only hang together in bad times? The Americans hang together in good times and bad times and they should not be used as an example.

MR TUMWEBAZE: We should be together in all times. If you invite me for your wedding, I will come. But let us not be as simplistic as we want this matter to be.

3.53
MR JOHN OTEKAT (Independent, Serere County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in sending our condolences to the bereaved families. I would like to say I am one of the people who were affected. In my constituency, we lost two people and we are devastated and the parents of those people are in very low in spirit.

I came back from Soroti yesterday and we have a very big problem there. I would like the Government, particularly the Ministry of Security, to take keen interest, especially now that we have been warned by the people of Al Shabaab. In Soroti, there are some people of Somali origin, who are hawkers during the day, hawking watches, and yet they sleep in Soroti Hotel. How can a person move round with watches during the day and eventually sleep in a very expensive hotel? Such things need to be investigated thoroughly. 

I say this so that the Ministry of Security may take up that issue. I reported to the DPC yesterday, people who are hawking and sleeping in very expensive hotels in Soroti. They are of Somali origin and they are very many now.

Secondly, there is now need to sensitise our people –

THE SPEAKER: Are those people found in Kengere?

MR OTEKAT: Yes, Kengere is in Soroti and there are very many there. 

Mr Speaker, another issue that I would like government to take up is that of sensitising our people on the danger of bags being abandoned around. I was in Soroti during the World Cup finals and there was a big screen in the sports ground. Everybody was shouting and all of us were not security conscious. So, people should be warned about bags that are abandoned in public places. 

Government should take advantage of the FM radios to sensitise our people about the danger of somebody coming into a room and abandoning his or her bag and disappear. I think those are very pertinent issues to look at. 

Lastly, on behalf of the people of Serere, we are very happy with what we saw. I was not here personally, but we saw in the papers and on TV. We would like to thank Government for moving very fast on this particular incident. This could have happened anywhere in the world. We saw on TV that Kale Kayihura and his team moved in very fast, Mulago Hospital was active, and His Excellency, President Museveni was also taking action. It gave us hope and we all believe this is very good because it goes a long way in reassuring our people that there is security. 

However, that should not stop us from continuously informing our people about the dangers of terrorism. Again, I would like to thank the minister for bringing this statement and assure Ugandans that government is doing whatever it can to make sure that Ugandans remain safe. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.57
MR BARNABAS TINKASIMIIRE (NRM, Buyaga County, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to join other honourable members in conveying our condolences to the families that have been affected and to condemn in the strongest terms possible those terrorists who targeted unarmed people. They left the armed and unleashed unnecessary suffering to us. 

Terrorism is a global challenge and this justifies our presence in Somalia. We went there for a reason and this is the reason in Somalia these fighting forces have many terrorist groups and are killing innocent Africans; and they have also spread to this country. So, it is at this particular moment that we must stand together with our security forces and all the people in Africa to ensure that we lift every effort that can be raised to condemn and give assistance to wipe out terrorism in our midst.

I have heard individuals making calls and saying that we should withdraw our forces from Somalia. I do not think it is necessary at this moment to call upon our manpower that is at the forefront of making sure that we fight terrorism. I find that unnecessary –(Interjections)– that may be your opinion, but I would encourage everybody to make sure that we fight tooth and nail to wipe out these terrorists wherever they are. We should consider the fact that we went to Somalia and, therefore, we must be hunted down. I believe that in every family, there should always be a first born. So we are in Somalia as the first born and we are paying the price of being a first born. Therefore, we must be prepared for the challenges and not be cowards in the face of these terrorist attacks. 

You saw the efforts made by the President, the security forces – anything can happen. You may blame this incident on our forces, but look at the security alertness of USA; anything can happen at any time. So, it is very important that we stand together during this time of grief instead of apportioning blame and demoralising the efforts that are being made to protect our nation -(Member timed out_)

4.02
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I debate the statement read to this Parliament by the Minister of Internal Affairs, let me convey my condolences to the families that were affected. 

Mr Speaker, I would want to point out key areas to the ministry. I want to know from this statement – because I am aware that much as it was not contained in the ministerial statement, there is a group that has allegedly claimed responsibility for the attacks.

I want to know from the Minister the steps the Ministry of Internal Affairs is taking regarding registration of immigrants. I am saying this because there is a very big population of Somalis in Uganda and Congolese in Uganda. They have even gone an extra mile of naming certain villages. You hear this is an Indian village, Congolese village, Somali village. To what extent have we taken on the issue of registration of immigrants? 

I would like to know from the Minister what we are going to do with public transport means, especially at the bus park with these buses that are flying upcountry. This group, which is claiming responsibility, has the potential of blowing more than ten buses in this country in one day. People just enter buses and their luggage is not checked. What security measures have we put in place to ensure that those who are using buses are checked, especially their luggage?

The other fundamental point is that if it is true this group claiming responsibility are the people who have done it, I want to say that we must consciously sit down and do an audit of our foreign policy accordingly. We want to be the giant in Africa, fine, but we are now seeing the cost we are paying.

This is like food for thought. It has happened. Many innocent young people have died. May their souls rest in peace but I want to say that this is the time to think about what has been a song; the issue of national identity cards. We must think about it.

We must look at the security of our entry points, especially at the airport and all our international borders. This is a very fundamental point. 

Finally, is the status of foreign refugees. Uganda is more of a free entry and exit. I think we must come up with very stringent measures to ensure that we handle the internal security of our country. I pray that the Lord rests the souls of those who have lost their lives in eternal peace. Thank you. 

4.06
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I would like to sincerely convey my condolences to the families who have lost their dear ones and to the entire country. Injustice anywhere is injustice everywhere. In Uganda, we have been players in a number of countries to bring about peace and order and therefore in our own country here; we have done our best to restore security to everyone.

I want to advise Government and those who are involved in security matters to look into the following areas; Security is for everyone and we must all participate. In the past, we used to have security committees at every LC I; but now, these people are sleeping and not doing much. This is the time to revive all the security committees in this country. We must empower them; we must tell them what they are supposed to do and I believe we must register every person in the village and all the visitors because as you know, Uganda is free entry and exit. This is the beauty of being a Ugandan. We allow people to come here and we are free with foreigners. I think this is a virtue that we must not make die. It is very important but at the same time, we need to be careful.

There are installations that we need to guard at the traffic points. Those people can load vehicles with explosives and it could cause danger. We need to register all the vehicles and parking areas and security personnel must be around parking areas. This is because right now, when you go along Kampala Road, people park anyhow and they are not checked. These are areas we need to check.

We also need to register all persons or visitors in hotels. Right now, visitors come, enter and they are not followed. Therefore, I also want to appeal to the Minister of Security to immediately bring forth the Bill; we pass the Bill soon and they work immediately so that we prevent crime. Thank you.

4.10
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to condemn in the strongest terms possible the cowardly act of those inhuman people who target the powerless and innocent people. Everybody is vulnerable. Therefore, as an advocate of nation building, I do not expect anybody to polarise this debate. This debate is bi-partisan and we need to think in terms of the corrective measures; lessons learnt and how best we can protect humanity against terrorists. 

I also want to request that the media houses are regulated. Whereas the President declared a week of national mourning, last evening, I was not seeing a semblance on TV and the radio stations because they are celebrating. Can they really start – at least for just this week – let them try to have programmes, with possibly Christian music? Somebody was telling me last evening that we had national prayers less of confession. 

Can we also have a full list of the victims? I want to thank Parliament’s administration for improving the security detail; but yesterday, whereas The New Vision was concerned about the security and calling an alert on the first page, in their editorial, they were blaming Parliament for being strict. I found that very unfortunate.

Even with this incidence, Uganda should not have apologies for deploying in Somali. The AU mission is for the African cause. Instead, this anger should be used to put pressure on the African brothers to beef up the support of other African forces to contain the situation in Somalia. 

I also want to pray that immediately, the telecom companies customise all SIM cards. All SIM cards, which cannot be identified by their owners, should be deactivated and from now on, only those who produce their identities should be given SIM cards. When we go elsewhere, what happens if you want a SIM card? You have to present a photocopy of your passport. Why do we make it a laisser-faire issue? People are using SIM cards to con others and they drop them immediately after buying them. That control is required. 

We also have a laisser-faire tendency in our immigration system. Whereas in our neighbouring countries refugees live in camps, in Uganda, we are calling them aliens and they mix with us without regularising their citizenship, and they become Ugandans very fast. We need to handle that immediately. Refugees must be kept in camps and Ugandans must be protected. However, I would like to appeal to Ugandans and to thank them for the hospitality. We have so many people of Somali origin and last evening in the media, there was fear that they would be attacked. I would like to pray to Ugandans that those Somalis in Kisenyi are innocent people –(Interjections)– and our failure to keep them in the gazetted camps is not their problem. I am saying that we must put in place systems and controls. Those are innocent people who ran to Uganda like Ugandans were running to Kenya when we had problems and therefore, we should have a system of accepting them here and protect them, but not to make them vulnerable to attacks of those who are now angry, thinking that it is the Somalis in Kisenyi who are responsible -(Member timed out-)

4.15
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a tragic moment for all of us. I wish to convey my condolences to the families of the deceased, most of whom are from my constituency. As we mourn this incident, I think we need to be serious. When I look at this statement, it is wanting in a number of material particulars. One is on the question of mourning; we are not serious. Apart from the minister saying that the flags will fly at half mast on all public buildings, there is nothing more. 

Mr Speaker, I pray that the mourning starts with us today because I see that we have 11 items on the Order Paper. We should dedicate this sitting to the issue of mourning. We should handle only one item and adjourn. It is my prayer, in the sprit of mourning that we do not handle any other business today because we cannot pretend that we are mourning when we are going to handle a number of other items so that business continues as usual. I have been to my constituency here in the central business district and there is no mourning. So, if we are serious – 

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Member, working is not enjoying life. Do you think you cannot mourn as you work? 

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, I was just talking about symbolism; the whole essence of the concept of mourning and I was raising it in good faith –(Interjections)– I beg for protection because I have very limited time and I have other issues to handle.

THE SPEAKER: You are very much protected.

MR LUKWAGO: I would pray that apart from saying “… a week of mourning …”, we should at least have one day declared a public holiday to send a message to the world that we are really affected by this incident. We should bring out the message to the world that this is a very serious matter to us. I pray that if possible, we declare it a public holiday. 

On the issue of the calls, I am not satisfied with this statement on page 2, that the Police, assisted by the other security agencies promptly launched investigations into the bombings. “We are determined to establish the nature and type of the devices used ….” I think the Minister is being economical with information; he is being mean to us as a House. 

Already, the Inspector-General of Police is addressing press conferences and giving details. I have heard people talk about Somalia and Al Shabaab; where do you get that information from? It is not in the Minister’s statement here. Why are we linking the bombing to Al Shabaab? It does not feature anywhere here. Actually, you are being speculative. So, what I am saying is that the minister should give us more facts – or even tomorrow - we should today have preliminary findings of the Police. If the Inspector-General of Police can tell the world that the Al Shabaab are claiming responsibility, why can’t the minister say so on the floor of the House so that we debate from an informed point of view? But it is not here with us and we should be cautious of the actions we are taking, as a state. 

You could actually tell that terrorism was about to happen here. I got very worried the day I saw a huge crowd of people from Southern Sudan demonstrating on our streets here saying that they wanted to secede from the Government of Sudan. They wanted independence and were protected by the state here, and we fully know the implications of attacking a sovereign nation here in our country. (Interjections) Yes! We gave these people security. I wonder where they were mobilising from. They were in thousands and I said, “Eh!” (Laughter) How could this happen? We are inviting trouble because here, we want to build Uganda as a nation and we are against any idea of secession. If today I stood here and said that one region of this country should secede, I would actually be committing treason. [DR MALLINGA: “You have said so.”] Have I said so? Can you challenge me? 

Mr Speaker, how could we allow people to demonstrate here with all the state protection, demanding for secession? These are all cases – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think the situation in Sudan is different because when this treaty ended, there was an agreement made and it is a known fact that they are going to have a referendum to decide whether Southern Sudan separates from the main Sudan. So, I think it is known that people will be campaigning for a position of secession or not because it is on the programme of that country. 

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, I was just wondering aloud why these people did not demonstrate in their own territory in Southern Sudan and they decided to do it here with our state protection when actually here, the demonstration for nationals like me are banned. We are not allowed to demonstrate. If you attempted to demonstrate here, you would be attacked by the Kiboko squad, and the security agencies will clamp down on you. So, we really need further information from the minister on all these developments and incidents.

Finally, I humbly pray – I am echoing the submissions in the message given out by my colleague, hon. Beti Kamya –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: I think it is fair to allow hon. Mabikke. He is the president of a party -(Laughter)- and this Ethiopian club is within his constituency. Can you say something?

4.23
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Independent, Makindye Division East Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to convey my condolences to the families of those persons who lost lives in the twin bombings that happened on Sunday night. My constituency felt the gravity of this attack. 

Contributor after contributor has stated that terrorism is a modern day challenge. That is correct. And no one, no leader, is advancing the position that Ugandan forces should withdraw from Somalia. But all of us are aware and those of us who have been following global trends that all countries that are facing these threats are currently undertaking a thorough review of their positions and of their strategies. President Barrack Obama has just recently conducted a thorough review. The new Prime Minister of UK has just conducted a thorough review of this trend and, therefore, this should not be alien to Uganda.

Our position is that when we decided to deploy troops in Somalia, the deployment should have been followed by a contingent plan to handle the repercussions.

While we talk about international threats of terrorism, and as we talk about review of our strategy, we should know that we have interests to keep in the AU but those interests should not come at a very high cost to Ugandans. The AU Mission in Somalia is becoming very expensive for Uganda. Day in, day out we are receiving bodies of our gallant UPDF soldiers back home. We are now burying innocent civilians. 

We all know that after CHOGM, the tourism industry had been boosted but when a tourist hears of terrorism, he cannot make Uganda his destination. We all know that Uganda has now become an attractive venue for international conferences -(Interjections)- yes, we are now professional conference organisers but when people read in the news and watch on international televisions that we have had an attack of this nature, no one can choose Uganda as the next option for an international conference. Is this not too expensive for our country? Does this not call for a review?

Mr Speaker, we should have reviewed our immigration policy.  Uganda is the only country where a foreigner walks in, buys land, gets a passport, gets an identity card and even gets on a voter roll. Uganda is the only country. You will hear a foreign dignitary having a Ugandan passport, moreover a diplomatic one. 

These incidents should help us review very many aspects. We should have expanded our medical services like ambulances. I wonder what sort of security minister we have and I am warning that when I take charge I will not stand -(Laughter)- -(Interjections)– do not worry. We agree that most countries are caught off guard. Whenever there are such attacks, many countries are caught off guard but we had a warning and we did not act on the warning. We had a warning one year; we simply did nothing about it. That is why, when some sections of the public say we should also review the position of the security minister, I think they are in order.  (Interjections) They are in order. 

I would like to finally say that we are one of the poorest nations in Africa. Africa has over 53 countries. It is very surprising that the poorest nations in Africa, Burundi and Uganda, are the ones running the AU Mission in Somalia. We have the big boys: South Africa which is a super power, Nigeria, Libya, Ghana, and Egypt. These are very powerful and big players but look at the little boys in Somalia doing all this work for the rest of Africa. 

I want to strongly call for a review of Uganda’s mission in Somalia -(Member timed out_)

4.30
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to send my condolences to the bereaved families and Uganda at large and also to condemn the attacks. 

Many Members have alluded to the fact that terrorism is a global phenomenon. But at this moment, we should examine the question of why Uganda is a target. We should also examine what the global response currently on terrorism is and critically examine the capability and capacity of Uganda to respond to this global phenomenon. 

To start on the examination of why Uganda is a target, it is true that the Al Shabaab has claimed responsibility and with critical analysis. The movement of the Al Shabaab Mujahidin started in 2004 and in their symbol they have the Horn of Africa. That, therefore, tells us that their area of operation and target is in the Horn of Africa -(Interjections)- no, it is in the Horn of Africa.

If we are to examine these forces, the Al Shabaab Mujahidin, most of the operations have been in Somalia targeting the transitional government, Ethiopia and the African Union Mission in Somalia. And to illustrate this I want to give some data that on 22February 2009, there was a suicide car bombing against the African Union Military base in Mogadishu and 11 people were killed. 

These are Ugandans and Burundians who are African Union forces. 29 October 2008, there was a suicide bombing by this same group at the United Nations compound in Ethiopia and 24 were killed. 6 October 2008, a motor shell aimed at the presidential palace in Mogadishu, struck a market place and 17 people were killed. 3 September 2008, there was an attack on the Somali presidential compound and 15 were killed and 25 were injured. 5th February 2008, twin bombings in the port city of Bosasa and 25 people were killed and 70 were injured and April 2009, a motor shell fired at a US Congressman as his plane was taking off from a Somali airport. If you go to the webpage of the US home security, they list that 20 of the Americans have joined these forces in Somalia and about five of them are being tried in Minneapolis in the US.

Therefore, the issue is that Uganda is a target primarily because these people see Uganda as those supporting the transitional government in Somalia. This is why we are a target and if we know this is why we are a target, we should therefore ask, do we have the capacity and capability of dealing with these threats?  We accepted to deploy the AU and we should ask ourselves why because AU met and made a resolution. They asked countries to pledge their forces. All the countries that pledged refused to send and deploy. Have we asked ourselves why they refused to deploy?

America started the war in Somalia. Should we ask ourselves now why the Americans fled Somalia? At this time, we should now ask ourselves; America went to Iraq but as we stand now, what are the Americans doing and what is their policy now on the question of fighting terrorism in Iraq and Afghanistan? Are they withdrawing, are they talking of withdrawing or are they intending to continue to stay? That is what we should - because we cannot stand and say, this is a global phenomenon and then we do not examine what the global response is. -(Member timed out_)

4.37
MR MATHIUS B. NSUBUGA (DP, Bukoto County South, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr speaker. I would also like to convey my sincere condolences to the families that were affected in this barbaric incident. Indeed, among the people affected is one of my veteran Democratic Party members in Teso, Mzee Ongodia who lost his daughter in this incident. So, it is very sad.

I had a chance of visiting the scenes yesterday together with my party president but if you see what happened, it is very tragic. Most of you are just seeing pictures in the papers. You could find people’s fingers still on the floor. Somebody’s head bursts and the brains are on the floor; that is why you saw the birds feasting. This is a very serious situation.

We were told, although we have been commending the police, Kiira Police Station is just a few metres -I would call them metres, it took them two hours to arrive on the scene. I was there yesterday and I was told that the police from Kiira Road took two hours to arrive on the scene. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE, INTERNAL AFFIARS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, the Police was aware. The Jinja Road Police was aware that there was a function taking place, it was aware that there were more than 2000 people [HON. MEMBERS: “Where?”] in Lugogo and, therefore, as disaster preparedness, they were around in case there should be some bad element within our society that would go to disturb the peace of the people who were watching the game.

The DPC himself was within the vicinity when the incident took place. He was in hearing and he ordered for his forces to move immediately and cordon off the place. So, is the hon. Member in order to tell such a blatant lie when we people who know the technical things that took place know otherwise?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, well, this is the information and I think you have given him the information. I think you are the man with the information, you have given it to him and now he knows.

The only problem which is here in your statement that may be would require your clarification is with paragraph two on page 1. “The Ethiopian Village Restaurant in Kabalagala was attacked at 10.45 p.m. and 18 people died”. Then you go to the third paragraph, “The second and third bomb went off at Kyadondo Rugby Club, Lugogo at 11.30 p.m.” 

Therefore, it means that it took 45 minutes; the first one had happened 45 minutes before. Was there any co-ordination between the systems so that these people who are at Lugogo would have been alerted? (Applause) I think this is something, which you have to explain.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, Police within the city, responsibility is divided between different units. Kabalagala is under the Kabalagala Police Station with a fully fledged DPC and Lugogo is under Jinja Road Police Station. For sure, information flew from Kabalagala and came this side but there was no way - because Police was not invited to provide security and, therefore -(Interjections)- please, can I finish my statement? Can I be protected?

THE SPEAKER: Order, let us listen, please!

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Can I finish my statement, Sir? 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, you are protected. Order, Members!

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Can I finish my statement, Mr Speaker? There was no way one could connect what took place in Kabalagala with what took place this end –(Interjections)- there was no way humanly possible. All I want this House to know –(Mr Mathius Nsubuga rose_)

THE SPEAKER: He is still holding the Floor, hon. Nsubuga. He is explaining. Have you finished, Minister?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I need your protection. Can I be protected? All I am saying is that we share information in police stations; for example, when the incident of Kabalagala took place, all units were informed that something had happened there and that they should keep alert. However, to know that something similar was going to take place in Lugogo is not humanely possible -(Interruptions)

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, I will still maintain my statement because I got it firsthand from the persons who were at the scene. They said that it took two hours for the police to arrive, and we were told that one of the bombs that went off targeted the exit route that they knew people would use. So, for the minister to come and say that they were there in time is wrong. On Saturday my people were in Kamwokya and it took the Police just five minutes to come and beat people and disperse my rally. (Laughter)

We were in this House when hon. Kyanjo stood on the Floor of this House and warned us saying that we needed to review the presence of our forces in Somalia and everybody took him lightly. I wish we had reviewed it at that time because I do not think this would have happened.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, you say you are repeating what he said but in your view, when you say “review”, can you propose what kind of review we should make? 

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, this was an African Union mission. Burundi and Uganda were the only countries who sent forces there. We took it as if it was only for Uganda to do that. Now, this was the time we were supposed to review and say, “Look, if others have refused to send their forces, why don’t we review this.” This is because we were doing this in the spirit of the African Union, in the African spirit. We were not doing this because Uganda has interests in Somalia or because we had investments in Somalia. We were doing this in the spirit of African unity. So, that is the time we were supposed to review this.

On the issue of foreigners; yesterday, those of you who watched TV saw the Vice-Chairman of the Somali Community in Uganda. I had a chance to talk to him. He said that they had started registering Somalis because they knew that with this issue in Somalia, bad people would come and live with them and cause havoc, like what happened here, but the Ministry of Internal Affairs stopped them from registering Somalis. He is on record and you can ask him; he is around. Can we know why the Ministry of Internal Affairs, and in particular hon. Kirunda Kivejinja, stopped the registration of Somalis in this country?

Secondly, I am glad I lived with hon. Matia Kasaija. Hon. Kiyonga and Mbabazi, you know that in Kenya an alien had to move with an alien certificate to show that you are alien. I am sure many of you were moving with alien certificates. (Laughter) However, here in this country, your ministry is just leaving every Tom, Dick and Harry to enter the country and this is how we are paying for that.

Those of us who come from near border posts have complained about corruption. You remember when child sacrifice started, we said that we had quack doctors who had come from other countries and they even put up signposts saying “witch doctor”. The Government has not done anything about that. That is why we still have child sacrifice. Haven’t you seen signposts showing “Omusawo Omuganda” from either Tanzania or from Zaire? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I am sure you have not seen any signpost talking about a witchdoctor. It is different from a native doctor. A witchdoctor is criminal. The two are not the same. A native doctor is not a witchdoctor. (Laughter)

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, I will take your advice but what puzzles me is seeing a signpost saying this is a native doctor from Zaire -(Member timed out_)

4.50
MR ALEX ONZIMA (FDC, Maracha County, Arua): Thank you. Mr Speaker, allow me to join the rest of the Members of Parliament who have expressed their dismay at the horrific and devilish attack on peaceful Ugandans and non-Ugandans that took place on Sunday.

We all know that a couple of years ago, terrorists attacked the cities of Dar-es-Salaam and Nairobi. They had also intended to attack Kampala but that did not take place. So, it is clear that all along this people have been working hard to seize any opportunity to attack Uganda and eventually it came to pass. If you go by the names of the people who lost their lives in this horrific attack, you find almost all tribes on that list as well as foreigners. 

I want to make it clear that by the time these terrorists attacked Dar-es-Salaam and Nairobi, neither Kenyan troops nor Tanzanian troops were deployed in Somalia. So, the deployment of our soldiers for a noble cause in Mogadishu cannot be the single factor for us to attribute this nasty incident that took place on our soil. 

It has also been said here that in Somalia itself, terrorists also make attacks. We also know that in Iraq, bombs were planted by terrorists even in places of worship, in mosques, to kill fellow Iraqis. So, in my view it will not make much sense for one to conclude that the deployment of our soldiers in Somalia is the one single factor responsible for this kind of activity. 

I know it is a constitutional obligation of the Government of the Republic of Uganda to provide security for all Ugandans and the non-citizens residing in this country. However, I also want to make it explicitly clear that much as it is the responsibility of Government to provide security, the major part of the security of any individual Ugandan rests with that Ugandan -(Interjections)- you may ignore this but it is a fact. First of all, a citizen must do everything possible within his or her capacity to avoid areas where you will fall into a trap. So, my appeal to all Ugandans – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Otto, you stood to give information and then within a second you turned information into order? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It became hot. (Laughter)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of order. There is what we call vicarious liability in law. Is hon. Onzima in order to come on the Floor of this House when Ugandans are burying their beloved ones and blame the victims? Is hon. Onzima in order to blame the victims and not to apportion blame to the people who should protect them?  

Secondly, since he has crossed to the Movement, is he in order to talk like that from this side? (Laughter) This is a double point of order.

HON. MEMBERS: He should go the other side.

THE SPEAKER: Well, it is not good to blame a victim. 

MR ONZIMA: Mr Speaker, my appeal to all of us Ugandans and my appeal to all foreigners residing in this country is that each one of us must do everything possible to avoid circumstances that will lead us to fall into any trap of these terrorists. Much as Government also does her part to provide security to this nation, we should do ours. 

I carefully followed the argument by hon. Erias Lukwago on the issue of national mourning. What does this mean? What does it entail? Does it mean that as a nation we just fly our national flag at half mast? What message can we send as a nation to terrorists that nobody will ever play with the lives of Ugandans and foreigners residing in this country? 

Has the Government, for instance, any plan to ensure that all Ugandans get onto the streets for peaceful demonstrations as a warning to these terrorists? Nothing! Is there any plan, for instance, for Ugandans to go to their places of worship and pray in all parts of the country, be it in mosques or churches, as a symbol of unity and as a sign that we oppose this cowardly act of planting bombs here and there? What plan does Government have now that many Ugandans are burying their dead? 

What is Government’s role? What is the contribution of Government to the bereaved families? There is nothing that has been said here. We cannot simply say that we are mourning together with the bereaved families by one action, and that is flying our national flag at half mast. It cannot be. As a government, we must join hands, we must prove to all Ugandans that we are not happy with this unfortunate incident and do everything possible to mourn together with the bereaved families. 

More importantly, a strong message to all Ugandans is that most of the contribution to anybody’s security must come from the individuals themselves and then Government will play its role. With this we will probably be in a position to have a better country to live in. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.49
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono County North, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The whole country is supposed to rely on this minister’s statement for information. When you look at page 1 of this statement, the minister has talked about the 74 people who died; who are these people and what are their details? In Mukono North, so far three people have been confirmed dead and there is one young man in hospital right now. The doctors are saying that one of his legs might be amputated. I request that the minister avails us with a full list of victims and their details for our information. 

Still on page 1, paragraph 2, we read that the first device went off at 10.25 p.m. and the second and third went off at 11.30 p.m. It is my view that if Police and indeed the government had moved fast, 56 people would have been saved. We have over 100 radio stations in Uganda and they were all relaying this football match live. Forty-five (45) minutes would have been enough to alert Ugandans of this incidence. I was watching this match on UBC. The match took 120 minutes because they went into extra time and then there was this ceremony of awarding the trophy. However, during all that time, I never saw anything on UBC to the effect that an accident or danger had occurred to this nation.

I want to also propose that in future we allow the Minister of Security to use these radio stations. In the USA, they have a system they call punch-in-time; when something very important takes place in the country, the minister in charge of security can be able to notify all media houses so that the nation is alerted about such an incidence. Here you find that some radio stations of course are closed; the radio station was closed anyway. (Applause) 

However, you find that this radio station is playing music, the other one is broadcasting news, another one has prayers etc. I think the minister should have time when he can have access to all radio stations in Uganda at a given time and they can broadcast something similar. We should at least know that at a given time, all radio stations in Uganda will be broadcasting such and such a programme, which is relaying information to the people of Uganda. This is because we cannot force people to listen some radio stations all the time.

When you look at paragraph 4, you will find that the minister has chosen to indicate that among the dead and injured were Americans, Irish, Ugandans, Ethiopians and Eritreans. Let me hope that he was not listing them in their order of importance to him. (Laughter) When we lose so many Ugandans in their countries, for example if I have gone somewhere and a baby has died and its mother has also died, I think I will start with announcing the death of the mother. Ugandans in their own statement are coming third and yet they form the majority of the dead.

Mr, Speaker -(Member timed out_)

5.04
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also send my condolences and I want to thank those who did everything to inform and reassure the people of Uganda. Among others, I really want to put this on record and thank Gen. Jeje Odong, the honourable minister, for being a true General. I saw him move in very calmly and confidently; I did not see him with any bullet proof. This is the kind of reassurance that Ugandans would always want to see from their leaders, not only for us to wait for the President to arrive in those places. The people responsible - the security minister and all those other people - should have actually been seen to be with the people of Uganda at such a time. So I thank, on top of the President, hon. Jeje Odong for being such a true brave General.

I think the issue here is the issue of immigration. Unless we improve our immigration department, this kind of thing is going to continue. I do not think these attacks were coordinated on mobile. I think these attacks could have happened because some people infiltrated this country. How many hours does it take one to get from the border of Busia to Kampala and cause havoc? Many of these people are suicide bombers. So, I really want to tell our Government that there is a weakness in the immigration department that needs to be tightened if we want to improve the security of this country.

Today I was shocked to read from the Minister of Security that they were caught off guard. On the 5th of July, the leader of Al Shabaab warned that they would strike. Six days later, they lived to what they said. Are our security people sensitive? How could they forget within six days, less than a full week? I think we should take responsibility and honour and resign. When an attack took place in the United States, some people took responsibility and resigned. The chief of CIA resigned; he took responsibility.

It is not enough to come and tell Ugandans, “We were caught off guard”. Who do you think you are? You are using tax payers’ money. You are being paid and deployed to keep the people of Uganda. Intelligence is a very sophisticated thing. You had all the information, you have all the networks, and just after six days and you have the courage as a whole minister to say, “Sorry, we were caught off guard.” I think this is a big shame. We should learn to take responsibility instead of just making statements and taking the people of Uganda for a ride.

I want to put one record clear. I have heard many people talk about deployment in Somalia. While I was still the shadow Minister of Foreign Affairs, I was asked by the Opposition to prepare a paper and present it to our caucus. I prepared a paper, which was eventually adopted, to support the deployment of troops in Somalia. We gave some conditions and among them was one that said that the other African countries must stand by us and honour their obligation. The other one is that the welfare of our troops must be catered for and it must be guaranteed. The third one was that the mandate of the troops must be very clear in the sense that if you attack them, they will attack you. You cannot keep peace in a place where there is no peace. So when the Opposition are calling for a review, it is from this background. Let us not just talk like a chorus because we need to support certain things -(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, my brother, for giving way. First of all, Kenya and Tanzania had not sent troops to Somalia when they were bombed so what guarantee do you have that if you review the presence of troops in Somalia, Uganda cannot be attacked?

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, if we are contributing, we should all be attentive and serious. I thought I was very clear. I have narrowed my contribution, and even given the date when Al Shabaab warned us, in linking this attack to Al Shabaab. So really, where are you coming from? When Tanzania and Kenya were attacked, it was very clear that it was not Al Shabaab but Al Qaeda. Being a minister, let us also be responsible. When you are a minister, be responsible and do not talk for the sake of talking.

It is good to declare national mourning but it is not enough to just make a statement on radio, TV, newspapers and then lower our flags at half mast. I want to propose that one, Government meets all the burial expenses of the victims; two, that Government meets all the medical bills for the victims; three, that Government gives every family a token of compensation.

We must take responsibility as a nation. That is the only way we can show that truly it is national - it has happened elsewhere, it is not just here. So my appeal is that when we take all this, we should be able to reassure the people of Uganda that we are responsible as a government and as a people.

Finally, the way Kampala streets are packed with cars is a big danger. Why do we allow cars to park the way they park in town? These bombers may be suicide bombers but if anybody wants to bomb Parliament, he does not need to enter here, he can just park across there and the bomb explodes -(Member timed out_)

5.12
MS SUSAN NAKAWUKI (FDC, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. Allow me to add my voice to others and send my heartfelt condolences to the families of the deceased. It is really heart wrenching that there is a shadow of death roaming across this nation.

As we mourn our relatives and friends who passed away during the explosions, allow me to inform this House that actually we also lost another learned friend over the weekend, Mr Nicholas Odeke, who was shot in Kotido. It is absurd that this country is no longer safe for the Ugandans. This has been a young lawyer who was shot during broad daylight by an unknown person –(Interjection)- I said his name is Nicholas Odeke. We were with the President yesterday at Christ the King during the mass. Just to add on that, even Masaka Road has now become a death trap for the Ugandan. It is under construction, it is so dusty, there are no safety measures on the road and it is really bad. 

We still have to bear in mind the uncountable number of Ugandans who have died in Somalia. We are all aware that it is the duty of the state to safeguard Ugandans. It is sickening; as the Minister for Internal Affairs, hon. Matia Kasaija, was submitting, I was grieving in my spirit because of his submission. When you actually look at his statement, the last paragraph on page 1, he was telling serious lies to this country. I looked at the minister saying that there was no way the Police could go and warn these people simply because they had not been invited. That reminds me of the Saturday incident at Kamwokya when they were beating up the DP president, Mr Norbert Mao. The Police was so involved and actually, he was treated like a terrorist. 

I would like to draw everyone’s attention to the Daily Monitor newspaper of today. If you look at page 7, you would see the unserious Generals of this country posing for photos as if they are models. (Laughter) If you look at that page, the full Commander of the Special Forces was even standing akimbo posing for the photo -(Interjections)- as if he had gone for a fashion show. (Laughter)

It is high time that we took such matters seriously in this country because right now, all Ugandans feel unsafe. People cannot right now go to dance halls. Many people relax there but they are afraid. The business community is also losing out. We need the ministers to assure us that it is a bit safe for the Ugandans. Actually, I feel this minister here should resign. I declare him incompetent because as a minister of internal affairs, you cannot stand up when the whole country is grieving and you say there is nothing that the State could do about it.

Mr Speaker, the Minister lied to us. I was coming from Masaka and I happened to get to that place shortly after the explosion and everyone was running onto the road; I almost run into them. I had to stop and put double indicators and try to find out what was going on. It took two hours before the Police could come in. If anyone was watching the news on Monday on CNN, you could see that it was just these ordinary Ugandans trying to help out others. Actually, there was a victim who was on the floor and had lost an arm and they were saying, “Ah, that one is dead; do not look at him.” The victim was trying to raise his arm a little bit for somebody to at least help and the Police was not there. The Minister now comes here and says that they came in time! It makes all of us concerned. 

Today it is those people but the next day it is going to be our relatives –(Interjections)- so, I think this minister or even ourselves –(Interjections)- yes, it is not far from us because it can even happen at Parliament. I think it should be collective responsibility starting with the ministers and ourselves. Let us make sure that whatever we say is in the best interests of this country -(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: I think we have sufficiently debated this statement and I am sure other statements will be coming because the minister will be updating us on the developments. Maybe hon. Magulumaali and hon. Mary Mugyenyi will come in before the ministers and then the Prime Minister will end or start.

5.17
MR ERASMUS MAGULUMAALI (Independent, Kooki County, Rakai): I thank you. Greetings from the people of Kooki! Hon. Members, this is a moment of real grief and we should bring our memories together. It was in this very House where we agreed and approved the deployment of our troops to Somalia. It is on record. The moment of truth has come and we should not deny what we agreed upon as honourable Members of Parliament. 

I also convey my condolence message to the bereaved families. We should remember that our level of patriotism is under question. Why did we deploy in Somalia or wherever we have deployed? To help our brothers and sisters who have problems we all agreed, and it is wrong for us to apportion blame. In this House, there were ministers and honourable members and we all agreed. Apportioning blame now is not going to help. 

I pray that this House and Ugandans at large will continue to rally behind the President, the Commander-in-Chief, our troops, the Police, the security agencies to contain a situation where all of us are quite doubtful. What we need is to morale boost ourselves. 

I request that if it is possible, we move very fast to debate the Interception of Communication Bill and we get over with it. This is a challenge not only to the Ugandan leadership but also to the African leadership. There is an opportunity on the way – we are expecting the African Union Summit any time, hoping that we have managed to contain the situation. It should be our responsibility; I do not know how we are going to frame it but we should ask our brothers as to why they are not fulfilling their commitment to the African cause. That would be a very fundamental question and we should be able to get answers since their people are coming here. (Interjections)

I pray that we continue to be united in a moment like this because we have lost, whether as the Opposition or as members of the Government side. The incident has attracted international recognition and we should also be able to cooperate with other partners in the world to condemn terrorism. Terrorism has no choice, whether you are in the Opposition or Government side. So, my prayer to this House is that we remain united. Let us stand strong behind the forces that are out to hunt for these terrorists. The responsibility for the security of this country, for the security of your person is your responsibility and my responsibility. So let us collectively stand united. I thank you very much.

5.22
MRS MARY MUGYENYI (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): I thank you very much for the opportunity for me to convey my condolences to the bereaved families and also the condolences of my people of Nyabushozi to people who have lost life and particularly to families that are into mourning today. 

I also want to add my voice to the voices of many Members of Parliament here who have thanked Government for the work that they have so far been able to do. I am saying this with sincerity because I do not have to say it even when I belong to the side of the ruling party. However, I think the security forces in this country so far, not until 11th July and apart from the insurgency in Northern Uganda, have ensured we enjoy peace and security. That is why we have had so many night clubs and places like Kyadondo collect so many people in the night to enjoy an evening like those people were doing.

Now that the moment of truth has come home, indeed it has come to Uganda and it is unfortunate that we are living in an era of terrorism, it is even worse and saddening to know that the most targeted are the most prime age of our people. I am saying this because people of my age and those of the age of most of you here cannot go to night clubs; they do not go out in the night to have fun. It can only be the youth to do this. So, the terrorists have deprived this country of the best that we have been probably having. We should unite and condemn this.

I want to echo what hon. Magulumaali has just said. We must be able to identify areas that will require all of us to unite, situations that will require us to unite especially those where we are faced with danger. I am saying this because terrorists are not going to differentiate between a member of the ruling party and that from the Opposition or tribe. That is why I must say with confidence that in situations like these, we need to be united to support our security agencies to deal with such situations.

Mr Speaker, I have heard many voices from people contending that this happened because our forces are in Somalia. However, I must say that liberation and democracy in many African countries, which is enjoyed today, came with a cost. These people who died were watching the World Cup soccer live from South Africa. If countries like Tanzania, Uganda, Mozambique and others had not sacrificed their citizens and land to liberate South Africa, there would never have been the World Cup on the African soil during this year. Therefore, I would like to say that having taken the decision to send our troops to Somalia, I know there is a cost and I know we are now burying our people in a painful way. However, it is too early for us to pull our forces out of Somalia because the terrorists will have succeeded.

I am glad that the AU Summit is coming to sit in Uganda soon and this has happened just before they come over. I would like to say that there is lack of seriousness on the part of the leadership of the African Union member states. The decision to send troops to Somalia to support the Somalia Government was made at an AU Summit. So, what happened? How come there are only two countries that have honoured their pledges with the rest just sitting and waiting for the UN to send money and all the other sorts of excuses. The Parliament of Uganda needs to send a message to the AU Summit in reiterating our concern on their commitment and fear to –(Member timed out_)

5.28
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT, SECURITY (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament. I rise to join my colleagues in Parliament today in condemning that dastardly act of terrorism. I share the grief and sorrow of the whole nation. My sympathy goes to the families of those who died and the victims of this terrible tragedy.

Obviously, this was a well planned and co-ordinated act of terrorism calculated to inflict maximum pain onto unsuspecting innocent civilians. Can you imagine how devilish these people are? Even beasts in the wilderness cannot go to that level in their beastly behaviour. This is a direct threat and affront to our country’s wellbeing as a nation and to our way of life. Therefore, I appeal to all sectors of our society and our nation that our response should be mature and thoughtful. This is a moment of unity and not a moment for political point scoring.

What I said yesterday and wish to reiterate today was that I was sorry. I was in Kabale District when this happened and the journalists came and asked me questions, to which I responded there and then. I remember I said that I was sorry that this happened and that we, the state, did not prevent it. I did author apologies that this happened and that it was bad that we had not prevented it. However, I did promise that security would take all the additional measures necessary to prevent a reoccurrence of these acts of terrorism.

When I returned, I did visit the victims in Mulago Hospital, for example. This is for the benefit of my brothers on the Opposition who did not pick the news. I really saw those who survived and were in Intensive Care Unit with sharp nails in their heads, the brains; it was a terrible sight. So, this is not a time, as I said, for scoring political points; this is a time to unite.

When we in security introduce necessary measures to beef up the security of our people, I will appeal to you, honourable Members of Parliament and the general public, to support them. Policing, as hon. Onzima said very correctly, is a community responsibility. We have the Police Force, we have other security agencies but they cannot succeed unless they have the co-operation of the entire community in discharging their responsibilities. It is not true -(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, hon. John Patrick Amama Mbabazi, for accepting to take this point of clarification. Some time we used to have what was known as the special branch in the Police. It was professional and would detect crime and advise Government agencies accordingly. They were so professional in their work and in my simple mind they cannot be compared to with the CMI and others. 

Can I seek clarification from you as to what has happened to this professional group that used to feed Government with information relating to security of persons and property in this country? Do you have any idea, as a second thought, of bringing them back so that they can assist other agencies at a technical level to fight such kind of vices?

MR MBABAZI: The special branch was inherited from the colonial police and it was an intelligence arm of the Police. It was doing intelligence work both for the Police and for the political government. With the establishment of the security agencies which in your judgement may not be performing as well as the special branch - I will take it with a pinch of salt because I will want to measure your ability to make that judgement - they were replaced. Part of the function they were performing in the Police is being performed by another department and we have those security agencies that deal with intelligence and political security. 

What I was saying is that certainly policing is a public and community responsibility. The Police and other security organisations have the responsibility to lead the way. It is not true to say that we have suffered a terrorist attack for the first time because you may recall that we had bombs in Kampala before. By the time we defeated the ADF, we had lost about 82 people through these bombs here in Kampala and Jinja. They were planting them in bars and places like that.

The point I would like to make is that all these terrorist attacks are linked and are part of the international terrorism that exists in the world today. It is not true to say that if we moved our forces out of Somalia, we would be immune from such attacks. We would not because international terrorists have their own agenda. They will attack you if they believe that you do not support them or when you are vulnerable because their agenda is political control not of a few countries but to spread worldwide.

We will be taking the necessary measures to improve the security of our people. In so doing, we expect maximum co-operation from the general public especially those who run facilities where the public go like hotels. We have done this before. You may have noticed that in major hotels such as Serena, Sheraton and Munyonyo, you are subjected to certain measures just to ensure that there is security in the place where you will be. This has been done through a co-operative arrangement between security agencies and the owners of such places. They have been co-operative but some of them are really not that co-operative because it is an expense and many of them resist the idea of adding that cost. 

I do not want to pre-empt what we will come up with, but certainly one of the measures we are going to come up with is to ensure that either by legal command or by whatever measures we take everyone who entertains the public in a public place takes measures to ensure the security of the patrons of that place.  This is what I was talking about in Kabale when I made the statement where The Daily Monitor said that I said we were caught off guard. It is interesting that they do not even quote me in that article. They quote other statements that I made extensively but not that one and that is because I did not say that. 

What I said is what I have just told you. I said that when the World Cup came, many groups set out to watch the tournament in many areas such as bars. I mentioned that although we had general policing, we had not deployed specifically in areas where people were, like in that restaurant or in Lugogo. Because of that, these terrorists managed to find a loophole which they used successfully to inflict the damage that was put on our people. Otherwise, the Police was on alert everywhere. We had police patrol in all places.

It is not always the case that you can monitor every inch of your country or city. I think the most important thing is that we must have the vigilance of the public like they did in Makindye, so that people are conscious. We had done this some time ago and many of the intended terrorists’ acts in Uganda were foiled through the co-operation between the security agencies and the Police. 

I just want to assure you that we will do everything that we can to ensure that there is no repetition or reoccurrence of these acts of terrorism from now onwards. 

There was a point about AU involvement in Somali – (Interjections)– Mr Speaker, I think the Minister of Defence will say this, that we have got alliances with many people in the world that are fighting against terrorism, because terrorism is not a threat against individual countries; it is not a threat against individual human beings but a threat against law and order. It is against the orderly living of society. Therefore, we will be taking measures in liaison with our friends here in Uganda. Some of these measures may curtail the level of freedom that we have been enjoying in the past, but all these will be done in the interest of protecting everyone. I thank you.

5.44
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker and Members of Parliament. What hit our country on Sunday night was to say the least heartless on the part of the planners and those who executed it. I am sure many colleagues have read in the papers and heard on the international press that those thugs were saying that, “When they cry, we laugh.” They were referring to us; that when we cry, they laugh. So, it was heartless on the part of the planners and those who executed it. It was irrational, indiscriminate, deplorable and tragic. And really in summary, that is what terrorism is. 

So, I join colleagues who spoke before me to condemn in the strongest terms those who planned this act and those who carried it out. My constituency also has already received a victim, who died in the attacks. My feelings are with the family and friends of those who died and I pass on my condolences. 

Let me give some clarification on some points which were made about the resolution we took as Parliament to authorise the President to deploy the UPDF to this peace keeping mission. My brother, hon. Okumu, articulated that the FDC Party Caucus sat and discussed this –(Interjections)– okay, Opposition caucus –(Interjections)– Ndugu Lukwago seems to be agitated by the mention of FDC. (Laughter) 

To cast back, unfortunately, about that time we had other differences and at the time we took the resolution our colleagues on the Opposition had walked out of the House. However, I had had fairly extensive discussions with the hon. Leader of the Opposition and he had asked me many questions and I gave him many clarifications and he gave me indication that on the whole, he was in support of this deployment. 

Our resolution is, of course, in our Hansard; it did not have conditionality as colleagues are saying that it was on condition that other people joined us. What is true is that it is desirable now and even before that as many African countries as possible should join this mission in Somalia. It is regrettable that they have –(Interruption)

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you, hon. Minister, for giving way. I looked up and saw that hon. Reagan Okumu was not there. But I think what hon. Okumu referred to – the series of formal meetings we had from party levels to the Opposition Caucus in Parliament; we issued a formal statement in support of deployment. There were three conditions that we reflected on. 

One was that those who committed themselves to joining the peace-keeping mission should deploy. The other was in relation to ensuring the security of our people, that their lives should not be unnecessarily risked. And the third is that victims who lost lives or got injured would be adequately compensated. And you reflected your assurance on some of these. Subsequent on this particular resolution, when you came before the House, those particular concerns where repeated. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there is a problem joining the two issues; the one that happened on Sunday and the one of reviewing the stay of our troops in Somalia; it creates a wrong impression. In a sense, you are giving credence to those who carried out the senseless act, that they had a cause and that because they had a cause now you are talking about reviewing it. They may think that they were justified and that is why you are talking about reviewing it. I do not know whether this is the appropriate time to combine the two issues.  Whereas we can review it, let us not give the impression that these people are the cause and are forcing you to review. 

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and the Minister of Defence. Just for clarity of our assertion, some of us are strongly of the view that we would have achieved a lot more if the African Union had honoured its obligation and that is why we are pushing for this. We think that we can do a lot more to save our country and to save Somalia itself, if everybody who made a commitment stands by what they said initially. 

I would like to remind the hon. Minister of Defence that when the debate was on the Floor of this House, part of his submission to this House, which was very moving, was to assure us that we would not be in Somalia alone. In his own words, on page 513 of our Hansard of Wednesday, 07 February 2007 the hon. Minister of Defence, hon. Dr Crispus Kiyonga, said to this House that the African Union mission would do three things. 

“One, conduct peace support operation in Somalia, two; provide support to the transitional federal government institution, and three; facilitate the provision of humanitarian assistance.” 

Then in the subsequent paragraph, he says, “Mr Speaker, Uganda will not be moving into Somalia in isolation. The appeal has been wide within the African Union and I am glad to inform hon. Members that the following African countries have also agreed to provide troops: Ghana, Malawi, Nigeria and Burundi together with Uganda so far. Five countries have agreed to provide troops for this mission. For a start, we are over-subscribed.” These are the words of the Minister of Defence. Thank you.

DR KIYONGA: Not quite -(Interruption)

MR WACHA: I thank you, Mr Speaker and the Minister, for giving way. Let me also take this opportunity to console the people who lost their relatives and friends. This matter affects all of us. As a matter of fact, the whole morning, I was making arrangements for sending a body home, so, we are in the same boat.

The Minister made a statement, which needs clarification right from the beginning so that we are together. Am I to understand you, Sir, that even if all the other African states who have been mentioned fail to fulfil their obligation towards Somalia, Uganda is going to continue alone even if others withdraw? Are we going to go at it alone?  

Secondly, are you, at this particular moment, happy with the limited mission that Uganda and Somalia are playing in Somalia? And if you are not satisfied, is Uganda capable of extending the mission alone? 

DR KIYONGA: I think hon. Wacha has come too early if you listen to what I will say. That clarification will come. 

Hon. Alaso and colleagues, it is true that when I came here to propose that motion and you voted positively, this was following a resolution of the AU Summit. Our Heads of State of the African Union had made a declaration that we move to Somalia and help our brothers and sisters. So, when I came here to say that we were not going to be there in isolation, I was reflecting that. Indeed, the position on the ground is not that we are there in isolation. As you have read, hon. Alaso, one of the countries I mentioned was Burundi, which is still there with us. 

Although the other people have not contributed any troops, nevertheless, they have not retracted that motion. Efforts continue to be made. Only about a week ago, there was an extra-ordinary Summit of IGAD in Addis Ababa to talk about the situation in Somalia. This was supposed to prepare for a bigger discussion of the African Union Summit, which is going to take place here in Kampala.

The truth of the matter is that in these difficult exercises, Africa is alone. If we are not going to take on the challenge and do everything possible to solve our problems, Africa will get worse, from all aspects. Therefore, all of us who articulate Pan-Africanism must not be found to be wanting.

Hon. Wacha has asked the question; we have waited for three years and our other brothers apart from Burundi are not forthcoming. What is the way forward? I am paraphrasing what he said. In Government - and I am sure other friends who are Pan-Africanists even if they are not in Government - the strong feeling is that we must in one way or another solve the problem in Somalia first for our fellow brothers and sisters in Somalia and secondly, for the region because the moment that situation in Somalia is left like that, terrorism will thrive. (Applause)

As hon. Amama Mbabazi has said and other people who spoke before him, terrorism is global –

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, hon. Minister, can you give me just one minute? I want to introduce the special guests we have. We have pupils of Bishop Hannington Memorial School Kabowa, Lubaga South Constituency represented by hon. Susan Nampijja. (Applause) You are all welcome to the House and your MP is in the House. (Applause)

DR KIYONGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for bringing to our attention these smartly dressed children. We welcome them to the House. (Applause)

So, to go back to the point made by hon. Wacha, my answer is that we must be very innovative as Africans, take every step and scratch the bottom of the pot to solve our problems, particularly security. In the case of Uganda, while we are standing there only with our brothers in Burundi and we are waiting and we continue to wait, we have also taken some additional measures. I will mention two.

Number one, we have pleaded with every leader who has come on the scene in Mogadishu regarding the point of reconciliation. Indeed, President Sharif who is the current leader there came on that ticket.

Secondly, we have pleaded with them to create their own security capacity and as a way of contributing to that, colleagues as you have seen in the press, we have been doing some limited training of the Somalis. Right now as I speak, in Bihanga in Ibanda District, we are training 700 Somalis with the help of the EU. This is going to go on until we train about 2,000. I am told other countries are also training.

Even if other people did not come, hon. Ben Wacha, and reconciliation made progress and this capacity building made progress, we could still achieve something for our brothers and sisters in Somalia. But it is critical that we remain put and take every initiative to solve that problem; not doing so will be just hiding our heads in the sand -(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, hon. Minister, for giving way. I have heard the minister talking about progress made in reconciling the different factions in Somalia. I am surprised by that statement because a few days ago, the President of the interim administration in Somalia went to the front line to confront the Islamists and he was seen on a Ugandan tank. Does this demonstrate reconciliation? What kind of reconciliation are you talking about, hon. Minister? I would like to be clarified on that. Is there a process of talking or are these people entangled in war? Why would the President of Somalia go to the front line if we were appealing for reconciliation among the factions? 

DR KIYONGA: Well, I think I will appeal to – (Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: I forgot a point. There was a commitment by the minister on behalf of Government at the time when we passed a resolution to send troops to Somalia that on a monthly basis, he would come to Parliament to report to us on the progress of our operations in Somalia and he said he would follow this to the letter. Up to date, it is unfortunate that I do not see the minister coming here on a regular basis - not even to mention monthly basis - to brief this House. As a result, Parliament is blind about what is happening in Somalia. We do not know whether there is any progress in our operations in Somalia, we cannot even have an idea when we shall conclude our operations in Somalia because we cannot be in Somalia endlessly and I think this was the value attached to the frequent reports to this House. Thank you. 

MR GAGAWALA: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform hon. Amuriat that he should not forget so quickly that at one time, Ugandans were being killed by Idi Amin and they had to go and beg Tanzania – literally on their knees – to come and partner with them to cleanse. In the same vein, Tanzania again helped Rwanda and Burundi and Uganda. Therefore, the onus should be on us to say that we have arrived; let us help others. That is the information that I thought Eng. Amuriat would get abreast with. 

DR KIYONGA: Mr Speaker, I think I made the point that we really must stay put and take all innovative measures to help the situation in Somalia. My brother, hon. Amuriat, is a regular attendant of this House and I would like to remind him that since we deployed the troops in Somalia, I have made not less than three or four statements of updates to this House. Well, I need to check my facts but I have made progress reports in this House and even more importantly in the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, where all of us are represented. Let me undertake once again that if the feeling that the frequency is not frequent enough, then I will step up so that –(Mr Kyanjo rose_)

THE SPEAKER: But you are really prolonging this debate; it is not proper. 

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Minister for giving way. The statement which was made by the Leader of the Opposition made a critical proposal that we are seeking to have a meeting with Government so that together we can find a lasting solution. I would wish to hear this commitment being reiterated on the side of Government so that we have a common platform to review the whole issue and find a solution at the end. Hon. Kiyonga, you are aware that some of us vehemently opposed this total exercise – myself, hon. Sebaggala, hon. Otto, hon. Fungaroo - but we were defeated and complied by the verdict of the majority. 

But now, there is need to sit down together and review the situation honestly, even if we are not able to blame ourselves. The necessary thing now is to understand that something has happened. We would be insensitive if we said it doesn’t matter or that it is business as usual. I would like to have this commitment come from the side of Government so that we can sit together and agree on how to move on. 

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Kyanjo, isn’t it enough in general terms to agree that we need to review, without going into the details?

DR KIYONGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I see dialogue between hon. Alaso and Prof. Kabwegyere; I hope they allow me to continue. (Laughter) Actually, when I heard the Leader of the Opposition mention the word review in his statement, my reaction was that I need to go to him and we discuss more to hear what it is that the professor would like us to do and what institutional mechanism he is proposing. I am posing these questions because as hon. Kyanjo knows, and he is a member of our Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs and every time we appear before that committee, we are always requested, if we do not come up front with our own understanding, to brief them of what is going on in Somalia. So, because we need to define what we are talking about when we say “review”, I will undertake at the earliest opportunity to seek appointment with the Leader of the Opposition so that I understand what is being proposed and then I can carry it to my colleagues in Government. And as I have said, we will have more frequent reports to you in the House. So, without taking a lot of your time, honourable colleagues, I join everybody -(Interjections)– okay, with the permission of the Speaker. 

I was surprised that hon. Alaso was still questioning the presence of our troops in that part of Africa; not only in Chad but in the DRC and Southern Sudan because all of us recall that when the peace talks failed in Juba, the government took the only option left, working in cooperation with other countries in the region, to pursue Kony and the Minister of Defence then came and made a very elaborate statement in this House which was thoroughly discussed. 

The question of legality was raised and it was very well answered. So, I want to assure you that the UPDF is in that region for a good cause – to ensure that we get total peace not only in Uganda but in the DRC, in the Central African Republic and in Southern Sudan to the extent that this is being violated by the LRA and with the permission of the Speaker, I will next week come and issue a more elaborate statement on that situation. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kabakumba wants to make a statement as the Minister of Information and National Guidance. It is a brief statement. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

6.12
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Mrs Kabakumba Masiko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues in condemning the heinous and cowardly terrorist acts of killing innocent civilians. I sympathise and send my condolences to the bereaved families who lost their loved ones. This is a very costly wake up call to all of us that are still alive. Any of us could have been a victim, given the moment that was chosen by the terrorist to strike. I can only add that as Government, we shall continue sensitising the people as and when we get information about security threats. 

And for the record, Government has always been warning Ugandans about these threats and many of the proprietors were advised to acquire walk-through detectors but many of them have not complied. When as Government we come up with measures to compel the proprietors of these areas that attract crowds, I hope this Parliament will support us.

That night I was at the UBC Grounds because I had been invited as Minister of Information and National Guidance to be there but all of you may know that I do not normally go for these functions.

For the record, when the bomb went off at the Ethiopian Village, the IGP did send messages through the security forces that were on the ground to warn people to leave the sites immediately -(Interjections)- and this information was received by the organisers at UBC. If those who were watching were attentive, there was an announcement about the security threats at that time. The organisers assured the people that they had checked everybody that had entered and they had -(Interjections)- that was for the UBC Grounds - and they had cleared the whole area before. Unfortunately, after some time, we received news that bombs had gone off at Kyadondo Rugby Club and therefore that function was wound up very fast.

As I wind up, security starts with all of us and we must be conscious and guide our people. I can assure you, like my colleagues have said that definitely Uganda cannot be safe if the terrorists are all over the world. And for me as a Ugandan, if Uganda can contribute towards making the world a safe place to live in, I would be very proud.

I understand the frustrations of hon. Okupa but I believe that when UBC aired the President’s statement about the events and the declaration of the mourning period, maybe hon. Okupa was not watching and rather he was watching Al Jazeera. I can assure you the statement was very clear that apart from the half masts, the normal activities would continue and I want to assure you that as a national broadcaster we can only increase on broadcasting the activities concerning, or related to, the mourning and the losses that we have incurred. But we cannot completely stop airing other programmes.

And I also want to assure Ugandans - hon. Nambooze mentioned something like if we can organise as Government - I want to assure you that Government is planning that at specific periods all these private radios, including the national broadcasters, when there is national and important news to broadcast, they will be compelled to broadcast at that specific time. But there is some infrastructure that is needed to be put in place and that is what we are working on. So, this is not something new but it is in plan. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

6.18
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker and honourable members of Parliament, I wish to convey our condolences to the bereaved and -(Interjections)- the Minister will make a statement after me. We convey our condolences to the bereaved and we pray that the Almighty may sustain them.

You have suggested -(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, we have the Minister of Internal Affairs waiting to make responses. I would have felt it procedurally proper for the Prime Minister to conclude the whole thing.

THE SPEAKER: The Prime Minister is not winding up. The Minister of Internal Affairs, the owner of the statement, will wind up. He is making a contribution.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I want to thank all of you for your suggestions. I want to inform you that Cabinet is due to meet tomorrow and we had already arranged to discuss a number of issues including, as has been suggested, burial expenses, medical expenses, and compensation. The Minister of State for Internal Affairs had been requested to bring the proposals to Cabinet. His Excellency, the President, has already made a contribution and we shall be putting all these things together and coming out with concrete proposals –(Ms Nambooze rose_)

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Internal Affairs.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: No, she is giving information.

THE SPEAKER: Wind up.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: I am sorry I would have allowed her to speak because I want her to feel secure since she is new -(Laughter)- but the Speaker has made a little –(Interjections)- okay. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: No, really we started this at 3 and it is coming to - 

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The information I want to give the Prime Minister is that some people have been buried today and most of them shall be buried tomorrow but he is talking about the Cabinet meeting tomorrow to discuss how they will be buried. Most probably he is talking about giving “mataaba” in Luganda. 

PROF. NSIBAMBI: When problems occur, it is important to sit down and work out things in detail. Others may be given “mataaba” but we must do it in a coherent manner and I want to assure you that we shall do so. 

I want also to point out that the Minister of State was deliberate in not giving too much information because when you are investigating acts of terrorism, it is unwise to reveal too much. I want to inform you that terrorists have been listening to our debate so we should be frugal in our statements. I thank you. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Please wind up, Minister of Internal Affairs. It seems my friend hon. Alaso has really - what is burning you? Can you make it before he winds up?

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, thank you very much for your indulgence. The concern I want to raise is what I observed at the gate of Parliament this morning and I think it is important for all of us. The security measures at Parliament, I think, should be adhered to by all of us. If it means queuing, whether you are a minister or what, we all must queue and let the police search us. 

I watched one car coming through the gate of Parliament and instead of following the normal entry, this car drove on the right and it took this very tough policeman to insist to the driver of this car that he was not going to allow them no matter who they were.

When we are talking about security here, I think we should have a bottom line; all of us should adhere to security arrangements.

MR OKUPA: In fact, I was in the queue. It was hon. Kabakumba’s car. It came and we thought it was a terrorist overtaking us -(Laughter)- but it took the courage of that officer there to stop and block her. I thank the police officer who took charge to stop the minister. The minister got out and went away. We cannot allow this type of thing.

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Speaker, for the record of this House, my vehicle is not available but in the morning I stopped because there was a long queue and I was summoned to the Committee of Presidential Affairs in Parliament and I walked out and that pick-up was driven back. It never entered -(Interjections)- it did not enter this Parliament. So, I want to thank Parliament and I want all of us to support Parliament in its effort to make these Parliamentary premises more secure for all of us. That pick up never entered this Parliament.

6.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I wish to thank you very much indeed. As leaders, we should be exemplary. Do not force the police to do unbecoming actions on you people and on ourselves. So, I appeal and I am very glad that all of you - I was in the queue and I had about five cars in front of me and I can assure you, I waited until I was checked. I wanted to see how the police officer was checking my car and I was very impressed. So, please, let us encourage those officers to do that.

Now, the question which I want to make a small contribution on and inform this House about is, to stay or not to stay in Somalia.

THE SPEAKER: Please, do not open that one.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Okay.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I think what Members want are the details and the names and you can do that maybe tomorrow or the other day but otherwise leave the Somalia thing out.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Thank you very much for your guidance. Colleagues, let me quickly run through a few issues that you raised.

Assurance that what took place last Sunday will be conclusively investigated. I want to assure you that we are not alone. What took place in our country on Sunday is an attack on humanity. It is not a Ugandan problem; this is not a Kenyan problem and this is not a British problem; it is a humanity problem. I want to tell you, we have appealed to very many friendly forces some of whom have already arrived and we are busy carrying out this investigation. With this support in terms of equipment and in terms of manpower, I am fully convinced that this time we will be able to conclusively bring these investigations to an end and we shall inform the country accordingly.

Security for schools, bus parks and so forth. I want to assure you that for every place now where normally there could be 20 people plus, our eyes and ears are there. 

The Soroti case; please, I appeal to you like my other colleagues have said, security is a shared responsibility. All of us are responsible for security. It is not a matter of police alone. I have 37,000 personnel to police this whole country. You can imagine the magnitude of the problem. So, if you have any suspicion or you have any matter which you think you are not very clear about, please help us to report this to the nearest police station. I thank you very much and I welcome your proposals in strengthening our security, the registration of aliens, migration, refugees and registration of visitors in hotels.

I want to assure colleagues that I have carried all recommendations along with me and when we meet in our security committee or the organs that are responsible, I will advise them to make sure that they move in accordance with what you have advised.

Lastly, details of the victims; I promise this House that we will give you the details of the victims because we have received them already. I did not think that it would be appropriate for me to bring it now but we shall circulate the list in the lobby for those of you who want to know who died, who is in hospital, where he is and so forth. That information is already with us.

Once again colleagues, I wish to thank you -(Interjections)- which meeting, Mr Speaker? 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Hon. Kyanjo, I did not capture that point of the meeting. But I want to wind up by thanking you very much for these wonderful contributions that you have made and I want to assure the country again, just as hon. Kiyonga said, we are doing everything within our power to ensure that the security is fully restored and our investors continue to come here and the AU meeting that is going take place in another week or so takes place. So do not fear but keep alert. That is the message that I want to give you. Keep alert everybody. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Minister and I thank you very much, hon. Members for your contributions. I hope the various ideas given here will be taken into account by the Executive to improve the security and to deal with the other touchy matter in Somalia and then they will brief us.

I want to take this opportunity, hon. Members, to again inform you that some time ago when the Kasubi tombs were burnt, we made a decision here that we should make a contribution. A substantial contribution has been made by all of you and I thank you that we are working together in this matter and I intend to take the contribution. I need not mention the details now but I can say it was substantial. What I am doing is to get in touch with the leaders of various groups including the Leader of Opposition and Leader of Government side so that when I go to Mengo, I go with representation of all interests to take -(Laughter)- to take that contribution. But I thank you for that substantial contribution. You will know the details the day we present it. Thank you very much.

With this, I do not think we can take up another item. The House is adjourned until tomorrow. I know it is a Cabinet day but I would request that members of Cabinet finish their work early so that by 2.30 p.m. we start and clear the business we have.

I have seen newspapers raising issues of quorum. Please, try to be here. And do not raise issues of quorum because you are accusing your colleagues of not attending. (Laughter) Let us all be here and clear business.

The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 6.33 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 14 July 2010 at 2.30 p.m.)

