Thursday, 11 July 2002

Parliament met at 2.25 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.   

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I have two matters to communicate. The first one is that I want to remind you about the invitation from the Joint Christian Council for evening tea this evening at the home of the Archbishop of the Church of Uganda. So, please do the needful and attend that function.  

Secondly, I understand that there were some distortions in the matters they communicated concerning the resolutions of the church on the current political, economic and social direction of Uganda.  So, I have a text of what they say is the correct release and copies are going to be put in your pigeonholes.  That is from the Joint Christian Council.

The second issue concerns forthcoming events in the Parliament of Uganda. I am happy to announce that the Parliament of Uganda will be hosting the 33rd Commonwealth Parliament Conference Africa Regional meeting from the 2nd to the 10th of August here in Kampala. 

It is a very important event for the 7th Parliament, because the last time we had a Commonwealth Parliamentary meeting was in 1967, five years after independence. Because of the turbulence we went through we were suspended for a total of about 20 years, and we have been members for another almost 20 years. So, it is a very important event for us, and we are happily carrying out the arrangements - (Applause). 

We have put in place an organising committee, chaired by myself, and I am being assisted by the members of the executive committee of the CPA- Uganda branch and a few other members have been selected because of their knowledge in organising meetings and so on. 

The theme of the conference will be “Good Governance and Development: The basic crying need of Africa for an equitable and democratic world order for the 21st century.” 

We shall discuss the following topics: 

“Good governance as a necessary pre-condition for development: How Parliaments in the African region can respond to the growing threat of terrorism.” In this respect, the Uganda Parliament and the Parliament of Malawi were given the assignment to produce the country paper on terrorism. And some selected members on our Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs of this House are preparing that paper on behalf of the Ugandan Parliament. 

We shall also discuss the World Trade Organisation: The challenges facing Africa. We shall also discuss HIV/AIDS: What is the role of Parliament in combating it? And on this one, honourable members, last year in the annual meeting in Nigeria, Uganda presented the lead people on this subject, but owing to public demand from other Parliaments, we have had to bring back the topic. It will be presented by Kenya and Sierra Leone. 

We shall also discuss the role of parliamentary regional groupings in strengthening regional and sub-regional units. 

We shall also discuss women and development: How can Parliament contribute to engendering to the political decision-making process in Africa.
  
So, these are the major topics and we shall be having these guests here for a whole week.  During the course of the conference, they will have an opportunity to reach other parts of the country so that they can also understand and appreciate what we have in Uganda.  I thought I should inform you and also make you know that although the whole Parliament will not be able to attend, all of you will participate in the events of the CPA.  Thank you very much.

MR AGGREY AWORI: Madam Speaker, regarding the invitation to His Grace the Archbishop’s residence this afternoon, I note that we are expected to be there at 5.00 O’clock, does it mean that we are going to curtail our debate this afternoon to maybe 4.30 to allow us enough time to be there punctually?  

Secondly, two other items pertaining to the Order Paper: when we started this debated, we requested the Speaker that certain items which had been left out be brought forward so that they can be cleared. One of the items mentioned was questions from members to the ministers, in other words, question time. To date, notwithstanding the assurances from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister that the Cabinet is ready to answer our questions, I do not see them featuring at all on the Order Paper, and yet some of them are matters of national importance and urgency.

Last but not least, I do not want to read your mind, Madam Speaker, but I presume this is the last day of debating the President’s address to the nation. I am very concerned about what is going on in the country at the moment. There is a national crisis and we cannot bury our heads under the carpet and assume it will go away. 

We have been touching on this issue of national security in bits and pieces, and yet some of our colleagues come from the areas that have been affected by insecurity. I am specifically referring to the Acholi districts and some of the Lango districts, in other words: Lira, Apac, Pader, Kitgum, Gulu, Moyo, Nebbi, Adjumani; and it is also spreading to the capital of this country, Kampala.

I am really worried, and I think that this matter must get the attention of this House and the Government. It is really important that the President not only addresses the press, but he also addresses this august House on a matter of this nature. It is national security; it is no longer the northern security per se. Some of us who have got experience in these issues - a bad one for that matter - we see similar symptoms like the past and that is why I am concerned. I have no time, I have no bus fare, no airfare to run to exile again –(Interruption)- the helicopter was not allowed to land here for that reason -(Laughter).  

Madam Speaker, I am just requesting, with your indulgence, that when we come to the end of this topic next Tuesday, you allow us on the Order Paper to deal first and foremost with national security, especially in the areas I have mentioned. It is really important.  

I was alarmed this morning when I learnt that in the press conference by His Excellency the President, he said, among other things, that a letter dismissing one of our colleagues as the Director of Internal Security Organisation was forged. When the signature of the Commander in Chief/Head of State is being forged to dismiss a senior army officer, we have reached a point when this House must be involved in decisions pertaining to national security.

I beg to move that at the end of this debate, the next item on the Order Paper for this House should concern no other topic except national security.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, on the first one you will be given time to leave in order to be able to reach the Godly place by 5.00 O’clock. So, you should not worry about arriving late. I shall give you time to arrive there. Now, with regard to questions, they will come on the Order Paper starting from next week.  

As to whether we should immediately discuss security, you have made two requests. You want the President to address you on this matter and also you want it to be discussed in this House.  We shall transmit the request that the President addresses you on this matter, and I think we shall discuss it with the Speaker on the next order of business. You will be given opportunity to discuss it. It is very important; we agree.  Thank you.

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT TO THIS PARLIAMENT ON TUESDAY, 11 JUNE 2002

MR JOSEPH MUGAMBE (Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion. I will start off by thanking His Excellency the President for a clear State of the Nation Address. I will extend my thanks also to include the Vice President for having composed herself so well and fitted in the shoes of His Excellency the President. I would also like to thank the honourable member who moved the motion and the seconder as well. Due to the limited time, I will go straight to make few comments on the address.

On Page 2, paragraph 2, the President says, “the economy is top on our minds”, and I entirely agree with him. I am also happy he has put a presidential economic council in place. I would plead that this council be facilitated so that we do not have forces acting in different directions, because we have got the National Planning Authority, and besides that we have got a well facilitated Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Another issue I would like to request for is a clear population policy. We may have good economic policies, but without a clear population policy we shall be in problems. Whatever economic growth we shall register can be eaten away by unplanned population growth. I am aware that for every population growth of one per cent, you need an economic growth of four per cent - four times more - to keep the status quo. So, without addressing the population issues, we may have problems.  

I have heard some leaders urging people to produce as many as they wish. But there is no clear statement from the Government as to what the actual policy should be. 

We should not mix up economic growth with economic development. Economic development is economic growth in the desired direction.    Since I have little time, I may not go through all that. 

On page 3, the President says that the economic status of the country is dependent on several issues he raises here, which is true.  Here I would like to go further and refer to what one human psychologist called Abraham said. He said that for human motivation, there are levels of needs and the lowest level of needs are physiological needs. Once the physiological needs are not there, then the next need is not attainable.  After the physiological needs, the next need is security, then after the security there is belonging.

To go back to the physiological needs, I will talk about Nakifuma. In Nakifuma there is a sub-county called Ntunda and we have had problems in this sub-county. The first problem was coffee wilt. It ate away all the coffee and one parish had to migrate to another parish. As if that was not enough, again the same sub-county was attacked by banana bacteria, which you must have known about because it has been a national problem. It is so critical that those people have roadblocks; you cannot move food out. The banana trees are being cut down and buried.  

We thank the Minister of Agriculture for acting fast and giving us all the facilities, including jik, and we managed to cut down the banana trees. But as if that is not enough, again there is another unique disease that is attacking the cassava. What I am saying is that the basic needs in this place are missing. We need immediate assistance.  

I will rush to Page 14 to the point about education.  We are told happily that enrolment is 7 million pupils and 300,000 sat for P.L.E. in 2001 and the projected number of pupils in P.7 is one million. 

Our leader does not need this data. He needs information. Information is analysed data. Let us try to analyse this data a bit.  In 1997, that is when U.P.E started, there were 2.24 million pupils in P.1.  Now we are saying there are going to be one million pupils in P.7. Is that a good story to tell! There were 860 pupils in P.2 and a similar number in P.3. We are told the pupils who sat P.7 were 300,000. Is that a good story?  Had it been analysed, definitely it would have been put differently.

There is another problem. When U.P.E was being introduced, it was for four children per family. That means the money would be sent to the pupils wherever they were. Now the situation is that money is not sent to other institutions other than Government-aided primary schools. When did the policy change? Is His Excellency aware that people have gone around to change the policy?  Maybe the Minister of Education may have to explain to us. 

I will talk a bit about fish, which is mentioned on page 18. The Ministry of Agriculture has been very efficient, however, there is a problem. We have got extension staff in the field - I do not know what they call them - who are responsible for the fish sub-sector in our areas.  

We have got graduates who were sent there two and half years ago, but these people do not even have bicycles, they do not have means of transport and they are not very sure of their salary. In short, they are not well facilitated. I am sure they are not doing what they should have done. I wish to ask the Minister of Agriculture to look into this very seriously.  

Lastly, the document talked about exports, but there is one export which we are overlooking, though it was emphasised last year, this is tourism. Tourism is an invisible export and most of these goods that are consumed in tourism are almost in consumable form. So, I wish more emphasis could be put on tourism.  

When you look at the Budget and even the President’s address to the nation, you realise that the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry should be a core Ministry. It is the one from which we can produce wealth. So, I wish the President could have a second look at the Ministry. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am going to reduce the time from seven to five minutes.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI (Buikwe North, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to contribute to this debate. I must say that at first I was not sure whether I should support the motion or not, because it will be recalled that when the President was commissioning Bujagali dam in my constituency, he refused to be thanked for anything. In fact, he castigated leaders who were present for wasting time thanking people for what they are supposed to do for this country –(Laughter)- So, I am not sure whether Parliament is utilising this time wisely in view of that pronouncement which was made when I was present in my own constituency.

However, now that Parliament has already committed itself to debating this speech, I wish to follow the bandwagon by supporting the motion by hon. Ruzindana and - at the fate of my own peril – to thank the President for his address to the nation.  

When the President came to make remarks on the budget day, I was happy to note that this time he did not disown his speech and he came out to demonstrate that indeed he truly delegated his functions. This is what we would like to see. The creation of the presidency is a landmark to show that the presidency is more than one person, in the person of his Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni.  

In the same way, I hope that this marks a watershed where the presidency will stop disowning its speeches at public functions. As a former senior government official, I feel hurt when a head of state publicly disowns his official statement and goes ahead to make his own from his head. I think this defies the whole effort of institution building. It also demeans the very senior government officers who put in lots of hours preparing a presidential speech only to be rubbished publicly, humiliated as if they are nobodies.

It is high time that we run this country under generally accepted international practice as it is done in civilised countries. We would like – (Dr Phillip Byaruhanga rose_)- can we talk over it in the corridor after we have finished – (Laughter)

I would like now to address the issue of Bujagali dam mentioned on page 13. The President says, “Bujagali was commissioned in January in 2002, all bottlenecks against its construction having been finally overcome.”  This is July, Madam Speaker, the grass that had been cut at the site has already overgrown and although the bottlenecks were overcome, no work has yet started.  

We continue to get disturbing reports that there are still outstanding issues between the Uganda Government and the World Bank. In fact when the President was in Jinja recently, he said the dam would be built whether or not the World Bank gives us money. That was after this statement. As a representative of the people where the site is, I am put to task to explain why, after all the bottlenecks have been overcome, work has not started. Do we have the capacity to build that dam from our own resources?  Do we?  I wonder! 

In the New Vision of July 4th, under the business column, it is reported that the Uganda Government at the end of June was overdrawn with the Bank of Uganda to the tune of 457 billion shillings. This important fact has not been reflected in the President’s speech, and it has not been reflected in the budget speech –(Interjections)- It is very well known, and hon. Kagonyera knows that all along we have been operating on a cash budget that was the essence of the fiscal discipline that has endeared this Government to all donors.  

One would ask what has happened to that discipline in fiscal management to the extent that Government can get overdrawn by a sum of 457 billion shillings. For your information, Bujagali dam will need 990 billion shillings. If you add to this already overdrawn amount, we are talking of a trillion shillings in deficits. This of course will lead to printing of money, and the inflation that we have talked about for a long time, of controlling and being in single digit, will be history. For sure, - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Try to wind up.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Yes, Madam Speaker, I am. This Government has done a lot of good things. We should not allow individuals to ruin the good that we have all fought to put up.  

I will end with one quotation from Druker. It is on management. A head of section in the Ford motor industry sent a telegram to Henry Ford saying, “we surpassed all targets yesterday!” and this man expected Ford to send a congratulatory message. Ford cabled back and said, “what about tomorrow?” For sure the Movement Government has done a lot, the question is, what about tomorrow?  I leave that to the honourable members to debate and consider.  I thank you. (Applause)

MAJ. JOHN KAZOORA (Kashari County, Mbarara District): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have been in this House and this is my seventh year. I have heard and seen people move this very motion, but I want now to specifically thank hon. Ruzindana for the wonderful exposition to the speech made by the President. He did us proud, and I urge members to go back and read word for word of what hon. Ruzindana said. I hope this will improve the standards of debate in this House. 

I have his speech somewhere in the Hansard. He said, “I am just taking advantage of my privileged position as an elder, both in age and also in the Movement, to point out a few of these omissions and nobody should think of it as a bit unusual.” 

We have a saying that when you get into a home and you do not find an elder to advise, that home is not respected. So, I hope honourable members go back and read hon. Ruzindana’s speech.  They will consider that he is an elder and he is advising; and not a matter of shouting “Movement”, “Movement”, but there are also elders who can advise on these matters - (Applause).

In the President’s speech, he talked about the Fifteen-Point Programme and reminded us of the forgotten song of building an independent, self-sustaining and integrated national economy. I last heard of that statement very many years ago.  I do not know what happened. But now that it is back, I hope the actors and the implementers take it seriously.

The President also thanked us for having passed the POB. And when he was on this great American trip, he was hailed because this House passed the Leadership Code Bill. I thought he would also have thanked us for that. And you all remember the enormous effort the Minister for Ethics and Integrity put in to have this bill passed. I thought that was a big landmark and it could have been mentioned.  

The President talked about good governance, and certainly good governance is very important for any society. Now, for the country to be kept guessing on the way forward, to live in the world of guessing, to me, is not fair. Hon. Mwandha talked about this issue yesterday.  We all know that our dear President is serving his last constitutional term, and it is important that the transition is managed and not just let to be controlled by situations that are not planned. I hope this debate will be resurrected and continued.

Madam Speaker, good governance entails a lot of things. Hon. Aggrey Awori here alluded to something. A Government-owned newspaper carries a big headline, “The Boss of Internal Security Organisation Dismissed”. Big headline! The following day, another paper says he is not dismissed. National security is not a matter that can be treated like that! 

I had expected somebody in Government to tell us what is happening, which is which and what is the morale of the informers and operatives -(Mr Kategaya walked out_) I had thought hon. Kategaya was coming to tell me - (Laughter) So, this good governance entails a lot of things, and we thought that that matter could have been handled in a neater manner.  

Marketing: We appeal to our farmers to do a lot of work but as I speak now, a bunch of matooke that costs 6,000/= here is 100/= in Kashari. I was there recently with hon. Mutagamba and she could not believe - 100/=! A litre of milk in Kashari is also 100/=, and I know you know what it takes for these farmers to get this milk. And they are even lucky to get the 100/= in cash. The farmers are demoralised, Madam Speaker.

In the President’s speech, and this was also repeated in the Budget, they talked of providing valley dams to the cattle corridor. They mentioned Bukanga, Isingiro, and then they jumped Kashari and went to Nyabushozi, Kazo and Ssembabule. Madam Speaker, you know very well that Kashari is at the centre of the cattle corridor. I hope the ministers concerned will address this. 

I had this struggle in the last Parliament about water for Kashari. Hon. Kagonyera, I do not want to repeat this. Please take the matter of water in Kashari seriously. In 1999, we lost over 10,000 head of cattle. We do not expect the same to happen in future.  

Lastly, the mover of the motion talked about institutions and several members have also talked about institutions, so I just want to emphasise. In fact, I thanked hon. Ruzindana for this speech, but his conclusion did not tally with his observations. I thought the observations would make a different conclusion. But since he was the mover, I will let it pass. 

There was this issue where the President mentioned that if they detect corruption they should report to certain individuals - it was said in his speech and then during the budget day - and yet you know very well that we talk about these institutions, but we have given the IGG no power. And no wonder, on the budget day that individual that was talked about came and sat where the ministers normally sit! Probably he assumed that he had reached that level. I wondered whether he was replacing the honourable Minister for Ethics and Integrity or he had taken over from the IGG. 

The advisors of the President, for heaven’s sake, let this Government and the society emphasize the working of institutions and forget creating parallel individuals and other bodies! I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS GERTRUDE KULANY (Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I also want to thank hon. Ruzindana for moving this motion. I am going to talk about agriculture.  Agriculture is the backbone of this country, but it is sad that when it comes to allocating resources, it is one of the Ministries that are given very little money. It is given four per cent of the total budget. No wonder when you travel to the countryside, you see very poor agriculture on the ground.  

When they talked of modernization of agriculture, I thought actually that the peasant was going to be liberated from using the hoe to using a tractor, but it is sad. What is going on now with the PMA and NAADS is just theory. 

In my district we live on a mountain and most of the peasants have not acquired the skills of farming. You find that agriculture extension workers are poorly facilitated, and as a result of that, their skills are not passed on to the peasants. The result of this is very poor yields of crops, and most of the soils are washed away. If Government is really serious and takes agriculture as a backbone, it should put in a lot of resources and help the peasants to get out of the poverty we are talking about.  

There is also an area where I feel people are marginalized, and this is the business community. The URA subjects the business community to paying taxes for the goods they are going to sell, and at times these business people find it very difficult to collect the taxes before they sell these goods. 

I request Government to allow these business people at least to pay a portion of the taxes, and when they have sold all the goods then they clear the taxes. Otherwise, so many of them lose the same goods because of failure to pay for the taxes. So, at the end of it, everybody is frustrated and yet the business community is also a backbone of this country. Most of the taxes URA collects are from the business community. So, it is very sad that it is one group of society which is marginalized.

Madam Speaker, I want to talk about education.  We are happy about UPE, but some of these districts, especially mine, because of our history we are still behind.  You find that the structures are not there or there are very poor structures. 

Government should not take every district as if they are all at par. There are some which are still very backward. More resources should be given to those districts which are still lagging behind.

And you may have realized, Madam Speaker, that in the results of PLE, it is only central which performs well. I am sure all of you believe that it does not mean that it is only people who stay in central who are clever. The countryside also has clever children, but because of poor facilities in the countryside, they are always lagging behind. So, Minister for Education, please look into that.  

Now as I speak we have only one teachers’ training college, but if you went there, you would not believe it is a teachers’ training college. Government has not put much effort in it. We also have a vocational training institute in Kapchorwa, but if you go there, they have no facilities at all, and yet it is the only vocational training institute we have in the entire district. So, I really pray to Government to look at some areas very closely and try to bring them on board so that we are all at par and when we speak, we are speaking the same thing.

I come from a district which has a lot of resources, and of recent, they have discovered we also have very good lime. The raw material of the cement you are getting from Tororo actually comes from Kapchorwa. I would request the Government that the people of Kapchorwa also want value to be added to their product. We should have an annex of Tororo cement in Kapchorwa where the raw material comes from, so that the locals can also benefit from it.

On health, our only hospital, Kapchorwa Hospital, as I speak now has no maternity wing.  When I was last in NRC I talked about it, but up to date there is no maternity wing in Kapchorwa Hospital. The women deliver in a room they share with other patients. It is a very serious matter, and I hope the Minister for Health will do something about it. 

I also want to inform him that there are no drugs in the hospital. Whenever patients go there they tell them there are no drugs. And as I speak now we have an attack of highland fever in Kapchorwa, so we need the drugs. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

DR OKULO EPAK (Oyam North, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Each time I have contributed to this debate I have complained against the captioning of the motion. It seems it is a determined effort to continue making the motion read in that way. My own humble submission would be that our participation in this debate could either be adding value or pointing out omissions to the State of Nation Address and policies stated by the President. And hopefully, whatever contribution we make here would reach him and would assist him to enrich the policies.  But the way it is captioned, if we have really to thank him for the so called “clear and precise exposition”, then there will be no need for him to even bother to know what we said.  

I wish to suggest that we caption this motion “contributions of Parliament…” Just remove the word “thanks” and add the word “contributions of Parliament”, so that His Excellency the President can expect that we are going to add value or otherwise to his speech by that definition. 

The only thanks I can give to the President for this speech is for saving himself the embarrassment. I thank him for saving himself the embarrassment of delivering this kind of State of Nation Address. I want to thank him for doing that and delegating it to somebody else.  

On page 2, the President said: 

“Our vision, as stated in Point Number Five in the Movement’s ‘15 Point Programme,’ is to build an independent, integrated and self-sustaining national economy. It is, therefore, prudent to take stock of economic performance every year and see how much we have achieved and how much still remains to be done” towards realization of this so-called goal or vision.  

A lot of us had thought that this bush dream had by now surely died and was buried. We are wondering at the attempt to resurrect it now at a time when the President himself is the chief peddler of AGOA, of globalisation, and he is having his development budget almost 90 per cent financed by donors and he is a member of the highly indebted poor countries. 

The only performance evaluation or stock which can be taken is that, we are moving totally in the opposite direction of that dream. It would save the President a lot of embarrassment if this dream could be buried for good. 

Good governance and security: Madam Speaker, the President expresses a lot of happiness with this Parliament for passing the Political Organizations Bill. I was a member of the Constituent Assembly.  The phenomenon called political systems, which has found its way into our Constitution and ramifications in issues like the Political Organizations Bill, to me, is the greatest political fraud ever designed to perpetuate leadership of this nature. 

Consequently, if such a great political fraud is supposed to be a measure of good governance, if such a great political fraud is supposed to be the reflection of the political state of this country, then we can only pray to God to save us from this kind of good governance. Towards the end –(Interruption)

MR STEVEN BASALIZA: Is it in order for the Member of Parliament holding the Floor to call the Political Organizations Bill, which turned into an Act, a political fraud when it was passed by the majority of Members of Parliament elected throughout the country?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In view of the fact that it is this Parliament, which enacted that law consciously, it cannot be a fraud.  He is out of order.

DR OKULO EPAK: That is my opinion. I am entitled to my opinion, in difference of whatever this Parliament has passed, and you will recall I walked out on this very issue. I would like to apologize to the Chair for that ruling, but I think I am entitled to my opinion –(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you challenging my ruling?

DR OKULO EPAK: No! (Laughter). Madam Speaker, the statement goes on to say, “Let all those who wish to be with us on the long road to permanent peace and sustained development now waste no further time on sterile debate.”  

In my view, it is this unsolicited advice, which is sterile. As long as we have a case for political pluralism in this country, nobody is going to tell us that that debate is sterile. I consider it productive. So long as development is intimately and increasingly linked with healthy political competition for leadership and alternative policies, I cannot see how continued debate on alternative polices can be called sterile.

War on Kony: Madam Speaker, historically, even in Great Britain, people who are in power assume that they have the natural prerogative to decide what to do with dissidents, regardless of the suffering of the masses. Whether people of Luwero were suffering, Obote was saying, “Museveni will remain in the bush, I am not talking to bandits”. In Great Britain, they were not going to talk to the Irish Republicans. Here, we are insisting we cannot talk to Kony, and yet the people of Acholi have been suffering for the last 16 years. 

Those of us at the periphery have been getting a bit of this. It is simply not fair! This is not Kony alone. This is Kony and the people. If the President of Uganda can talk to those who come from all over the world and he sees them in State House, including the Congolese rebels –(Laughter)- where the fate of Ugandans is not involved in the DRC, why can’t we really stoop as low as possible and try to talk to Kony, whatever devil he is? Why can’t we do that - they are a hindrance to our economy - as long as the people of Uganda, the people of the north, the people of the south will be saved rather than trying to save our own egos.

Let me make another economic remark on the recent stated revival of the co-operative society or movement. I consider it a great mockery that the very source of deliberate destruction of the co-operative movement should now contemplate its revival. It is a mockery!  The revival of the co-operative movement is as much a mockery as the mode in which the Programme for Modernization of Agriculture is made. I would only wish that a co-operative movement can be revived, but I have no hope whatsoever on the achievements of the PMA.  

On energy, I want to appreciate two things.  First, I want to appreciate the improvement on road infrastructure and communication infrastructure. I can now take three and a half hours to my village in Loro, and when I reach Loro I select a vintage tree, hang my mobile phone there and climb to answer or make a call -(Laughter). I think soon it may not be necessary to hang it on a tree, but still I can communicate from anywhere in Loro now and that is good enough for the state of the situation in which we are.

I also want to thank Government for the policy and programme on rural electrification.  But let me say this, I do not agree, whatsoever, with those people who think that the people who are opposing the Bujagali dam on environmental issues are economic saboteurs.  

My own view is that, between the leadership which thinks in one dimension and the society which thinks in many dimensions and want to look for alternatives out of possible choices, I think the latter are being more genuine and realistic. I also think that the fact that this thing has raised controversy shows that we are not sleeping and we are not savages.

Thirdly, this is not the first time a hydro- electric power scheme has raised dust. Even the Owen and Ripon Falls dam raised dust here, but the British went ahead and desecrated that beauty which has reduced Jinja now to mere red soil. With the collapse of the industrial estates, which it was intended to serve, Jinja is left gaping and yet it had this natural attribute which it could have exploited forever. 

We have alternative hydro-electric schemes in this country, and I do not see why Ayago A and B could not have been considered. I do not see why Karuma could not have been considered, because we already have Murchsion Falls at Jinja, rather than have these two dams next to each other and  they can be destroyed with one shot, and we do not think of distributing developments elsewhere.  
Even Obote, when he wanted to destroy Murchsion Falls, it was opposed, that is why it was never built. I consider those who destroy our natural heritage the greatest saboteurs of our national well being.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

PROF. EPHRAIM KAMUNTU (Sheema South, Bushenyi):  Madam Speaker, I want to thank you very much for the opportunity you have afforded me to contribute to the President’s State of Nation Address. First of all, the State of the Nation Address is a very serious matter. It spells out the economic achievements, it points out the tasks that lie ahead, and indeed its spells out the difficulties that must be overcome if we are to make progress in this country. And, indeed, it has a purpose - the purpose of giving the legislators an opportunity to respond and give a feedback to the Government, and indeed for the nation to hear how the Government has performed. It is so critical that it is even provided for in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. 

 I therefore want to join those who have expressed their appreciation to the President for fulfilling a constitutional obligation, and to thank the mover of the motion for the reflective and sober manner in which he did it.

Madam Speaker, I also want to thank the Vice President. The Vice President represented the President in addressing the nation, and I thank her for the concise and precise manner she did it, by 4.00 O’clock the task was already done. 

I know members might have differences of opinion, but a number of people have commended the Vice President for her potential for a higher position when it becomes vacant. I wish her well anyway. All I can add is that there is a feeling in the country that since Independence we have had nine Presidents, all of whom have been men, and until this country gets a lady President, there will be no peace. We need to encourage the ladies; maybe if they had their turn we might have some peace in this land.  

I want to confine my remarks on the two major areas of the President’s address. The first is good governance and security. Democracy and maintaining the tempo of democratisation in this land is a very big challenge, because democracy is not a one-time event, it is a process. Therefore, we must re-dedicate ourselves to institutionalise democracy in this country, to institutionalise competition for political power, to find mechanisms for mitigating conflicts, which is intrinsic to political competition. 

We must find a method of building cleavages and consensus so that politics or competition doesn’t become a crusade for exterminating opponents, but politics and election should be seen as an opportunity to give candidates a chance to show that they are better than their competitors.  

We must build a new political culture where legitimacy of leaders is based on consent of the governed, expressed through a free and fair election.  One of the difficulties we are facing on this good governance is not a technical matter; it also has a value system. We must endeavour to avoid the growing inequalities which fuel social resentments and anger. Part of the reason for violence in politics is precisely lack of tolerance, and these are matters we must build collectively together with the Executive arm of Government.

The question of insecurity is of major concern, and it is worrying that even when we are talking about security, the ministers responsible for security are absent. We would want to show the causes of insecurity in this land, unless it is grasped it will not be dealt with.  

We know that since colonial times security in this country has never been permanently established, and we know that security is a pre-requisite for any development.  

The root causes of insecurity are known; they are structural. We have weak political, social and economic institutions. We also have economic marginalisation and the fear of exclusion by regions and social groups. This is a root cause of insecurity. Some groups and some regions feel marginalized, and some groups will feel excluded and they will feel inequalities in resource allocation and distribution.  

There is lack of consensus on major political issues, which we must really face squarely.  Issues like federalism, if hon. Lukyamuzi was here he would argue on how we need to build a consensus on what federalism in this country must be.  We must build a consensus on prohibition of political parties. It is true that majority decisions must be respected, but for a majority decision to be respected, it must be reasonable, and this is a problem which we must all face. Indeed, we must respect the majority, but the majority must be reasonable for a consensus to build confidence in them and for peace to be established. 

I want to conclude on the point that insecurity remains one of the most pressing challenges facing this country, and Government and us must do something. Armed conflict within the country, external wars, refugees, displaced persons, cattle rustling, rebellion - all these issues surely must be addressed both within and without.   

Then we come to sustainable economic growth, mentioned on page 7 of the President’s address. Over the years Government has achieved strong economic growth, and we commend the Government for this.  

Two serious points which should be observed: one, growth rate, be it 5.6 or 6, is indeed good, but it is not sufficient.  Madam Speaker, if you give me one minute, I will demonstrate that this point is very critical.  If you have a growth rate of 6 per cent and you want to measure the impact it has on poverty, you just look over the period of time. 

In 1999/2000, the percentage of people living below the poverty line was 44 percent and the population was estimated at 16 million.  So, 44 percent of 16 million is about seven million people living below the poverty line.  Now the rate of people living below the poverty line has improved, it is now 35, but it is 35 percent of 22 million.  The total is now 7.7 million. So, while the rate is decreasing, the total of the people who are poor is increasing. You look at the percentage; you have more people poor.  Therefore, you must address both the rate at which this growth is being achieved and at the same time the population growth rate must be handled –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you please wind up?

PROF. KAMUNTU:  Madam Speaker, the second point that is also equally significant is inflation.  Similarly, inflation has been controlled in single digits.  But when you desegregate factors contributing to this, you find that the big factor is that the food prices are very low and because they are low, they pull down the rate and the rate becomes negative. But the price of bananas compared to the price of acaricides, the price of mangoes compared to the price of a manufactured item like kerosene, like soap and when you have milk at 100/=, is doubling. 

The terms of trade are working against the farmers who are the majority of the population.  Yes, inflation is controlled, but it is benefiting a small group and the majority of people are not benefiting. So, we have to also address that issue. If you can be generous, Madam Speaker, one more point and I will sit down – it is very critical –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kamuntu, other members would like to contribute. I will give you half a minute.

PROF. KAMUNTU:  Thank you very much, indeed, I appreciate - (Laughter). I just wanted to comment quickly on the domestic savings rate, which is so critical in determining the rate of investment in this country. The domestic savings rate in this country is very low. It is in fact about five percent. And you would need to double the savings rate in order for you to achieve the investment rate and to promote growth and get out of poverty.  

But right now, the financial sector is still in terms of analysis of the depth, and the narrowness makes the saving very difficult, and it forces the Government to continue to depend on foreign investment with the consequences of dependence. 

We have to address the issue of the farmers, the herdsmen, the carpenters, the teachers. They have no where to put their money, even for safe custody. And for you to have a majority of your workforce with no access to financial services is counter productive to all efforts we are putting in on investment.  Therefore, we would encourage Government to promote village banks.  I call them village banks because they can be located where people are. They can be linked from banks, and they can mobilise domestic service and they can have a boost on investment.  Thank you.

ENG. HILARY ONEK (Lamwo County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank His Excellency the President again for the good speech that was presented to us. I would also like to commend hon. Ruzindana and hon. Malinga for the motion that we are debating. 

I would like to comment on sustainable economic growth. On the exports, there are two figures here which strike me. The entire export for the year 2001 was US$456 million whereas remittance from Ugandans abroad is US$550 million, far exceeding the exports. I would like this Parliament to commend our brothers and sisters who are abroad for their patriotic acts of sending money home.  

I would also like to recommend that the Ministry of Education improve the quality of human exports so that we get more graduates going out.  At the moment the majority are labourers. Perhaps if we get better exports of human resources, we shall get more money from there.

On the point of utilities, the complaint of the investors is that the utility costs are high among other costs.  It is true because, first of all, there are high operational losses in utilities. Secondly, there are high overheads. 

All utility companies, like UEB and Water, sell approximately 50 percent of their products. So, the other 50 percent is lost and the customer pays for it. 

I would like to hail Government policies of getting the private sector into this service. However, as the private sector gets these vital services, we should have in place strong regulatory authorities like Uganda Electricity Regulatory Authority, although currently its personnel are weak. There are more administrators than people who know how to manage utilities and regulate from a position of knowledge.  So, that has to be reviewed; and a similar authority could be created if water is to be privatised.  

On energy, I would like to commend the increase of power at Nalubale from 6 Mega Watts to 180 Mega Watts after rehabilitation.  However, I am very disappointed with the technocrats of the electricity company for misleading leaders to believe that both Nalubale and Kiira combined can provide 380 Mega Watts of power to the people of Uganda. It is a lie!  Why?  

Madam Speaker, this hydroelectric power production arises out of a given excellent quantity of water volume falling through a specific height and turning the turbine, which in turn activates the power generators. The existing Nalubale Power Station is designed to consume the entire capacity of the Nile passing through there.  Now that the extension was added there, we will need a second River Nile to get it to turn to produce the 200 Mega Watts.  This is my area of specialization - (Applause).

Nalubale and Kiira plants have a total capacity potential to produce 300 Mega Watts, but they cannot produce energy because water will not be sufficient.  The flow of any river is dictated by the geographical physical conditions of that river, the climatic conditions and all those other factors – they do not change overtime. 

River Nile has been monitored since 1899 – I have the data - up to today.  The flow of River Nile has been monitored from 1899 - (Interruption)

MR BAGUMA ISOKE:  Madam Speaker, may I find out from the honourable member, as he is a technical person in power generation, what he did in the year 1994 or there about when serving as Managing Director of National Water and Sewerage Corporation and at the same time a Director for UEB. What advice did he give UEB and Government on that technical matter?

ENG. ONEK: Madam Speaker, I have never served on the board of UEB. Although, I think when hon. Bidandi Ssali was then the Minister of Energy – either 1994 or 1992, I do not recollect the exact date – I was assigned together with Eng. D’Ujanga responsibility to go and evaluate Maziba Power Station in Kabale, which we successfully did and we wrote our report. To-date, I think Maziba Power Station is working.  

However, to inform our Minister, I have advised the Minister of Energy against this extension, because I knew that drawing water from the same point would not yield that power - (Mr Migereko rose_) You were not there in the Ministry, so let me finish off my submission kindly -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Onek, I do not know whether you have made a major distortion. 

MR MIGEREKO:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I would like to thank hon. Onek for giving way.  Eng. Onek is making a very important revelation.  The 380 Mega Watts’ generation capacity for both Nalubale and Kiira were arrived at after a very long scientific study. And as we speak now, 180 Mega Watts is being generated from Nalubale and it is also true that 120 Mega Watts are being generated from Kiira Power Station spontaneously. And we are in the process of installing two other units so that we can be in a position to generate a total of 380 Mega Watts. So far we have not run into any problem.  

But more importantly, up until a few days ago, Eng. Onek was the chairman of the Committee on Natural Resources, and he was also responsible for the energy sector. We do not have anything on record at all advising us or drawing our attention to this important information which would have been very crucial in regard to determining the procurement of the two turbines.  In fact, he has supported all our efforts in regard to procuring funds for installing the other two units that will help us to generate the extra 80 Mega Watts, which we are certain it will be in a position to generate, and therefore, realize the 380 Mega Watts.  

Obviously we are open-minded, we can still sit down and discuss this one.  But for someone who has led a committee for that long to come on this Floor and hit us in the back, I think this is unacceptable!

ENG. ONEK: Thank you very much, honourable Minister for that statement. To begin with, hardly two months after I was in Parliament, I got a fatal accident, and when I returned we were on the Butamira issue, which was very hot. Now, thereafter, we had very little time and then we went for recess.  It was very much in my agenda, and I am still a member of the Natural Resources Committee, we are going to debate this topic.  

Secondly, in any case, it is too late to raise the issue now. I am just drawing the attention of the House to the problem that we are facing.  I informed UEB in 1996, I even wrote to Government. I even informed hon. Sendaula - if he was here - when he was our minister of water about four or five years ago of the same problem.  

Definitely, in the short run, as the Minister says, the systems are all running, but we are depleting the levels of the lake.  With time you will see the lake level will drop; you will ask me after about two years from now what the lake levels will be. 

The lake level of Lake Victoria was expected to rise by 4.5 feet by the year 1960, which it did. Now we are going to deplete that volume and the lake level will drop, and therefore, the ecology of the whole lake area here will be affected. This is a long-term effect; it is not going to be now. You can run all the turbines now, you are free, you are at liberty, but you are going to eventually draw down the water of the lake. This is something that I will quote in the years to come –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up, hon. Onek.

ENG. ONEK: Madam Speaker, I have all the details here. 

Let me go back to the politics of the North. The people of Lamwo County condemn Joseph Kony and all the atrocities he is committing against the people of Acholi, Uganda and other nationals residing in Uganda. We condemn it.  

Two; it is unthinkable to imagine that any sane Acholi leader would support such atrocious acts targeted at the innocent women and children of Acholi - peace loving civilians - against their own relatives and homes. We are not heartless, as some of the country’s enemies, including some of our colleagues here, would like to portray Acholi people and divide the people of Uganda. The huts being torched by Kony in thousands are homes of our impoverished people. They are the only property they have - those grass-thatched huts. They are being torched and therefore we are touched. 

Acholi people are just hostage to criminals who were, until recently, supported by Sudan and other enemies of Uganda. Now opportunistic and shortsighted politicians from all parts of Uganda and abroad are capitalising on Kony as a fighting force against the Government of President Museveni. The Government is aware of this. 

It was reported recently that thousands of documents were captured from Kony’s base in Sudan. Now the recent blanket blame attacks on Acholi leaders, labelling them treacherous agents of Kony by hon. Katirima among others, whose constituency is better placed to know the fact than the rest of Ugandans, is very unfortunate

The reality is that we Acholi leaders are in agony.  We are in agony of torture of our dear ones, of destruction of our homes, our property, destruction of our economy and even our spirit. It is a shame that now some political games are being played to make us spiritless by the likes of the circular, which was given out here.  

Lamentations from some leaders from Acholi are inevitable. Hon. Katirima and his constituency should focus on the issues at hand and not waste time and capitalise on the noise they hear elsewhere. Whatever you are doing, there will always be interference. Noise will be there, whether from opposition or not, but you must be focused. Jumping onto the noise and making it the issue is useless. 

We will come and support the plan to modernise the UPDF. We hope that it will improve their efficiency and effectiveness to secure peace in Northern Uganda. 

I was in Agoro recently and one of the things that the UPDF should improve is to pay their people on time. Soldiers there have not been paid for four months, and what are they doing? They have the guns, and who knows what they could do with them? They could easily cause insecurity in the region too. That is something, which I hope the modernisation of UPDF will rectify.

Political options should also be strengthened and utilised in the region. We believe a combined formula is necessary to give confidence to the rebels who may want to come out of the bush. There are already signals; some rebels want to come out but they want some assurance in the political approach. 

It is important to note that Kony’s insurgency is Uganda’s problem and not an Acholi affair, as some of you want to believe. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would finally like to thank the President for his informative and focused speech. Thank you very much.

MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Kasilo County, Soroti): I will first and foremost start by thanking the President for the speech, and then I will straight away turn to page 14 and seek clarification on education. The Minister of Education is here and he will help us understand this very well. 

When I look at the figures, enrolment has increased from 2.5 million to 7 million. To me this constitutes 33 or 35 percent of Uganda’s population. We very well know that we have some school-going-age children who are not at school. We also have children of one day up to five years old. The percentage here would then come up to 50 percent or more. Is it true that the population of children below the ages of 13 is 50 percent or so? I need help with this. Otherwise, these figures are not correct.

I will go to page 10 where the President says, “Any aggrieved investor who faces the contemptible requests for unearned shares in prospective enterprises by the parasitic elements in our society should report to Mr Onegi-Obel and Mrs Susan Muhwezi….” Has the President lost confidence in our institutions? Has the President lost confidence in our hon. Minister, Miria Matembe? 

Could this be the reason why it was reported that when the President had the meeting with the ministers in Kyankwanzi, he called some ministers saboteurs? I think we should make the best use of institutions in this country.

I turn to page three, about good governance and security. I want to start with security, and I am talking from experience. When I see the people in Northern Uganda suffer as a result of rebel activities, it pains me. Why? It pains me because I have been a former abductee. I know what happens when you are in the hands of the rebels. So many bad things happen under rebel activity, and worse things happen during war. I think we should use all means available to us to bring security – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, do not conduct another meeting there. Listen to this important contribution.

MR OKUPA: We should use all means available to us to ensure that we have security in these affected areas. During the times of war, women are raped, kids are abducted, men are tortured and so many bad things happen. Men are also raped! During the time I happened to be abducted, I saw a woman being raped, with my own eyes. This is something that we must take seriously if we are to save these children from abductions. 

So, I am appealing to Parliament and to His Excellency to use all available means to solve this. Whether it means talking to Kony, let us talk to him if that will bring peace to the northern region and other areas that are affected by the rebel activities. That is my humble appeal to His Excellency and to all the concerned parties.

I would like to turn to page 2 on infrastructure. I thank the President for all the effort he put into improving the infrastructure. Our honourable Minister, John Nasasira, has also done a lot to improve the infrastructure of this country. I must however request the honourable Minister to take the supervision of these roads seriously. 

There is a road connecting Serere County to Kasilo County, which was constructed under the central Government, but the work done on it was very poor. The contractors who did the work did a shoddy job. Two vehicles cannot bypass each other on it. My small Pajero cannot bypass any other vehicle on it. So, honourable Minister, we ask you to ensure that proper supervision is done on these roads.

When we come to the issue of the dams, I wonder why Teso has been left out on the construction of new dams. When I was growing up, we had dams in Kasilo and in Teso, but up to today, no effort has been put into rehabilitating these dams, leave alone constructing new ones. We are requesting the Government to put this into consideration and have dams rehabilitated in all cattle rearing areas. 

I have heard some people say that their cows were taken. Yes, it is true they were taken, but we have slowly restocked Teso. I can comfortably say that we now have a number of animals there. Within the next four to five years, Teso would have regained its past glory.  

I want to thank Parliament for the resolution it passed on Tuesday about the intruders in Teso. I must however add that it was very unfortunate that yesterday one of the honourable members from Teso made a statement saying that we do not want to be reminded about the cows of Teso. I think that was unfair and unfortunate. 

As for the member who made a statement here that she saw some undisciplined soldiers take animals out of Teso, I think she was right. Why do I say so? I saw it with my own eyes too. Undisciplined NRA soldiers, under the command of Adam Rwakatare Bunyenyezi, took animals from our home. I saw it with my own eyes. My uncle whom am named after was shot on that day too. So, people should not think that we are getting this out of the blue. That is the truth –(Interruption)

MS ALASO ASIANUT: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. I would like to inform the House that the people of Soroti and Teso are generally very grateful for the resolution. They also say that the situation in South Africa, after the coming down of apartheid, was more settled when the Archbishop Desmond Tutu went a little further and tried to reconcile the two sides. So, burying our heads in the sand and saying that we do not need an inquiry will really do us more harm than good.  

Secondly, I want to inform the honourable member holding the Floor that the two honourable members who spoke here yesterday did not witness what they were talking about. One of them was in London by the time these things were happening in Teso and the other was locked up in a prison in Mbale. So, they did not actually see what was happening – (Applause and Laughter).

MR OKUPA: Thank you for that information. To add onto that, the two members were with us in Soroti and we had a meeting there with the NPC from 11.00 a.m up to midnight. But when one of the Ministers, hon. Grace Akello, was asked to say something, she decided to keep quiet. It is however shocking that yesterday she made the statement that she did. I wish she had made that statement in Soroti.

Finally, Prime Minister, this is very unfortunate, we all know the Constitutional Review Commission is collecting views from the people throughout the country and that it should use neutral people in doing so. I was however surprised when I got home and found the GISOs collecting views from people for the same. People came to me and said, “it is the GISOs collecting views. We cannot freely give our views to them. How can you give a memorandum to a GISO operative?” So, many people fear to give their views to the GISO. 

They should have used neutral people to collect views. I remember my mother told me that one cannot use a monkey to collect views about the destruction of the forest. I think it was unfair that the Constitutional Review Commission used the GISOs.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday I informed you that those who will not be able to contribute to this debate will be able to do so next week. They will be given priority when we start the general debate on the Budget next week. I have taken note of those who have been standing. 

I have to reluctantly end the contributions here and ask members of the Executive to respond if they have to. I must say that you should not talk about your Policy Statements now, because that is the subject of next week’s debates. If there is something you want to correct, correct it now. If there is nothing to say, do not say anything. Can we have the Minister of Energy first? Do you have anything to say?

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I believe this Parliament needs to sit down and review the means in which it is conducting business. If it is the State of the Nation Address, members are presenting issues in reaction to that. If members cannot do that and then they are referred to the Budget Speech debate, then we are just speaking for the sake of it. 

I call upon you, Madam Speaker, and the Parliamentary Commission to review the manner in which we conduct business. We speak only for five minutes, as if we are just supposed to speak for the press. So, I ask for your indulgence, please allow members to speak in response to the State of the Nation Address. When it comes to the Budget, we shall speak in response to that. But if this Parliament is being controlled by the state, then the independence, the authority of this Parliament is lost. I seek your indulgence, Madam Speaker, to review your decision. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Honourable member, I will not review my decision today. We agreed on how much time we were going to spend on this matter before hand. Otherwise, if you want your views considered, the Business Committee will sit and discuss how much time we should give to each business at hand. We agreed that we would end this today and start general debate next week.  

THE MINISTER OF STATE, ENERGY (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank members for the statements of support they have come out with in regard to the steps being taken to enhance our generation capacity, to improve our transmission and distribution network on top of improving management in the energy sector. 

A number of issues have been raised by members in regard to the energy and minerals sector. I start with comments raised in regard to the future of the Bujagali project. I wish to assure members that Government is working very closely with our development partners and the independent power producers to ensure that financial closure for the Bujagali project is attainted. 

As I speak now, negotiations are taking place, and as per the assurances of His Excellency the President, Government is considering all avenues that can be pursued in order to ensure that this project takes off and is seen to its completion. At an appropriate stage, when negotiations have been finalized, Government will come here and make a statement so that we can be in a position to further assure the members that we are on course with this project. 

In the meantime, there have also been allegations of corruption associated with one of the companies that is associated with the contractor executing work at the Bujagali site. Government has taken up this matter very seriously and the Rt Hon. Prime Minister has requested the Inspector General of Government to institute an inquiry into these allegations. At this stage I cannot say more than this because that would pre-empt the ongoing negotiations. 

A matter was also raised in regard to NORPAK. Currently Government is in contact with NORPAK. NORPAK was interested in developing the Karuma site. It has been agreed between Government and our financial partners, together with NORPAK, that as soon as the Bujagali project attains financial closure, we should be in position to commence negotiations on the development of Karuma. This is in line with the principle of sequencing, which was agreed upon here in Parliament. 

Hon. Wadri of Terego raised the issue of electricity for the West Nile region. First of all, I must say on behalf of Government, we apologize that we could not meet the March deadline of increasing thermo capacity in this region. The position on the ground however, is as follows: Government tendered out this business through competitive bidding. The process of tendering took some time. On 18 June 2002, the winning bidder, that is Uganda Rural Electrification Company Limited, was selected. We are in the process of finalizing negotiations with Uganda Rural Electrification Company so that work can commence. 

In the meantime, and I am sure hon. Wadri is aware of this, construction work of power transmission lines from Arua, Bondo to Nebbi is in progress. And today we also received a grant of US $1.5 million committed to electrification of this region. These sums of money are going to be expended on extending the distribution and transmission lines in this region. We however need the support of Members of Parliament from that region. 

As we extend the transmission and distribution lines, issues of compensation of wealth have been coming up. We are running a very tight budget, which we are using to address all the power needs in the region. We would like to appeal to the Members of Parliament to talk to their constituents such that they can spare us the compensation aspect of this project. If we are going to deal with matters of compensation, chances are, we shall not have enough money to extend the lines, and at the same time work will be delayed. 

Uganda Rural Electrification Company, on top of handling thermo electricity, will extend the power lines in this region and also undertake the development of the power stations at both Nyagak and Olewa. This is therefore to assure members here that work on electrifying the West Nile region is on course. It is in line with the commitment stipulated in the President’s manifesto –(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Is it in order for honourable members in the lobby to make excessive noise when we are listening to a very important response from the Minister of Energy?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, they are out of order. Members in the lobby, if you have decided to listen from outside please listen and make no noise. Otherwise, come back into the Chamber.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, I thank you for that guidance. Hon. Michael Sebalu wanted to hear from Government as to when the Rural Electrification Strategy of the year 2001/2010 will be implemented.  As indicated in our Ministry annual report of the year 2001, which has been circulated to all of you, the strategy is already under implementation. I would like to appeal to you all to take interest in this annual report, and -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Sergeant, could you please go and bring those people back into the Chamber!

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, as members will discover in that annual report, we are going to be in position to reach virtually the whole country. 

In the meantime, the Energy for Rural Transformation was launched this morning by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Prof. Nsibambi, at the Sheraton Hotel - (Applause). This is going to give us extra impetus in regard to our work, and I am sure members will be able to see this one on the ground. 

Next week the Rural Electrification Board, which is one of the requirements of the Electricity Act, is going to be handled by Cabinet. We are certain that Cabinet will pass the names that we have forwarded to it, and those will be announced to the members so that they can get to know them later. 

There was also an issue raised by hon. Onek in regard to the staffing of the Electricity Regulatory Authority. Hon. Onek asserted that the authority is constituted of only administrators and therefore cannot handle regulatory work that is associated with the electricity industry. Honourable members, it is not true. The Electricity Regulatory Authority is mainly composed of engineers.

The Chief Executive Officer of the Electricity Regulatory Authority is an engineer with a PhD in electrical engineering and a very long experience in engineering work. He has been a chief executive of many companies in this country. He is Dr Ssebowa, who was previously the Executive Director of Uganda Clays Limited in Kajjansi. He is assisted by two other engineers, a highly competent lawyer, a financial analyst and an economist. 

I thought I should clarify on this one because if we do not, this could diminish people’s confidence in the regulatory authority. Without an authority that is well manned, people would have a problem investing in our energy sector. I however agree that we still need to improve the capacity of these people so that they can be given greater exposure. We shall take up more in-house training and even outside training, and we are ready to discuss it with our brother, hon. Onek.  

Lastly, hon. Gertrude Kulany raised a very important point in regard to the existence of lime deposits in Kapchorwa. As a matter of fact, these lime deposits are not only in Kapchorwa but they are also in Karamoja region and Katekikire in Moroto area. When His Excellency decided to settle in Karamoja for quite some time in his disarmament exercise, he directed our Ministry to take special interest in the existing minerals in Karamoja. As a matter of fact, he has now prevailed on Tororo Cement to start collecting lime from Kapchorwa and Moroto area for the production of cement at their factory. 

What is now happening is that my Ministry and that of investments are currently carrying out studies to establish the cost implications of commercially tapping these minerals. I would like to assure hon. Gertrude Kulany and all the members in this House that the limestone deposits in your area are considered to be extremely rich and there would be no need for the cement industry in Tororo to continue importing lime from Kenya or Japan. 

The Ministry of Transport is currently working on the roads not only in Kapchorwa but also in the Karamoja region. This is in order to facilitate the evacuation of lime from those areas to Tororo as we work on extending power to both Kapchorwa and Moroto area, so that some processing can be undertaken on site. 

With those few remarks, Madam Speaker and honourable members, I want to thank everybody for supporting us in whatever we are doing.

MR AWORI: I am seeking guidance on a matter of procedure. We are getting replies now from the Front Bench on a number of issues raised by my honourable colleagues. I note with great concern that not only are we out of time in light of our forthcoming commitment with His Grace the Archbishop Nkoyoyo, but also the persistent question of AGOA is still outstanding. I am just wondering whether it will be possible to accord facilities for Mrs Muhwezi and Geoffrey Onegi Obel to come and answer questions on this particular issue.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, as far as I am concerned, the spokesman in this Parliament for AGOA is the Minister of Trade, so it is not necessary to invite all those people here. But the ministers are going to be quite quick in their responses. Let me ask the Minister of Education to come up, if he has something to say.

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Prof. Khiddu Makubuya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, I will try to be brief. Hon. Mallinga reviewed the history of education in Karamoja and recommended that the programme of boarding primary schools be re-introduced. We shall study these recommendations and see if it is possible to accommodate them.

We also need to note that we have a special education programme for Karamoja, which was not there historically. It is the alternative basic education for Karamoja. The idea is that if the children are moving, the school should move to where they are. So, this special arrangement is also in place. But as I said, we shall study the recommendation. 

Hon. Bakaluba Mukasa complained about reduction in funding levels, which tend to affect the operations of the schools. We are operating a cash budget and you can only disburse what you have, and this is not only peculiar to education but it affects practically all aspects of Government operations.  

Hon. Sebalu raised the issue of classroom construction. He proposed that we should practically re-centralise classroom construction, get a company of some reputation so that we get a uniform product and think along these lines. This is a matter which has been debated. 

The policy is that we continue with the decentralised approach to classroom construction, because you do not only want classrooms built, but you are also using the programme of classroom construction as a poverty alleviation measure. You are also using the programme to develop local capacity in the district in construction. But we have not folded our hands. We have issued guidelines and minimum requirements for construction of classrooms. In addition to detailing the district engineers to assist in the supervision, the Ministry has deployed engineering assistants directly answerable to the Ministry in all the districts.

Lastly, we have now operationalised the Education Standards Agency, and one of its functions is exactly to ensure that the guidelines that we issue for construction of classrooms are complied with. I request honourable members to work together with us in dealing with this issue. When you come across shoddy work somewhere, we would be very grateful if you brought it to our attention.  

Hon. Johnson Malinga asked about the onward linkage from UPE. Madam Speaker, this is a matter very dear to the Government, and we are now developing a post-primary education and training strategy. We are consulting with all the stakeholders, and this concern will be taken care of before school year 2004, when we expect a million pupils to have taken the PLE examination.    

Referring to page 14 of the State of the Nation Address, these figures are reported from an actual head count, and this is the correct position. I assume up to today, and my assumption is based on this kind of figures, that the majority of the population of our country are young people. But if this is not correct, we have a census coming later in the year and we shall know the truth shortly.  

Madam Speaker, I have virtually finished! (Laughter). Many of these issues which were raised actually involve recommendations which we are going to be studying, and debate on education will continue here and elsewhere. But I would like to thank honourable members for the interest that they have taken in these education issues. I can assure you I would have been terribly disappointed if I had no educational issues to respond to.  Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Mrs Mary Mugyenyi): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I will respond to issues raised regarding agriculture in three areas, crop, livestock and fisheries.

First of all, I would like to thank the honourable members for the issues raised during this debate. I particularly want to thank you for acknowledging or recognising the fact that agriculture is still receiving a low percentage of the national budget than it ought to be receiving.  Maybe that is worth noting, and the Ministry of Finance will recognise your feelings about this.

Let me say that the criticism against PMA and NAADS being called theories and not really on the ground is uncalled for. I would like to appeal to honourable members that these are new institutions, policies and institutional arrangements that need to be given time to mature, and it is up to all of us to support them rather than discourage them. If you have  criticism against a particular issue, it is right to raise it but not just to condemn it before it takes off - like NAADS is now struggling to take off. I think it is a very good policy that will address the extension service concerns of this country. I wish to appeal to you to give it a chance.   

Let me look at the issues raised under crop –(Interruption)

DR NKUUHE: I would like to seek a point of clarification.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister please make your statement.

DR NKUUHE: Madam Speaker, this is very important.  Because the point I wanted clarification on –(Interruption)

MRS MUGYENYI: The Speaker is not accepting, honourable member. 
Under crop, there were issues raised regarding coffee, and I am not going to mention names because many of you actually did raise issues over the last three days on coffee. But coffee seedlings are now being distributed, but they are not being monitored. In actual fact, coffee is distributed through Uganda Coffee Development Authority to the districts, and at every district there is a UCDA officer together with the district agricultural staff. 

Coffee nursery operators are appointed and provided with coffee seeds. UCDA monitors these coffee seeds, their distribution and all the nurseries. You could say that it is not enough; yes, I recognise that, but there is a lot of effort now going on to ensure that the coffee that is distributed and the nurseries that are being operated are looked after particularly by the district staff, the two officers, the district agricultural officer and the UCDA officer.  

Upon maturity, Government again purchases this coffee and distributes it at the sub-county level. Monitoring of coffee production is now ongoing. As a matter of fact, as I speak now, there is a team on the ground all over this country that is comprised of staff from MAAIF, UCDA and NARO monitoring this coffee. My senior Minister is in Mbale at a workshop addressing issues of coffee seedlings and this coffee that is being given out under the strategic interventions programme. 

The second question raised yesterday was whether this star coffee is truly Ugandan, because its quality is not as good as Ugandan coffee and yet Uganda produces good coffee. Now, when it was raised yesterday, I went back and talked to the proprietor, Mr Rukanga, and established for sure that this is Uganda-grown coffee which is processed in Tanzania, then brought back and packaged in Uganda. 

You realise that there are only four instant coffee processing plants in Africa, one in South Africa, another one in Ivory Coast, another in Tanzania and one in Egypt.  So, it is true that this one is Ugandan coffee.  In fact, I would like to appeal to you once again to be patriotic and consume star coffee. I am a coffee lover, I consume coffee and I think it is coffee of good quality, please support it. The other coffee is not any better than it is.  But sometimes we tend to neglect what is ours. If it is written, “packaged in Uganda”, we look for coffee that comes from outside.
  
Another question that was raised twice was regarding vanilla.  The question was why not spend some of the money spent on coffee on vanilla since vanilla is of high value on the international market. Now, the facts are that vanilla cannot be grown by as many growers as coffee - (Applause)- and these are the facts. Presently coffee is grown by one and half million farmers, and we hope that in future, and with the present Government intervention, about three million Ugandan farmers will be growing coffee. You realise that the world demand for vanilla is only 33,000 bags while the world demand for coffee is 110 million bags.  

It is also true that Madagascar alone, which is the leading producer of vanilla, could satisfy the world demand for vanilla; it is just that now they have had problems. So, we do not want to encourage so many farmers to grow vanilla and then be disappointed in the future. 

Vanilla growing also needs a lot of rainfall and humidity, and that is why it does well in places like Bundibugyo and Mukono. On Monday I was in Masaka and I found that they were actually producing good vanilla! But it cannot be grown as extensively as coffee is grown.
I move to livestock.  The cattle corridor needs a special programme to export beef - this was from a Member of Parliament from Mpigi District, hon. Kalule Ssengo. I would like to first of all thank you for realising that, but I want you to also  note that a lot of effort is being made to improve the capacity of Uganda to export beef.  Right now one beef processor in Uganda has started exporting beef to Tanzania. It is one of the livestock products that have been targeted under the strategic interventions to promote the production and export of agricultural products.
In line with this intervention, Government is providing funds for water for livestock at every parish level. And I would like to tell my two brothers from Kashari and from Teso that the programme will reach them - (Applause). We are going into the first financial year, and then we move on to provide water for livestock at every parish level within the cattle corridor.  We have not started with Teso because now we are looking at this need to export. And as you rightly acknowledged, the livestock in Teso right now is not so much if we are looking for cows to export for beef, but we will get there.
As far as Kashari is concerned, water is really not my responsibility, but the Directorate of Animal Resources has a hand in what happens in this water for livestock. So, I do acknowledge that. We did send an interim ministerial team to carry out a needs assessment in the districts where we are going to start from. We cannot start everywhere, and for sure the counties of Bukanga, Nyabushozi, Kazo, Isingiro South and North had a higher need than Kashari for water for livestock. The honourable Member of Parliament for Kashari should be grateful that the other day you were in Kashari opening Mabira dam, which has just been finished and very well done. But if Kashari does not have water at every parish presently, the programme will get there.

Government is also taking measures, in line with this need for export, to control animal diseases and to also demarcate a disease-free zone from where livestock for export can be got. We are working hand in hand with the private sector to ensure that we are able to export our livestock because Uganda has a big potential in this livestock sector. 

We are restocking within the cattle corridor and we are also breeding to improve our livestock. We are also regulating and enforcing disease control measures. As a matter of fact, in the next financial year, 2002/2003, ADB is funding a project up to the tune of 26 million dollars to address these issues so that we are able to export livestock products.

Another question was raised on rabies yesterday.  Let me inform you that the rabies vaccine has been provided at the district level. It is managed by the District Veterinary Officers in every district and it is free of charge. You just need to access it. At the central level, the Ministry of Agriculture is providing rabies vaccine through the Commissioner for Livestock Health and Entomology.

Lastly, about diseases of cattle that moved with nomads to the Teso region, the Department of Livestock Health and Entomology has been working with the district veterinary officers of the districts in Teso to immunize the animals.  But I must also say that from the tests that were done, no diseases have been found.  But all the same, the animals are being immunized and at no cost. 

I do not want to re-echo this debate on the nomads.  All I can say is that I went to Teso to look at the issues of the livestock that moved there, and I must say that it is unfortunate that the debate is degenerating because politicians with their own different agenda, I think, are taking advantage. Let me not open a Pandora’s box - (Laughter). I thank you very much.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, TRADE (Dr Abel Rwendeire): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity given to me. There were several areas in which questions were raised by a number of colleagues.  I will address them collectively.

One of them is star coffee. My honourable colleague who has been holding the Floor has talked about star coffee. I do not think I need to add anything more, except to say that I visited Tanica Factory in Bukoba in May this year, trying to ensure that what is being done is exactly what we have been asking them to do.  

Secondly, I wanted to ensure that, maybe in the spirit of the East African Community, we could find out what else needs to be done there so that we could do it together, that is between Tanzania and Uganda. And also so that we can improve the situation, since we know it would be very difficult to establish an instant coffee factory in Uganda.

I have just returned from Singapore and Malaysia, also looking at the issues of value addition. One of the things which we found was that to establish an instant coffee factory, producing 500 tons of instant coffee a year, one would need to invest not less than 15 million dollars or up to 20 million dollars. That is quite a substantial amount of money which we may not be able to collect in such a short time. 

But the venture that we have with Tanzanians is that the private sector people take the coffee there and stay there when they are processing it. Secondly, we have very qualified testers who definitely will tell you that this is Ugandan coffee that has not been adulterated.  So, I have no doubt, whatsoever, that the coffee we are getting is the Ugandan coffee that we have taken there, and our Tanzanians brothers are so faithful in this respect. We have no reason to suspect any other thing that they may be doing.  

The other element that was talked about, especially by hon. Sitenda Sebalu, is on value addition.  Definitely value addition is one issue that our President and his Government are taking very seriously. One of the projects that we have in the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry - and indeed the policy statement is out, you will read about it - is the Uganda integrated programme supported by UNIDO and other development partners. 

One of the aspects it addresses is value addition and going down to the grassroots and not staying in the cities only. It is a pilot programme in six districts, and the idea is that once it takes root, we would expand to the whole country and certainly the value addition for fruits, vegetables and so on will be addressed as members certainly require.  

The third question concerning the trade sector was that there was no policy that could touch on trade.  We have had a rolling policy that really takes all the reforms that we would want to introduce as and when it is necessary. Now, because of the funding difficulties that we all know, it has been difficult for us to get this policy in terms of documentation for everybody. 

But honourable members will take some satisfaction in the fact that the European Union has agreed to sponsor a project called UPTOP - Uganda Programme for Trade Opportunities and Policy. The project is going to cost 4.5 million euros, and if we put it in dollars, it is about 4.6 million dollars.

This project was expected to start in September this year, but looking at the urgent need to have the project going, DFID has agreed to give funds to start the project this month. The money that has been given for the first tracking of this programme is 93,000 Pounds, and this will address the issues of trade, the export strategy and so on. It will certainly involve all stakeholders. Members of Parliament are significant stakeholders, and you will be one of the first ones to be involved in the workshops to contribute to reviving this.

The other element of trade was AGOA, and the question that was asked was whether AGOA has a committee for implementing it. Yes, the committee exists. Cabinet set up the committee in February last year. The committee is composed of representatives from the stakeholders both in the public as well as in the private sector.  

From the public sector we have representation from Ministry Finance, Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. From parastatals we have got the Uganda National Bureau of Standards, Uganda Investment Authority, Uganda Revenue Authority and Uganda Export Promotion Board. From the private sector we the Uganda National Chamber of Commerce and Industry and UMA. 

We have also got chairpersons of several sub-committees of AGOA, and these are textiles and garments, crafts and arts, horticulture, fruits and vegetables, leather products as well as foods and beverages.  

The committee meets once a month, and it is chaired by the Minister of State for Trade and in his absence, the Permanent Secretary Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry. The committee has organised a number of workshops, actually up to five workshops, the recent one being in March, where we had regional representation and Members of Parliament were also invited.

But let me say this, there has been a lot of interest now, because previously when we organised these workshops, very few members would come. I remember the one we organised in November last year, very few Members of Parliament came. But since it has come from you, and you are really keenly interested in things of AGOA and trade, there will be a workshop organised to look at both the WTO - after the Doha conference, what next – and then to look at COMESA as well as EBA (Everything But Arms), a facility offered by the European Union. So, within a month a workshop will be organised for this purpose.

The other element was on co-operatives. The question was, “we are now going to form new co-operatives, is Government moving in to replace the ones which were there or not?” Honourable members, this initiative is meant actually to strengthen the co-operative movement in this country. It is not meant to replace what is available. It is meant to broaden. 

There are three areas in which we would want to broaden the co-operative movement; one area is to broaden involvement. You may recall that the co-operatives were mainly targeting agricultural marketing, and usually a few women would be members. We want to broaden this so that we allow now the youth and the women to participate very actively in the co-operative movement.  

Number two is expanding of the mandate. If we look at the law that established the co-operative movement, it was, as said, very restricted to marketing of co-operative produce.  But now we want the mandate expanded so that we can have housing co-operatives - we already have savings co-operatives - we can have transport, marketing, agro processing, and one example is actually the vanilla group that is doing very well and adding value. So, we want to expand the mandate of the co-operatives to cover a lot more sectors than just agricultural marketing.

The other broadening is on geographical expansion. We want to ensure that in every sub-county at least there is a co-operative society because not all sub-counties actually had these powerful societies. We have got to ensure that in so doing we encourage every constituency to have at least a number of viable societies or co-operatives. 

We want to also strengthen the governance of these co-operatives. One of the weaknesses within the co-operatives was that they were managed by not actually members, but by hired secretaries who did not really have much of a stake in these co-operatives. So, we want to ensure that there is improvement in governance and transparency in management of these institutions, Government clear support, and the demarcation of roles as well as of course reforming the law.

Lastly, there was a question from hon. Pataki Amasi on the issue of the resolutions which were given concerning the wildlife conservation areas. There are certain areas which were left out, they were stood over in the last session of Parliament, and he was wondering what would happen. The wildlife conservation areas, including Lomonga Wildlife Reserve, were stood over because of the proroguing of Parliament. Now that the committees have been constituted, then they will have to do what they were supposed to do.  

The Parliamentary resolution recommendation was that the sessional committee members should visit this area before they can make a report, and they did not visit before Parliament was prorogued.  So, we have arranged for this sessional committee to visit the area and then they will make a report, and certainly the report will be brought to Parliament for consideration.  

I join my other colleagues to thank the Members of Parliament for their valuable contribution, particularly to this area of tourism, trade and industry, which is meant to enhance the creation of wealth for poverty eradication. Thank you very much.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, COMMUNICATIONS (Mr Micheal Werikhe): Madam Speaker and honourable members, first of all I wish to thank the honourable members for raising concerns and observations on the work of the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications.  

I wish further to thank honourable members for their appreciation of the work so far done in sub sectors under our Ministry. I wish to assure members that the impediments which were raised about some of our work will be addressed. 

The ministerial policy statement is with honourable members in two copies. I believe every member now has them. When we come to the debate on this policy statement, we will try to clarify on all issues. I know there are many issues on roads, telephones, etc and it may not be possible to actually respond to them right now. 

Madam Speaker, I promise that during that debate on our policy statement, we will answer all the issues that might have not been answered during this debate. However, my colleagues, the Ministers of State, came in during this debate and intervened from time to time on a number of issues that were raised.  Other than that, I once again thank my honourable colleagues for the appreciation and support for the work that the Ministry is doing.  I thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, LANDS (Mr Baguma Isoke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Two members of the House, one from Teso region and another from Mbarara District, did raise concerns about the construction of valley dams in their regions.   They said that those two regions are not specifically mentioned in the State of the Nation Address.  

I want to allay the fears of my colleagues; although not explicitly mentioned, Mabira dam has just been completed and commission in Mbarara District – Kashari County. Also, Kodukulu dam is under rehabilitation in the district of Kumi in the Teso region. 

Further, in the budget statement of my Ministry, which has been circulated to all Members of Parliament, we have mentioned the on-going work of constructing fifty valley tanks countrywide in the cattle corridor, including Teso.  Because this issue was raised today - an hour ago - I do not have the fifty names of the dams and tanks to be constructed, but Teso region is included among these fifty.

Finally, there is an on-going study in the northeast of Uganda, and those include the districts of Teso. Karamoja has its own programme, but Teso is supported by BADEA.  We are carrying out a study to locate valley dams and water tanks. I call upon colleagues from that region to come up when called upon, to actively support the survey team in locating these water points strategically.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will pass over the Minister of Finance because his sector will really be seriously addressed next week. I do not think much has been raised on the Ministry of Finance, though, so I will pass over your sector for now.   We will give you an opportunity next week because that is when we will debate the Budget. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH, GENERAL DUTIES (Capt. Mike Mukula): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable colleagues who have been able to express themselves and raise issues of concern, particularly concerning the health sector.  I am very sure that at an appropriate time when we come in to debate a comprehensive document, which has already been presented to the House, we will be able to go in-depth to be able to explain the internal functions of the Ministry and the strategic plans that we have under the medium-term expenditure framework.  

But permit me, Madam Speaker, to touch on a few issues of critical concern that were raised by honourable colleagues.

Hon. Winnie Byanyima of Mbarara Municipality - unfortunately who is not here - raised one very fundamental factor. She did ask, in seeking clarification, whether it was true that Uganda has got the least per capita expenditure on health within the sub-Saharan region. The answer is no.

The health financing system in Uganda, as it were, is at its infancy level in terms of the strategic framework that we have been able to put up under the health sector strategic plan. When the National Resistance Movement took over power, the expenditure was well below one dollar.  The per capita expenditure on health is low in the country, yes, but it is not the lowest in the sub-Saharan region. 

I would like to say very clearly that when we focus on the expenditure, you will note that there has been a significant increase per se. We have now achieved eightfold expenditure on the health sector. And when you put the gross expenditure compounded with the household input, we are now closing in to 15 per cent. This is a significant increase in the health sector expenditure. Government is committed to sustaining this trend in improving the health financing status.

Hon. Mwandha did touch on the issue of the removal of cost sharing. On one hand it is important to note, as I said yesterday, that a survey which was carried out by Prof. Turyamuhika, who was committed by Government to be able to carry out that study, did very clearly come out with indicative figures. Those figures showed that in the country, only 13 per cent of our population could afford to pay this access fee. The other 87 per cent was left in a very difficult position.  

This is indeed Government position on cost sharing.  It is based on a sound knowledge of the levels of household incomes, and it is being closely monitored so that a review would only be based upon a significant change at that level. I think that needs to be understood.

Another honourable colleague did raise an issue on corruption practices, particularly the issue of the CT scan. The administration and Government is committed to fighting corruption, and in the Ministry we have taken zero tolerance towards corruption within the sector. That is why I had Dr Kaggwa here to be able to listen in and to assert and find out the expressions that Members of Parliament had on the ground. But these cases shall be investigated, if Members of Parliament do raise issues. 

I would like to assure you that if there is any case that you do sight, please feel free at any time to be able to communicate to us and we will take corrective measures.

Hon. John Byabagambi of Ibanda South did raise the issue of infrastructure, more so in Buhinga hospital, which he said was in a state of disrepair. I would like to inform hon. Byabagambi that an infrastructure and medical equipment rehabilitation and development plan has been finalized by Government, and these institutional shortcomings are being addressed in phases. 

I would also like to mention here that a bit of equipment has been sent to various parts of the country, and the sustained support on the health sector is continuing. We have got, within the equipment strategic framework, a bit of capital development funds to be able to continue to improve the equipment and the state of our hospitals in the country. 

Similarly, shortages of drugs have also been heard of and they are common in certain parts, but a tremendous effort has now been evoked to enhance the financing support for the purchase and distribution of essential drugs. Support for the programme by the bilateral sources such as DANIDA is to continue but within a restructured framework, to improve efficiency of our supply chain management system. 

I would like to assure honourable Members of Parliament that this financial year there has been an increase of about 30 per cent on the primary health care programme.  

The honourable Member of Parliament for Kapchorwa, hon. Gertrude Kulany, was able to articulate the position of the district hospital, which I have been able to visit with her. 

I would like to thank her for the initiative she put on the ground in accompanying the entire medical team when we visited her institution. I would like to assure hon. Kulany that all efforts are being made to ensure that that hospital is given an effective support programme. And we shall soon be inviting you to the Ministry so that we can be able to bring you into light about the efforts and the strategies we have in Government.  

Hon. Etonu raised the issue of his son - may his soul rest in eternal peace. We sympathize with him, but I would like to say that the team in Mulago Hospital really did their best to support his son when he was in hospital. I would like to assure you that Mulago Hospital in the last few years or so has been able to acquire a bit of equipment from Japan, worth about 2.2 million dollars. In the last six years, Mulago Hospital has been equipped with some of this effective and ideal equipment for a referral hospital, to the tune of about 12.5 million US dollars.  

Within the framework and support that was extended to Mulago from the Japanese, we now have two hemodialysis machines - or the equipment that you use for the support of the kidneys that have failed - in the intensive care unit. There is need of course to increase. But I would like to assure you that this is very expensive equipment; the input into this equipment alone from the first onset run at a cost of about 2 million shillings per month. But I would like to assure you that all efforts are being made to improve the health care system in Mulago, and we are developing capacity in making sure that centres of excellence in Mulago are developed.

Briefly, I would like to thank the honourable colleagues who have been able to raise very fundamental issues in the health sector. I also thank them for having been very open and transparent. I would like to assure you that we will keep our doors and windows open in the Ministry, honourable colleagues may at any time feel free to come in and consult with us. We will continue to provide you with as much information as we can from the Ministry.  We seek for your support. Thank you

THE MINISTER OF STATE, ELDERLY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS (Mrs Florence Nayiga Sekabira): Madam Speaker, honourable colleagues, I would like, on behalf of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, to thank you for your contributions.  

My colleagues are not here, but as you know it is quite a wide Ministry and we have different departments in it. We have taken note of the issues raised, and I trust that as we handle our policy statement some of your concerns or questions will be properly attended to.  

I want to appreciate the support of this Parliament to our Ministry. We know that our Ministry has the role of advocating and ensuring that the rights of the interest groups or the marginalized groups are properly taken care of. I hope that when you receive our social sector strategic investment plan, you will appreciate that we are committed to ensure that the interest groups that we are charged with - the population of Uganda, the children, the youth, people with disabilities, the elderly men and women, those who missed formal education - shall be taken care of. 

We shall work hand in hand with all the different sectors of Government to ensure that they are properly taken care of and that they benefit from development and all other strategies that have been put in place by Government. With those comments, I thank you for listening to me. (Applause).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. There was nothing that came from the Ministry of Public Service so I will pass over that Ministry and go to the Minister of State for Parliamentary Affairs, then General Duties, Defence and the Prime Minister.


THE MINISTER OF STATE, PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Okot Ogong Felix): Madam Speaker, I know a number of issues have been raised by Members of Parliament, but a few comments have been raised on parliamentary affairs.  I would like to thank honourable members for the very co-ordinated, well-articulated debate that they have continued to have in this House. I would like to thank Members of Parliament for the high standard and proficiency of debating in this House.  I also want to inform Members of Parliament that as Government, we would like to associate with you, co-ordinate with you, discuss with you and promote a high level of dialogue between you and members of the Executive. 

I believe, as was indicated in the address to the nation by the President, we need to promote our level of co-operation. I want to appeal to all Members of Parliament, as we continue to develop our country we should also continue to co-operate with all sectors of Government and with all members of the Executive so that we perform to the best interest of our community.  

I would like to appeal to Members of Parliament, as we realize that the security situation in this country is deteriorating, we want to urge you to co-operate with Government so that together we work and arrest this situation, so that our people are stable and we promote peace and stability in this country.  

With those few words, I would like also to appeal to you as Members of Parliament to give us support. We are going to give you the service, and I believe when we are together we shall deliver.  For God and my country.

THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have made quite a bit of my contribution before, but I will touch on a few issues and the Prime Minister, who is a greater model than myself, will do the rest.

Monitoring: Many members have raised issues with regard to compliance, especially by local governments, with the work they are supposed to do, including construction of classrooms, health centres and so forth. I would like to add to what the Minister of Education had said. As Members of Parliament we are partners in making sure that Government policy is implemented.  You are also, I believe under the Local Government Act, ex-officio members of your local government councils. Therefore, you are expected to maximally influence what is done at local government level.  

I told you before that the last time I was in Moroto, we visited a primary school that was being constructed and the iron sheets on the roof could be folded like the aluminium foil you find in cigarettes. A very weak man went up and he folded the iron sheets. I rubbed the floor with my foot and made a hole in the floor. The local Member of Parliament accompanied me, and I demonstrated to him everything that was wrong with this work. So, I am only hoping that he, together with the local council, have taken action against the contractor, and I hope this guy has been blacklisted and prosecuted and not paid.  

I would like to urge my colleagues, Members of Parliament, to make sure that Government projects and programmes are effectively implemented in their constituencies. If they think someone has not done what they are supposed to do, we are there to co-operate with you to make sure that the right thing is done.   

About investment, I would like to talk in regard to Jinja and what hon. Kasigwa talked about.  We even went to Jinja to find out why it was very difficult for the investment authority to find land for investment. I was there; I cannot remember whether hon. Kasigwa was around, but it was broad daylight and we were able to demonstrate to these people in Jinja that it was very difficult for people to find land for placing their investments.  

I am glad the Deputy Speaker is from that region. I am saying this in good faith, there is a marked difference in response to requests on this side of the Nile and on the other side of the Nile with regard to availability of land for investment. Hon. Mwandha is listening very attentively, because this is the truth and it ought to be addressed. 

I think it was hon. Madada who talked about monitoring of finances. I have already said that Members of Parliament should work with us to monitor whether these financial projects are implemented.

Two more points, one is lip service in collaboration with civil society. This is absolutely incorrect! As a matter of fact, Government is actively involved with civil society.  There is a whole officer in the office of the Prime Minister whose practically full time job is to work with civil society to develop the most hospitable working relationship between civil society, NGOs and the Government of Uganda.  I think, by and large, those people who were being referred to are not too unhappy about the effort we are putting in.

The last statement I want to make, Madam Speaker, is of a general nature, and I would like to refer to two contributions to the debate. One is by hon. Okullo Epak, and he usually speaks and goes away.  He does not want to listen to others. That is why he makes the kind of utterances that he was making. The other speech was by hon. Kamuntu.   Both of them, I would say, are experienced political leaders and legislators. But you can tell the qualitative difference between the two types of debate. By the way, they belong to the same political group. I would like to say this- (Interjections)- I am deliberately not mentioning it. Hon. Byamukama cannot provoke me! 

The problem we have in this country is partly explained by that.  Why should men with the same experience, the same intelligence, the same everything have such fundamental differences on the same subject?  What is the cause? And that is part of the problem of politics of this country. Therefore, my appeal to my colleagues in this House is that we should step backwards and discover that it does not pay to hold certain attitudes or positions. We have tested those attitudes, we have tested those positions and they have not helped anybody.  

I would like to refer to what Prof. Kabwegyere was saying in this House. It really does not pay if you are going to debate the future of this country insanely. As hon. Mwandha was saying, it is just not enough to debate the future of this country, but it is the manner in which we do it.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I apologize I arrived late, and as expected, I found the Minister of Defence had been talked about. I would like to make a few comments on some of the main points that were made.  

Firstly, I would like to thank those of you Members of Parliament and members of the public who have supported Government effort to fight and eliminate terrorism.  

As I said here the other day, this country has suffered under terrorism for a very long time. The fighting forces of terror have been getting  support from outside. Now we have reached the turning point when this support has been terminated, and really we have every opportunity to eradicate terrorism in any form. The operation we code named “Iron Fist Operation” is precisely to achieve that objective. 

I must express gratitude from the Ministry of Defence, from those who are out there in Sudan on behalf of you honourable members and the general public of Uganda to fight and destroy this terrorism, for the appreciation and support you have shown them.

I would like to register the Ministry’s appreciation and gratitude to the Lango Parliamentary Group, which sat and clearly condemned the acts of terrorism by Kony in northern Uganda -(Applause)- and I would like to call on all the others to emulate that example.  

The question of talks with Kony has been raised.  We have always talked about it. Indeed the President, when he was addressing the press this morning, partly talked about the question of talks with Kony.  

A delegation made up of bishops met the President recently and they delivered a message to him urging the President to talk, and that in order to facilitate these talks, the UPDF should halt its operations against Kony. Well, the President responded by saying that the policy of Government has always been readiness to talk. An effort was made directly through the leadership in the north at the time when hon. Betty Bigombe was the Minister in charge of the north, in fact she led the talks but they failed.  

Efforts through various third parties were made, including one led by President Jimmy Carter, the former President of the United States, and the Carter Centre for Peace. The Vatican NGO called St. Jideo did try. They organised talks in Rome, and I led the Uganda delegation that met the LRA in Rome in 1997.

President Bashir of Sudan himself did invite Kony for talks, and Kony refused.  Canadians, Libyans, Egyptians, everyone of goodwill has tried to bring about talks, and it has always been Kony who has always turned down these talks. The reason at the time was because he knew he had this shield, he had this protection and we could not easily reach him.  

Now we are reaching where he is, getting to his roots, so what has he done? He has sent a few of them into Uganda, they have been dropping leaflets, they have sent messages through their contacts to say, “we are ready to talk now, could you please stop chasing us so that we can talk?” And the President has answered, “we are ready to talk, but we are not ready to stop chasing them”.  

The President, while talking to these bishops, told them to deliver the message to Kony. He made this revelation at the press conference today, it should be in the media tomorrow. He said, yes, he is giving them an opportunity if they collect in Southern Sudan in a place called Owiny Kibul and in another place called Panyakwara and in Aswa Ranch. We can give them assurances that we will not attack them there. The President says he would then ask the international community, specifically the World food Programme, to give them food because they do not have food, and then that opportunity could be used for the bishops to talk to them to see what new ideas they may have, if any.  

The reason they came into Uganda in the small groups and why they have been engaging in these kind of acts that we have witnessed in the last few weeks, is mainly to generate publicity in order precisely to put pressure on Government for talks.  

The other reason, obviously, is the hope that by doing that, we would pull back our forces from Sudan and come to protect the internally displaced peoples camps, the roads and other soft targets which they have been attacking. That has been one of their main reasons for engaging in the recent attacks.

Well, we will not leave southern Sudan until we have destroyed Kony. I sent a delegation to Khartoum last weekend. As members may recollect, the protocol expired on 30th June, and we had talked on phone with Sudanese authorities because 30th June coincided with their national day, when the military took over power in Sudan. So, they had agreed verbally to extend this until we sent a delegation, which was led by the Chief of Staff, and we have had this protocol extended to 15th of August. We shall use this time to hunt down Kony and we hope we will get him.  We nearly got him recently, but we missed that opportunity. We will not be deterred, we will continue trying until we get him, and I have no doubt in my mind we will get him.  

The Sudanese authorities had raised a question, they said some people were raising the issue in Parliament as to why Sudan as a sovereign state should invite a foreign force to come and operate on its territory. I told the Sudanese authorities when I was in Khartoum that I was prepared to address their Parliament on the issue. And I had one question for them, we are fighting against terrorism and there are only two choices, either you support the fight against terrorism or you support terrorism, and the choice was theirs.  

I had no doubt in my mind, the choice was very clear, and here in Uganda I would like to tell you the same story. Government has had the policy to talk to Kony all along, but it is they who have refused to talk.  Now we have no choice but to destroy them if they continue to bear arms, or we will talk to them if they clearly demonstrate that this time round they would like to talk. 

What I would like to tell my honourable colleagues is to follow the example of the parliamentary leadership from Lango, condemn the acts of terrorism and then maybe you can talk about these weaknesses.  Unlike those who I hear day in and day out condemning the UPDF, talking about UPDF weaknesses without in anyway condemning the acts of terrorism by Kony!  I have heard them before and I heard them today.  This is simply being inconsistent with the message, and I would like to tell those leaders and colleagues, please, there is nothing that is going to deter us, either you are with us or you are against us.

I understand there was a question about indiscipline of the UPDF in the north, and I understand that hon. Santa Okot either saw or heard about a captain who ran naked. Well, I need further information about that from her. I do not know whether she saw him or whether this was a sign of indiscipline or cowardice. What does running naked mean? What was it?  

Let me say this, when we mobilised our force to go and fight in southern Sudan, we took the bulk of the force there and we left these camps in that area in the hands of home guards. So, actually, we did not have the conventional professional soldiers in these areas. We had home guards protecting the camps, and it is true that they were few, and obviously, home guards are not on the same level as soldiers. 

We have had cases where they were overpowered like in Alero, in Cwero and a few places where they were overpowered.  But I would not characterise that as cowardice, because some of them fought but the overwhelming numbers of the opposition overpowered them. We have now brought back forces and left enough in southern Sudan to handle Kony.   We have deployed enough forces to protect all the camps, and we are going to protect every highway so that the publicity-generating activities of these bandits will not be available to them anymore.

Finally, I understand that hon. Hillary Onek said that soldiers have not been paid for months. I am not aware of that. I would like to hear more about it. As far as I am concerned, from the centre here, every 28th day of the month we give out money in payment of salary to all the soldiers under the pay of UPDF. I would like to invite hon. Hillary Onek, if he has any information about soldiers who may not have been paid, to give it to me, because I am particularly interested in it. We can obviously follow it up and pursue it to its logical conclusion.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you very much.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. May I also convey my appreciation, first of all, to His Excellency the President and then to all Members of Parliament. You have done a good job and you have made very important points, which we must address, including omissions; for example, the legislative programme should have appeared in the State of the Nation Address. That matter will be solved next time.  

Some have also argued that something should have been mentioned concerning decentralisation. Our view was that it is so institutionalised that perhaps we should skip it, because we do not want to make the address too long.  Be that as it may, we shall try to be more inclusive.

My colleagues have answered a number of issues, so I shall confine myself on a few which have not been answered. One of them was that His Excellency the President subordinated a constitutional function of delivering the State of the Nation Address to attending a conference on food security in Rome, Italy.  

I must say that this was a critical conference, because it was answering problems afflicting the continent of Africa and other policies. And as you know, His Excellency has attained fame for being one of the major spokesmen of Africa on these fundamental issues. This includes the problems of giving subsidies to the literate farmers abroad while we are not allowed to give subsidies to illiterate farmers, and the problems of marketing our goods.   

So, while the President was attending this international forum, addressing critical issues afflicting the continent of Africa, it was also benefiting Uganda.  

May I also point out that under Article 108(3)(a), His Excellency the President is allowed to ask the Vice President to deputise for him when the need arises. In this case, Madam Speaker, the need arose - (Applause).  

Others also pointed out that His Excellency is attending too many trips abroad. Again, I want to say that he is attending to major global issues, which also affect us, and his interface with these important actors has helped us.  Take AGOA for example - the marketing of our goods - he was one of the key people who pointed out that we need to access their markets. 

But also, let me say that when His Excellency interacts face to face with other global leaders to the undoubted advantage of this country, there are obvious advantages, which are not quantifiable.  But with time, you will be able to fathom the important consequences of his interface. The global village is now small, we cannot over localise ourselves.  We must keep abreast of what is taking place. We must penetrate the minds of critical international actors by meeting them physically.

Hon. Kamuntu said that while the percentage of the poor people has decreased from 44 per cent in 1997 and 35 per cent in 2001, the actual numbers of the poor has not changed or has in fact in some cases increased.  Let me put it to him that we have projects like restocking, UPE, primary health care, which are specifically addressing the reduction of property. 

So, in addition to the figures given to you, we are specifically addressing poverty through these programmes. UPE, for example, is addressing poverty of knowledge, and you cannot address material poverty without addressing the poverty of knowledge. So, we have multifaceted programmes, which ultimately will address some of the concerns raised by hon. Kamuntu. But we have also sustained growth of over 6.5 per cent on average for a period of over ten years alone. This is a commendable achievement by any standard. We should not underestimate our achievements.

Another Member of Parliament said that there is need for the army to pull out of politics, especially their representation in Parliament. I would like to disagree. First of all, as you know, historically nothing has harmed the interest of Uganda other than a semi-illiterate army through which people were acquiring power, brutalizing the members of the political system and maiming them.  

We are now creating a forum for members of the army to come and participate with us in the process of legislative programmes, so that they can own what we discuss and they can also go back and become vectors of modernization in the army. They need to own and spread what we are doing. We need also to interface with them so that we clarify our position vis-à-vis their positions, and we modify our positions in a mutual manner.

I must also refer to Article 78(2), which provided for the representation of these groups. Under that Article, the review should take place after ten years from the commencement of the Constitution and every five years thereafter.  In case you think this period is too long, there is a Constitutional Review Commission where the matter can be addressed. Let us encourage the participation of these groups in the legislative forum so that they may also internalize and fully grasp the issues, and be able to explain these issues in their constituencies.

Conflict resolution is a fundamental problem.  We are currently grappling with problems of national integration, and that is why we have to pay special attention to conflict resolution. If you take the northern part of Uganda, we have again adopted a multifaceted approach. We use political aspects, economic aspects and social aspects, for example, we have the Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF). One hundred  million dollars has been availed to us and we are going to ensure that the north is able to “catch up” with the rest of the country. 

We shall improve the quality and access to social services like health, education, water and sanitation and infrastructure, especially community roads. We shall support vulnerable groups, especially youth and women affected by conflict, to establish income-earning projects.

The restocking programme is to address the restoration of the cattle culture which was damaged by conflict. We want to increase agricultural productivity and increase income;  2.9 billion shillings has been allocated for this project to cover both northern Uganda and Luwero Triangle. 

We are also addressing the vulnerable youth in northern Uganda. This project is sponsored by the Japanese grant to assist and train the vulnerable youth in various skills, which can enable them to engage in gainful employment such as carpentry, masonry, et cetera.  The youth will be provided with tools at the end of their training. This is a 1.5 million-dollar project.   

Then we have also the Acholi programme. This is a four million euro project funded by the European Union to support projects in health, roads, water and education sectors as decided by the respective district councils of Gulu, Kitgum and Pader. Gulu District Council in particular was paid Shs 371,347,287 on 5 July 2002, to start to off the implementation of the projects approved by the district council. On receipt of their respective work plans this month, Pader District will be given Shs 212,816,127 and Kitgum District will receive Shs 221,643,248. We are addressing afflicted areas.

Rural Micro-finance support: 
 
It provides loan funds through micro-finance institutions to the clients. Under the Poverty Alleviation Project 1994 to 2001, Gulu, Kitgum, Pader, Lira and Apac Districts received Shs408,537,000 loan funds and their repayment was over 93 per cent. From 2001 to-date, the northern region has received Shs 101,650,000.  

Talks with Kony:  

In addition to what the Minister of Defence has articulated so ably, I want to say that Government has displayed commitment to talk to all rebel groups, including Kony. You are aware of successful dialogue with UPA and recently UNRF II. We also enacted the Amnesty law. 

We are obviously aware that we must address the political question. You are preaching of becoming converted, however, does Kony know what he really wants? I ask you to examine this question. An essential requirement for resolving the rebel activities in the North and other parts of Uganda is that these cruel bandits must be totally denied any sanctuary by all the elite and peasants. If they are totally denied sanctuary, they will be encircled and paralysed. 

Let me give you an example. In my own village at Buloba, Itongwa tried to re-surface but he was denied food. We gave information out on his whereabouts, and he was encircled and had to run away. He was lucky that he ran away, otherwise we would have strangled him. The Iteso also suffered from this problem and there was total denial of sanctuary to these groups. That is a minimum requirement. 

Disarmament Programme in Karamoja:

(i) The disarmament programme in Karamoja is another important issue of conflict resolution. Tribute must be paid to His Excellency the President who has personally spearheaded this process, and he has been there several times. I am happy to announce that 10,000 guns have been surrendered. 

(ii) UPDF strength has been increased by, inter-alia having the 4th Division headquarters in Karamoja. Furthermore, 142 LDUs per sub-county are already protecting the area. There is relative calm in the area.  

(iii) The programme is being supplemented by supply of water, security roads, formal and alternative basic education for the Karimojong, provision of improved seeds and use of animal traction.

(iv) We have also given ploughs to those who have handed over their weapons. Under the re-stocking project, animals are being distributed and they can be used for ploughing.

(v) Medical supplies have been provided.

(vi) Finally, magistrates, prosecutors and investigators have been deployed throughout Karamoja. Consequently, the Karimojong are testing the presence of Government and rule of law.

That is what in political science we call, “establishing central authority over subordinate units.” It is an essential ingredient of national integration. 

On 18 July 2002, I have invited all stakeholders, including honourable Members of Parliament, to attend a meeting at 9.15 a.m in the boardroom of my office. We shall address the persistent problems and also strengthen the gains we have acquired. We are addressing conflict resolution.  

The problem of pastoralists in Teso:

I agree with the honourable Minister of Internal Affairs that we, the elite of Uganda, should not politicise the problem of pastoralists in Teso. It is a major problem. Several meetings have been held to solve the problem. Indeed His Excellency the President, who has also been in touch with stakeholders, will be visiting Teso to address this problem further. 

I must add that Article 29(2)(a) of the Constitution guarantees every Ugandan the right to move freely throughout Uganda and reside and settle in any part of Uganda subject of course to individual proprietary rights. This mobility is a necessary facilitation of national integration. How can you speak of mobility for East Africa when you lack mobility within a small polity called Uganda?

Narrowing the principle of broad-basedness of the Movement to include only religion, tribe and regional representation while leaving out diverse ideological opinions:

Some people have said that broad-basedness is no longer a reality. I must say that this is an important matter that you are addressing. Efforts have been made to build consensus especially on controversial matters through caucus meetings, which are open to all of you. I am happy that even honourable Members like Mao have attended some of our caucuses. 

But what I find disturbing in Parliament is that certain people who attend these caucus meetings turn around and oppose an agreed position in other public fora. This, in my view, is a sign of political indiscipline. As a political scientist, I must assert that there is no political system or any organisation which can thrive without minimum political discipline. 

You might argue that, “I am under individual merit, you cannot whip me.” But you must whip yourself if you have to support a political system. It will not thrive, it will not continue to institutionalise on broad-basedness when there is political indiscipline. I must add that when we caucus on a position, you sustain it here and elsewhere. 

Executive ignoring views of Parliament as was illustrated by the sale of Uganda Commercial Bank Limited (UCBL):

It has been argued several times that the Executive ignores views of Parliament and several examples are being given, like the sale of UCBL. Let me make it clear once again, that when you pass Resolutions, they are advisory to the Executive. The Executive, in many cases, takes into account your Resolutions. It may or may not agree with the entire Resolution. 

When you take for example the UCBL, there was total agreement, in principle, that UCBL should be privatised. The haggling was only over the method and perhaps the pace of doing it. So, that is extremely important. When we do not embrace the Resolutions in their entirety, it is because we are in charge of Executive matters. Some of them may not be implementable because the timeframe is short. 

But you have also areas of supremacy. For example, under Article 159(2), we cannot borrow money unless you have given us permission to do so. So, you have that authority, and you have never refused and we have continued to borrow. We would be violating Article 159 of our Constitution if we did not ask for your permission to borrow. Let us be clear about our roles and give each other the space we deserve.  

Why not contract big multi-national firms instead of local contractors doing shoddy work at districts?

This was answered by the Minister of Education and Sports. Sometimes we want communities to participate in the building because we are giving them skills and building their capacity. It was a very well answered question, and I think I should not continue flogging it.  

No mention of decentralisation in State of Nation Address:

I should say that the decentralisation policy in Uganda might not have been captured in the address because it is largely a success story now.

Preferential treatment is given to foreigners as opposed to local investors. The road to Speke Resort Munyonyo and the one to the Ranch on the Lake were used as an example to illustrate this scenario:

There are two points to clarify on this issue:

(i) The incentives to investors, both local and foreign, are in accordance with the Investment Code. I have gathered from the Uganda Investment Authority that 36 percent of the investments are owned by Ugandans while 25 percent are joint ventures between Ugandans and foreign investors. These figures do not seem to sustain the statement above. The Minister of Investments may give you more details on this matter.

(ii) As for the road to Munyonyo, the answer, as given to me by the Ministry of Works, is as follows: The road to Speke Resort Munyonyo is under the Ministry of Works, Transport and Communications. It is a tarmac road, and the repairs carried out were part of periodic maintenance work, save for the last kilometre to the resort, which was upgraded to tarmac because the resort was to host the SMART Partnership Summit that was of great significance and interest to Uganda. 

The road to the Ranch on the Lake is a murram/earth road that falls under the local authorities for its maintenance. This clearly shows that Government is not employing double standards to investors.  

One honourable member urged Ugandans to discuss the issue of succession:

It was hon. Mwandha who did so, and I am glad he has stayed around to listen to the answers. I want to pay tribute to him. First of all, there are no laws preventing anybody from discussing this important matter. And I want to make it clear that the matter has been discussed over the radio, in the papers, and at one stage I was also portrayed as potential presidential material – (Laughter and Applause). 

What I disliked about that discussion, however, was that people were saying, “you must get a Muganda, or you must get a Catholic or a Muslim.” That is cheapening this discussion. My view has always been, “get the person who embraces the people of Uganda, get a person who can modernise this country. Do not use sectarian arrangements to discuss this question.” (Applause). 

And, of course, I have made it clear myself that I am a technocratic person. I decided not to participate in elective politics. So, I am not going to stand, as you know. I want to be technocratic and make a difference in that approach. You need technocratic politicians, don’t you?  

The qualifications for the President are provided for under Article 104(2) of our Constitution. It has the academic qualifications and the age. The term of the President is set under Article 105 of the Constitution. It is stated that the President does not have more than two terms, each term lasting five years. He or she is elected by universal adult suffrage, through a secret ballot, as under Article 103. 

The system of governance is also known, that is, we adopted the Movement system. Availability of this information means that the question of succession is known. The method of succession is also known. Some people have been speculating that President Museveni may try to amend Article 105; why should you speculate? The point I am making here is that the debate is going on. We should not of course spend too much time on it because there are other urgent issues to be addressed.

My personal view would be that if we probably intensified the debate two years before the elections, it would be better than spending so much time saying, “the other time the President shook hands with so and so, the other time he travelled with so and so, that is the successor!” And it is not for him to decide, as you know. We use universal adult suffrage by secret vote. You are aware that in Ghana a presidential candidate was blessed by an incumbent and he did not get through. So, the system is known, no law prevents us from debating it. (Applause).

May I once again pay tribute to His Excellency the President and to all of you for a job well done. I beg to support the motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Prime Minister. Let me invite the mover to wind up.

MR AUGUSTINE RUZINDANA: Madam Speaker, I thank you for giving me the opportunity to wind up. Normally this is not done. Even what has happened - Ministers responding - has never been done before. 

I would like to thank all members who have contributed to the motion. I hardly heard anybody opposing it, except one today, but he also supported certain aspects of what the Movement has achieved.  

Madam Speaker, some issues were raised concerning our constituent interests, others concerned the whole country and others concerned the whole system under which we are operating. Some have been answered and I would like to say that those that have not been dealt with could still be answered in the future. There are many, which have not been answered, and I will not go into them.  

We have been here for four days, and some of us are going to a ceremony in Namirembe, so I will not take a long time. I would only like to ask members to support the motion and when the Speaker puts the question, I ask everybody to say “aye.” But before you do that, Madam Speaker, there is one small thing I want to say. 

In the last four days I have seen that we, the political class, who were together in the last Parliament, in the CA, in the NRC, in the struggles that have taken place have a special opportunity to decide on the future of this country. 

Most of us here know that the Movement moved this country from a failed state to one that is now moving on the path to development and democracy, even if sometimes it is with faltering steps. The opportunity we have is that we can put this country onto a stable path that is irreversible. We can also conduct matters in such a way that what has been achieved cannot be reversed. 

I would like to end by asking all of us in Parliament, including members of the Executive, to know the heavy burden we have. We have to create a system in which everybody is a stakeholder, in which no one feels like a victim, in which everybody thinks that he has a contribution to make even if we may be in different political camps. 

The best service we can do to this country is to create an environment where all can say what they want to say and be respected for it, even if we do not all agree with it. This is generally what we have done. We are not always consistent on it though. So, when I decided to move the motion in the manner I did, it was to give everybody an opportunity to feel free to make his or her contribution, and I am glad that has been done. I thank you for having appreciated the way I did it. 

I beg to move that the motion before the House be supported by the whole House. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. Let me thank you very much for your patience and contributions. But the final motion will be heard next week on Tuesday before we begin the rest of the debate. 

I have taken note of the frustrations of members with regard to contributions. The Business Committee will look at the situation again and see how we can improve on time allocation and giving members the opportunity to speak.  

On the Order Paper for next week, after this motion, we shall have the Minister of Internal Affairs come back to the House to address the issue of extradition. Although he was due to give the report yesterday on the case of someone who was smuggled out of the country, he will be ready with it on Tuesday. 

Thank you very much honourable members, sorry for delaying you. I hope God will forgive us, as we were doing work for God and for our country. The House is adjourned to Tuesday next week at 2.00 p.m.

(Parliament rose at 6.28 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 16 July 2002 at 2.00 p.m.)


