Wednesday, 15 July 2009

Parliament met at 2.25 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s meeting. I will be altering today’s Order Paper later, to allow the Minister of Foreign Affairs to make a brief statement. In the meantime, let us proceed with the business. 

2.27
MR STEVEN KALIBA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. This Parliament passed some money to purchase energy savers in a bid to try and help our people cut the high UMEME bills. However, I was very surprised about two days ago, when I found these bulbs in my constituency being sold at Shs 10,000 each. What surprised me most, was that there is a very clear sentence saying, “Not for sale”, with the Coat of Arms and the words, “Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development.” 

I was in a constituency meeting and one of the constituents raised the matter. I initially did not believe it until I went with that person and gave them Shs 20,000. They brought me two bulbs, one of which I gave to you, Madam Speaker. 

I thought this was a very serious matter, because in my constituency, Fort Portal Municipality, not even a single energy saver bulb was distributed. I was really very ashamed and very embarrassed to find these bulbs, which were supposed to be distributed cost-free in the constituency, being sold in shops. 

I would like to get some clarification from the minister in charge how this distribution was carried out. Which companies did the distribution? Were these bulbs distributed in Fort Portal? If yes, where did they distribute them? I would also like to know how many bulbs were brought into this country. Were some of these bulbs from Osram? Were they supposed to be sold to recover some costs?

I really need this clarification because it is very embarrassing for such an item to be found in the shops and yet it is supposed to be distributed free of charge. I need some clarification from the sector minister.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise to support the concerns being raised by hon. Steven Kaliba. Can the Minister in charge tell us how much money the Government of Uganda paid to that Indonesian company to produce these bulbs, and how many bulbs were produced in Uganda? It seems like the Ugandan Government committed money to have energy saver bulbs produced and distributed free in Uganda, but as Parliament, we are not privy to that contract or to the distribution channel.

Secondly, these bulbs were supplied courtesy of the Ministry of Energy - my good colleague, hon. Daudi Migereko, was there then - but it seems they are now being adulterated in the open market. The writings on them are being rubbed using thinner glue and then put in Philips circuits and sold as routine bulbs. 

Can the Minister please take this seriously and tell this House where the contract that was entered between the Government of Uganda and that company is? How many bulbs were produced in this country and to whom were they distributed? Thank you, hon. Kaliba.

MR KALIBA:  Madam Speaker, I beg that I lay this on the Table to help the sector minister to investigate and come up with strategies to counteract this anomaly. I beg to lay this energy-saver bulb labelled, “Osram. Not for sale. 75W.” I beg to lay. 

2.32
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Madam Speaker, the issue that is being raised by hon. Kaliba, MP Fort Portal, requires detailed explanation. I will pass on these concerns to the hon. Minister of Energy who will be in a position to come up with a statement on this matter on Tuesday. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, join me in welcoming pupils from Namirembe Parents Primary School in Lubaga South. They are up here. They are represented by hon. Kamya and hon. Nabillah. You are welcome. (Applause)

2.33
MR OWOR AMOOTI OTADA (NRM, Kibanda County, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent public importance. On Saturday the 11th, Masindi District Local Government organised a meeting in Masindi, in the Education Hall. All leaders of Masindi were invited to that meeting. The Prime Minister of Bunyoro was invited. Sons and daughters hailing from Masindi were invited, and elders and opinion leaders were also invited. In fact, we had about 500 participants on that particular occasion.

I would like to report that in that meeting, we visited hell on earth because, four plain-clothed military officers came to arrest one of the participants, namely Lt Patrick Kasumba, who is an advocate, and I hear, also a legal advisor in ESO. That particular gentleman was discussing a paper entitled: “Land Rights in a Legal and Economic Perspective”, a copy of which I have and I will lay on the Table. He was invited to provide expert legal advice in that particular meeting, and I was also scheduled subsequently to discuss a paper. 

When these plain-clothed fellows came in, the participants overpowered them – they were four – and they were deterred for a few minutes. After 20 minutes, they returned with a full military double-cabin truck with over 12 heavily armed men, both in plain clothes and in military uniform camouflage of the air force. The vehicle number was DAF 041. These fellows surrounded the hall where we were, and they dragged Lt Kasumba to a waiting pickup, whose number plates I have just given you. 

The distinguished participants rose in protest, throwing stones and uttering very abusive words, and actually chanting anti-government slogans. This was going to create a Magara situation in Masindi on Saturday because if those military men had lost their heads, we are sure they might have shot into the ground because they were fully charged. 

That situation did not amuse us. Lt Kasumba was driven to Masindi Police Barracks. I want to thank the Division IO, because he refused to accept that truck to enter into the barracks, because they did not have orders to execute that particular operation. Brig. Mugisha also refused his IO subsequently, or I think he thanked him - because he was not around - for having refused entry to this particular truck. Having failed to gain access into the barracks, these people drove and dumped Lt Kasumba at the police station. There was no complainant made, and subsequently, Lt Kasumba registered his own complaint against his arrest. 

The distinguished participants thronged the police station where they met the Division IO, the DPC and the DISO. These three officers were categorical in saying that the orders did not come from Masindi Barracks, but they mentioned that the orders came from Maj. Gen. Jim Owesigire. The people in Masindi know that Maj. Gen. Owesigire has very significant land interests in Masindi. 

The forum in that particular meeting mandated me to request this House to seek clarification on the following issues: 
One, it is alleged in Masindi that Lt Patrick Kasumba wants to contest in Bujenje County against the Minister of Information and National Guidance, and Member of Parliament for Bujenje.

Two, Maj. Gen. Owesigire has land interests in Masindi. The people in Masindi detest this because of the method through which he acquired the land and the method in which he is handling the squatters on that particular land.

Three, while we were having that meeting in the Education Hall, where the minister herself was invited as a leader, together with other leaders, and she did not turn up, it is alleged that they had a side meeting. It is alleged that in that meeting, a discussion was held to the effect that something should be planned like what took place. 

Four, since the Member of Parliament for Buruli and the Member of Parliament for Bujenje snubbed the meeting, and it is alleged that they had their own meeting at the side, we would want clarification. I was mandated to ask for that. 

Five, the contempt with which these armed military men held us is also disturbing. Actually, I was asked to say in this Parliament that, that was an attack on the Banyoro. 

Six, and finally, the Banyoro had peacefully congregated to discuss matters that affect them as a society. For them to have been treated in that particular manner was totally very unbefitting. 

We are told that this lieutenant was summoned to CMI. We do not know the details of that, but the Banyoro are saying that this was not the only military officer that has attended a similar workshop. 

I, therefore, want to warn that this matter be taken seriously. For lack of a better word, I would want to caution that this matter be treated with the importance it deserves. As we talk, Masindi has been set on fire and the people are demanding an express explanation or an apology from Government for what happened on Saturday.

I would like to lay the following on Table. A CD of the events as they unfolded; a copy of the newspaper article; a copy of Lt Kasumba’s presentation; a copy of his ID; a copy of his movement pass from the UPDF; and a copy of the invitation entitled: “Meeting for Elders and Opinion Leaders of Masindi District”, for which the following people were invited.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay

MR OTADA: Madam Speaker, I thank you. I would like to lay the following on the Table:
1. 	A CD of a recording of what took place in Masindi.
2. 	A copy of the newspaper article about the same.
3. 	A copy of a presentation of the arrested participant.
4. 	A copy of the invitation for the meeting and identity of the arrested lieutenant. 

I beg to lay, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I noted that some allegations were made against the army and they are not here, but their minister is here. Do you have anything to say about this, hon. Kiyonga?

2.41
MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am glad but not surprised that this issue has found itself on the Floor of this House. Mr Paddy Kasumba is very well known to me; he is my constituent and he is a serving UPDF officer at the rank of a lieutenant. I am aware that Lt Kasumba Paddy is aspiring to contest with me in Bujenje Constituency, and I am not afraid of him. 

Allegations have been levelled against me and my colleague, hon. Kahwa, of having snubbed a meeting organised by the Chairman LC 5 Masindi District, Mr Bilija Stephen Kazimura. To give you a little background, I did find a message on Wednesday last week on my phone, from the chairman that he wanted to talk to me. I rang him after Cabinet and Parliament at around 6.00 p.m., and he informed me that he had been organising a meeting for elders in Masindi District and they had planned to have it on 16th of this month. He did inform me that since they had put council on 16th, they had rescheduled the meeting for 11th, which was last Saturday. 

I did not know about this meeting. He was just informing me then, and it was only two days away from the meeting. He did say that I should facilitate a topic entitled, “Guiding citizens’ action in a multiparty democracy.” However, I explained to the chairman that on Saturday 11th I was already committed and I could not be in the district, and I requested him to pass over my apologies. 

I will tell you that on Friday, we were at Kigumba Cooperative College with the Minister of Education, Minister of Energy, Minister of State for Minerals, Minister of State for Higher Education, and Minister of State for Primary Education. We were discussing the operationalisation of the Uganda Petroleum Institute.

On Saturday, I left Masindi District at exactly 7.00 a.m. to go to Pakwach, because I was scheduled to facilitate a mobilisation course for the youth. I did not come back until 6.00 p.m. that day. So, I get surprised that my colleague, hon. Otada, alleges that while they were having that conference, I was holding a side meeting planning to arrest Paddy Kasumba.

We have been in this House with hon. Otada for close to eight years; even yesterday I was with him in the canteen and he just greeted me and that was it. He never even took trouble to find out or hear from me. Now coming with these allegations to the Floor of the House makes me think there is some ulterior motive beyond this explanation.

As I came back on Saturday evening, news was all over on our local radios that Kasumba had been arrested and he had been taken to the barracks. I did ring Brig. Mugisha who is in charge of artillery at Masindi Barracks, and I complained to him asking why they had arrested and harassed my constituent, Paddy Kasumba. Brig. Mugisha at that time told me he was out of the district, but he would find out what happened and would get back to me. Indeed, after less than ten minutes, he got back to me to say that the IO had informed him that Lt Kasumba being a serving soldier, had been taken to Masindi Barracks, but they refused to receive him because there was no complaint against him, so he had been taken to Masindi Police Station. 

I did ring the DPC and the DISO to find out what was happening and what happened. The DISO did tell me that Kasumba had been brought to Masindi Police Station, but there was no complainant. I asked him, “If there is no complainant, why are you still holding him? You should release him.” 

I was mindful of the politics in Masindi District and especially in Bujenje Constituency. That is why I said I was not surprised that this thing came to the Floor of the House as it has been presented. Kasumba was released and all I know is that Gen. Owesigire –(Interruption)

MR SEBULIBA: Madam Speaker, I am standing on a procedural matter. Bearing in mind that our colleague has given us a statement of public importance and of course some names have been touched, I thought it would be procedurally correct for the people who are cited, like the minister, to come up with a personal statement. Hearing how she is reacting, I think it is better for her to come up with a statement rebutting the allegations. 

Otherwise, some of us are perturbed. I am more flummoxed because we have been making these statements and some of us have never got responses from the ministers concerned. We have been making statements on climate and other issues and we are yet to get responses. I think it would be procedurally correct – I stand to be corrected – that if there is something touching the personality of the minister, she should come to your office, make a proper statement and then we can also react to that one.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have gone into so many details and both Kasumba and Owesigire are not here. That is why I had wanted the minister who is in charge of the soldiers to tell us when he can come -(Ms Kabakumba Masiko rose_) No, you have denied. You have denied and it is on record. You said you were in Pakwach and that you did not go into hiding. All those are on record. 

I cannot get Kasumba here to explain his side of the story. She has explained that she was in Pakwach and that she did not avoid the meeting. She also said that she was given short notice. All those are on record. Isn’t that enough for now?

2.50
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On Monday morning, hon. Otada met me on the steps as you enter Parliament from the eastern gate, and briefly told me about that incident. He also referred me to a story that had appeared in the Monitor that morning. I did take his story seriously and I looked at the newspaper. An investigation has been started within the sector to follow up what hon. Otada told me. This afternoon, he has given much greater detail on the Floor, which I do hope will also assist the investigations. As I said, I only met him on Monday and today is Wednesday.

The second point I would like to make, is that it is true that Maj. Gen. Owesigire does own land in that area of Masindi, and there has been some dispute about that piece of land, and it is a subject of court proceedings. I am surprised that my colleague makes it part of his statement. That issue of land is a subject of the courts of law. 

Thirdly, I would like to say to hon. Otada that the people in Masindi must keep calm. The truth will come out and if anybody has made an error, appropriate steps will be taken. So, when the investigations are through, I will return to Parliament and issue another statement. (Ms Kabakumba Masiko rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But how much more do you have, really? No. Just conclude, please.

MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: I would like to conclude that it is not an allegation that Kasumba is coming to contest in Bujenje County; it is a fact. He has declared that he is coming to contest and it is no big deal for the people of Bujenje. 

I also want to assure this House that there is no fire in Masindi District and there is no fire in Bujenje County. I left Masindi on Monday and the district is calm.

I would like to request the people of Bunyoro and my colleagues that we sit down as a region and sort out some of the trivial issues we may have. 

This attack by hon. Otada is uncalled for, and it is very unfair. I will tell you that I have heard colleagues since yesterday saying that hon. Otada is going around telling them that it is I who instigated the arrest of this man. I did not, and I want it on record. I want my colleague, hon. Otada, to behave in a more civilised manner - (Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, you have been exceedingly kind to the minister and allowed her to give her conclusion. Is it in order for the minister to continue to make counter accusations on the Floor of this House in the face of your ruling?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Madam Minister, I hope you have accepted that the Ministry of Defence will carry out investigations and come and report to this House. So, there will be no more discussions on this matter. Let us go to the next item. Minister of Defence, please come up for your own issues now. (Laughter)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.55
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do hope that colleagues have picked copies of the statement. I was told by the Office of the Clerk that they were put on the table outside. So, I am sure that someone will do the needful- (Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, the minister has made an allegation that the statement is available at the table. We have been at the table and we have not received that statement- (Interjections)- But you can see it is only one side waving copies. (Laughter) Looks like the minister has given one side access to the statement and we have none.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, hon. Odonga Otto is indicating that they are actually there on this side of the House. Please proceed, Minister.

DR KIYONGA: Colleagues will recall that on Tuesday 16th of last month, the Leader of the Opposition raised issues concerning cattle rustling, and he was corroborated by a number of colleagues on the Floor. Madam Speaker, you ordered that I return to the House to make a statement on this. I should have made this statement earlier, but because of other urgent matters, I could not get on the Floor or on the Order Paper. 

In summary, six points were made on the Floor regarding this issue. The first one was that a number of persons, including some soldiers, had been killed by warriors in Karamoja. The second was that a big number of cattle had been rustled, and the number 6,000 was mentioned as cattle having been raided from Kotido District on only one occasion. The House was also informed that some raids had taken place in the District of Pader. Parliament was also told that some cows - the number was put at 600 - had been stolen from Adjumani District. 

Concern was expressed that the security situation in Karamoja had worsened despite the deployment of Police to reinforce the UPDF in that sub-region. Lastly, there was fear that given the food shortage situation, the Karimojong were likely to enter into the neighbouring areas of Bugisu and Teso in much bigger numbers.

Apart from the inaccuracies about the number of cattle raided from Kotido on just one occasion, and those stolen by some thieves from the South of Sudan, the concerns expressed by the honourable Members of Parliament are in line with our understanding of the security situation in the Karamoja sub region.

I wish to inform honourable Members of Parliament that in the past three months, there has been heightened activity on the part of the cattle rustlers within Karamoja. I would like to add that some incursions have been made into mainly the neighbouring district of Pader. The rustling has involved mainly the clans of Jie, Matheniko, Pokot and Dodoth. 

The security situation in the months of April, May and June can roughly be illustrated by the data that I have provided in the table that appears in paragraph 3.3. Let me just highlight some of its content. In these three months, 44 civilians and 16 soldiers were killed by the warriors. Let me add that 59 warriors were also killed in action, while fighting the soldiers. Over that period, the army recovered 252 guns from the warriors. Also recovered by the army were 3497 cows that had been rustled.

You will notice, under No. 10 in the table, that in that period the cows raided were 2451. One may wonder whether more cows than those raided were recovered. The explanation here is that because raiding goes on all the time in that place, there is always an accumulated number of cows that are raided. That is why recovery is also continuous. So, there are no contradictions in those two figures.

Hon. Members, you are aware that the army had to be sent to Karamoja to deal with cattle rustling, which has been long standing. I would like to inform this House that since 2001, a lot of progress has been made in stabilising Karamoja region to integrate it into the national economy.

I would like to inform the House that while in Karamoja, we work along six lines. One is the issue of disarmament, which sees us recover guns from those who hold them illegally. This is done both voluntarily and also by force using the army, though in some cases the police. As you are aware, recently, the police increased deployment in the Karamoja sub region. I can report that both the formal police and the special force called the Anti Stock Theft Unit have been deployed along the borders between Karamoja and the other neighbouring districts of Uganda.

Over the years, we have also been constructing security roads to ensure the troops move quickly to places that might be experiencing problems. 

Mobilisation is also a point of emphasis as we carry out disarmament. I can report that the President, Ministers, hon. Members of Parliament, particularly those from the area, and the district political and civic leaders, have carried out and continue to carry out mobilisation of the population towards disarmament. I wish at this stage to commend political leaders from Karamoja for the excellent work they have been doing to mobilise our people in that region for peace and development. However, I want to ask them to increase their efforts in this regard.

It may be necessary to consider once again enhancing assistance to hon. Members of Parliament from Karamoja to help them step up mobilisation. In the past, Madam Speaker, you did graciously give them one additional trip every month to enable them do more work in their areas. It is my opinion that if this is implemented, it will be very helpful.

The third area of action has been the issue of integrated development in the area. I am not going to give details about this aspect of our work since this paper is only about security.  

The fourth line is the issue of regional cooperation. We all know that cattle rustling is a regional matter, so we regularly hold meetings with our counterparts in the region on this very important subject.

The fifth line is the issue of specified or targeted protection measures. In this regard, I would like to say that there are special deployments in the towns. Now and then, patrols are carried out on the highways. Recently, we started guarding shared kraals, where cattle have been collectively put together to be offered better security.

Lastly, I would like to say that we do apprehend the criminals before we prosecute them.

How do we measure whether we are making any progress or not in the area of Karamoja? I would like to inform you that we mainly look at six points. One is the frequency, intensity and spread of raids. Two, we do gauge and discuss the human rights situation in the region, including the issue of displacement of the population. After that, we make reports and study what is going on, on these security roads. We keep collecting guns and assessing how many of them have been collected, and about how many are still left in the hands of criminals within the population. Then of course, we also track the level of development in the area.

We think that the negative events in the last three months are attributed to two main new developments. This is because we have massively reduced the guns in the area. Actually, we had almost stopped the use of the word “raid” and replaced it with the word “theft.” This was being done because the raids were involving only a few people who would have a gun or two. In recent times, however, we started to notice big formations of warriors carrying more than 30 guns. The intelligence information we have is that they are now sharing - when a particular group wants to raid cattle from a given area, they go and borrow guns from fellow warriors. This is one of the new features that explain the recent rise in cattle rustling in the last three months.

Also, due to the army and police pressure, some of the warriors withdrew to Kenya, and we have information that some of these are beginning to make a come back, and they are probably working with warriors from across the district to renew their raiding. 

These negative incidents in the past three months notwithstanding, we are satisfied that on the whole, the fundamentals remain firm towards stabilising Karamoja. The attacks on the highways are almost at zero level, and people are able to travel within Karamoja without escorts. 

We also think, the human rights situation has remarkably improved, although there are still areas of concern. Over the years, since 2001, a total of over 27,000 guns have been recovered from the warriors, and as hon. Colleagues from the sub-region know, a number of people who had been displaced have returned to their areas like Abim, Amudat, Nakapiripirit, and Katakwi. The districts of Teso, Mbale and Kapchorwa no longer experience the massive raids that used to be carried out by the warriors in that part of our country.

So, our response following this upsurge of cattle raiding in Karamoja – among many other procedures, I want to report on three:

1.	We held meetings within the ministry with some of our colleagues, honourable members of Parliament from Karamoja, and we have agreed on certain actions. We have informed each other on what is going on.
2.	Last week, the Chief of Defence Forces and the Inspector General of Police, went to the area to make an on-the spot situation analysis of what is going on in that sub region so that if there are loose ends, they can be tightened.
3.	We want to heighten our regional cooperation  with regard to this issue. 

So, before I conclude on the issue of security in Karamoja, I want to touch on what hon. Santos raised about cattle taken from Adjumani. The reports I have received are that, it is true, cattle unattended to numbering about 300, were taken by the Dinka people - herdsmen from Southern Sudan. 

The report reached the district late, but once the report reached the RDC, he worked with the security committee of the district to go to the neighbouring areas and report the matter to their counterparts in Southern Sudan. There was excellent cooperation from their colleagues in Southern Sudan, and as I speak now, 183 cattle have been recovered by our joint security committee of Adjumani and their counterparts in Sudan.

In conclusion, I would like to reassure Parliament and all Ugandans that, significant progress has been made in containing the security situation in Karamoja. The recent raids are being contained quickly. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this statement is a response to a very lengthy debate we held in this House. Again, last week, we had a very lengthy debate on security in this country. Unless there is something he has not touched, I do not want a debate on this matter now. We shall have only five minutes for the entire House – you want to supplement? Okay, the Minister for Internal Affairs wants to add something.

3.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Only last Friday, I was in Moroto, and I would like to report to you that I was elevated to be an elder among the Karimojong people and we danced very beautifully indeed. 

One and half months ago, I toured the entire Karamoja sub- region, all the way from Nakapiripirit up to Kaabong, and to a place called Karapata; this is along the borders of Southern Sudan and Kenya on the eastern side. I want to assure you that the situation is getting better.

You have heard my colleague saying that, the Inspector General and the CDF as we speak, are returning from Karamoja to review the situation. The biggest problem now, is to make sure that we put buffer forces in the various communities. We want to put a force between the Jie of Kotido and the Doth of Kaabong, so that they do not attack each other. 

Secondly, I want to assure my colleagues from Karamoja - they have been asking this question. Now that we have a bit of money, we are going to recruit a force within Karamoja that will help us to track any cattle that will have been rustled by anybody.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I want to assure this House that the Police are about to dominate the entire sub region. In a function last Friday, we received vehicles from the Netherlands Government; we received 20 pickups and about 30 motorcycles. The police are going to dominate the scene in Karamoja, and I pray that the question of cattle rustling and looseness in Karamoja become history in the near future. 

3.15
MR FRANCIS KIYONGA (Independent, Upe County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true we have been interacting with – (Interruption)

MR ISHAA OTTO: Madam Speaker, as you can observe, I have been seated here for the last 30 minutes and my good brother hon. Otafiire has been sleeping in this House; even now –(Laughter) Is it in order for him to continue sleeping in Parliament like that?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, I am aware that hon. Otafiire has just returned from Cabinet; he is thinking about the work in Cabinet. (Laughter) 

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: Madam Speaker, is he in order to start telling lies in the House -(Interjections)- shut up you! Wewe nyamaza kakiri.

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, you are decently sitting in your Chair steering this House. Is it in order for the hon. Kahinda Otafiire to usurp your powers and begin to order Members to shut up?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that was an assault with a friendly weapon.

DR FRANCIS KIYONGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that outside this House, we have interacted with the Minister of Defence on a number of issues, but for the record of this House, I would like to say that it is true that the situation has improved to 75 percent. However, that does not mean that it has to remain there. We need to achieve total security and this is possible. 

One of the ways to achieve it is by improving the intelligence body of the UPDF, which is still very poor. The population is willing to cooperate and identify criminals but these criminals, are not being arrested. Instead, it is those who bring information like LC I and the parish chiefs, who are being detained because of bringing that information. That is the kind of intelligence I say is poor. Let us improve in that area, if we want to achieve the other 25 percent.

The other point is that, although the issue of human rights violations has also improved, there are still cases of torture by members of the UPDF. Let us handle that area also. There are also still cases of extorting money from those suspected to have guns.

Lastly, I would like disarmament to move from the military up to the civilian level. If we are to complete disarmament, the Police will require that.

3.19
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the statement. I think the truth is that the disarmament exercise is both a success and a failure. The situation on the ground is that those who reach Karamoja have become poorer. Those who had 200 cows have two or none at all, and this is a very serious situation. I am on the ground through phone everyday to find out the situation in Karamoja. 

Secondly, there were some pledges and promises made to have military men along the border of Southern Sudan and Kenya. The borders in these countries are still porous. Let us face facts and do something.

The main raiders are being wiped out but there are smaller thieves who are even stealing chicken, which are very pertinent to some Karimojong. Others are raiding food that is given to some households. Very little has been done to address this situation; so something must be done especially on the Jie and Kaabong borders with Southern Sudan and Kenya. I think this needs immediate attention, as some of these people have already acquired guns because they go to auctions across –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Gutomoi, you had an opportunity in your capacity as the shadow minister, to address this matter before the minister came. Can you ask questions? You are now making submissions.

MR ANGIRO: That is why I am asking when this is going to be achieved. It is only when I explain that he can tell me how he is going to address this situation. This is because these people cross the border on auction days and acquire guns.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE, REGIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Speaker, you are aware that we are going to host the SMART Partnership Dialogue, which is due to take place here at Speke Commonwealth Resort in Munyonyo, between the 26th and 29th July 2009. Invitations to this important, high level event, were issued in collaboration with the Secretariat of the Commonwealth Partnership for Technical Management (CPTM), and invitations for the heads of state and government, included those neighbouring states that subscribe to the CPTM. 

The President of Sudan, His Excellency, Hassan Al Bashir, was among those to whom an invitation was sent by His Excellency, the President of Uganda, Yoweri Museveni, who is the chief host of the SMART Partnership Dialogue in 2009.

Madam Speaker, you are further aware that in July 2008, the Chief Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, Mr Luis Ocampo, issued a warrant of arrest in respect of His Excellency, President Omar Hassan Al Bashir, pursuant to a referral by the UN Security Council. This arrest warrant is in respect of war crimes and crimes against humanity allegedly committed in Sudan’s Darfur region, since early 2003. 

Coincidentally, the said ICC chief prosecutor was in Uganda on his way from DR Congo, and whilst here, something that was totally unconnected with the ongoing preparations for the SMART Partnership, he met various government officials and addressed the issue of the ICC arrest warrant issued against President Bashir. Indeed, Uganda as a state party to the Rome Statute of the ICC, is duty bound to arrest and hand over anybody indicted by the ICC. That is a treaty-based obligation that binds all state parties. 

However, as you are aware, the indictment of President Bashir has been quite controversial, given his status as a sitting head of state on the one hand, and the unprecedented nature of such a step. Various reactions have ensued as a result of this landmark development. The African Union in particular, has pursued various options in its attempt to address this matter. Other efforts have ensued from other organisations, including the OIC and the Arab League of States, among others. I will, however, limit my submission to the efforts by the AU.

The AU resolved that before it condemns or absolves President Bashir, it will need to make its own investigations. It, therefore, instituted a panel of investigators into the crisis in Darfur, which is chaired by the former South African President, His Excellency, Thabo Mbeki, and the Mbeki committee is yet to make a report on its findings.

Until such a time, and subject to the findings, it is diplomatically not appropriate to engage in acts of condemnation of President Bashir, on the one hand, and also unhelpful to appear to condone violations of human rights of the people of Darfur, on the other. The AU also requested the UN Security Council to exercise its authority under Article 16 of the Rome Statute, to deter the implementation of the arrest warrant against President Bashir for 12 months. Within this time framework, we believe that the Mbeki Panel will have issued its report.

Whilst that state of affairs remains pending, at the recent AU summit in Sirte, Libya, a decision was adopted urging all member states not to cooperate with the ICC in its quest to arrest President Bashir, pursuant to the said ICC warrant issued against him.

Honourable members will appreciate the intricate national, regional and indeed, international peace, security and stability dimensions, of matters relating to the ICC indictments. This includes, among others, the one for the LRA leader, Joseph Kony, and other cases about which the government has referred their pursuit to the ICC for the necessary action.

It is in light of the forgoing background, that I want to inform this august House, about the position government is taking, bearing in mind the said connection to the forthcoming SMART Partnership Dialogue of 2009.

Madam Speaker, Uganda remains steadfastly committed to its obligations under the Rome Statue, as indeed to those under other international treaties, which she has ratified. We are also committed to abide by the decisions duly adopted by the various organs of the AU. Therefore, while being mindful of our international obligations, we at the same time wish to avoid a possible diplomatic incident that may arise as a result of a visit by President Bashir at this point in time. The government is, therefore, diplomatically engaging the Government of Sudan with a view to ensuring that while the invitation to President Bashir still stands, a possible diplomatic incident is avoided.

With these clarifications, I hope that Members of Parliament will appreciate the context in which recent events have happened. Be assured that all necessary steps are underway to host a SMART Partnership Dialogue in 2009. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.29
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Rakai): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the honourable minister for this statement concerning the possible arrest of a sitting President, should he come to Uganda. 

This issue was raised in my committee, which sat this morning. In the event that the minister might not have provided a statement, I also approached you because the committee had compelled me to request you to seek parliamentary guidance over this very intricate issue. This pertains to the fact that we have a case with the ICC requesting them to indict the LRA leader, while at the same time there is a case for His Excellency General Al Bashir, who has been indicted by ICC, and is intending to visit this country.

My committee Members were of the opinion that, given the fact that Uganda is a signatory to the Rome Statute, and given the fact that we are currently chairing the Organisation of Islamic Countries and have also appealed to ICC to ensure that Kony is arrested wherever he is, as a committee and as Parliament, we feel that we must resolve this matter diplomatically. 

The statement says that there is a diplomatic incident to be avoided. I would like to request the minister to tell us how we are going to avoid this diplomatic incident. We are compelled and we are being requested to arrest His Excellency, Bashir. Can you tell us how we are going to avoid the possibility of arresting His Excellency the President when he comes, yet we are committed to ensuring that we fulfil the Rome Statute?

3.31
MR KAKOBA ONYANGO (NRM, Buikwe County North, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the honourable minister for giving the statement. The minister’s statement is hanging because he has not told us exactly what will be done. Nonetheless, Uganda has signed this statute and has to abide by it; everything is in this statute so there is no way we can ratify it and behave otherwise. Secondly - (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: The information I wanted to give the Member on the Floor is that, that statute you are holding has not been ratified by this Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think I can inform the House that it was given a first reading; so it is in this House.

MR KAKOBA: The statement has not been domesticated, but as a scholar of international relations, I know that once a convention has been ratified, it enters into force, and Uganda is obliged under that arrangement. It was ratified by Uganda.

Secondly, the indictment of President Bashir was handled by the UN under Security Council Resolution 1593 of 2005, and this was undertaken after the UN instituted an international commission of inquiry, which afterwards requested the prosecutor-general of the ICC to carry out the investigation. So, since we are members of the UN, we are bound by that and there is no way we can turn around and say that we are going to behave otherwise. I wanted us to have these international obligations in mind as we invite delegates to this partnership, and to avoid situations where we can be diplomatically embarrassed. My advice is that President Bashir should be advised not to come to Uganda. I thank you.

3.34
MR LULE MAWIYA (NRM, Kalungu County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am the Chairperson, Foreign Affairs Committee. I want to thank my minister for this statement, which is very timely, because it also came up in my committee meeting. 

I think this is clearing the air, because the state minister who is seated next to him made a statement too, and his words were totally different from the statement of the Minister, hon. Okello Oryem. The substantive Minister, hon. Kutesa, made another statement which was totally different from what hon. Okello Oryem made. So, we would like to know exactly - because even the Minister, hon. Isaac Musumba, has not been committal enough; he is not very clear in his statement. So what happens? Since the invitation is still on, you should be trying to avoid a diplomatic standoff. So, what are you doing? What is your resolve? Are you inviting H.E. Bashir? Are you going to arrest him? Be clear in your statement, so that we know what Uganda is actually resolving. Thank you.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, I am not a diplomat myself but according to the minister’s statement - I think in diplomatic language, we have already heard what the minister is suggesting; but if we go into the details of talking, like we are talking locally, do you not think it is going to compromise our diplomatic action. So, could we be a bit cautious as we submit; because, according to the minister, if you read between the lines, he has told us that we should not have that kind of diplomatic incident occurring. So, he has actually said that the president should not come.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, I just want you to look at page 3, in the second last paragraph: “The government is, therefore, diplomatically engaging the government of the Sudan with a view to ensuring that while the invitation of President Bashir still stands, a possible diplomatic incident is avoided.”

So, please, do not force the minister to say anything more than that.

3.37
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think your guidance throws some more light on the statement; but I think what we are trying to say as Parliament is that, we should clearly state that Uganda stands by its international responsibilities, and honours its obligation to the Rome Statute that it signed. 

We must be reliable partners. We cannot have Kony in The Hague and expect other parties to arrest him, while we are not able or not willing to execute our responsibilities under the same agreement. What message are we sending out? Our own Minister, a Ugandan, Dr Rugunda, is chairing the UN. It is the UN through the Security Council that sent the case of Bashir to the ICC. We cannot be the same government that says no and take it in between. We shall be embarrassed as a country to be seen to retract a position in our obligations. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Tashobya, are you saying we should lure him here and arrest him. (Laughter) Is that what you are suggesting?

3.39
MAJ. GUMA GUMISIRIZA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Madam Speaker, we are adults, and I presume of sound mind. The government is, therefore, diplomatically engaging the government of Sudan with a view of ensuring that while the invitation of President Gen. Bashir still stands, a possible diplomatic hitch or incident is avoided. Now, if you are a Member of Parliament and you cannot grasp the message therein, go home. 

3.40
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Madam Speaker, I stood up as person who holds a Masters in International Relations and Diplomatic Studies, to thank the government for the statement which you read, which has diplomatically informed President Bashir that he should actually not honour the invitation. That is the message. [Hon. Members: “No”] Yes, that is the message! The message is that, although the invitation still stands, Uganda does not rule out the fact that he can be diplomatically embarrassed by being arrested. That is the statement, and I want to thank the minister for this statement. 

As a country, we signed the Rome Statute. The AU decision is not a legally binding document; the legally binding document is the Rome Statute which Uganda should be willing and able to implement.

My only appeal to this Parliament is that we must quickly domesticate the Rome Statute in this country, so that these other issues can be dealt with appropriately at the national level. I thank you.

3.42
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Madam Speaker, my concern is that, Government knew very well that President Bashir was indicted, and Government went ahead to invite him for the Smart Partnership. It was not until this ICC Prosecutor, Ocampo, came here, that this matter started coming up. So, the clarification I really want to get is, supposing Ocampo had not come here, what were you going to do? Because this statement came immediately after Ocampo came here! 

Secondly, we should be mindful of our history and future. We should also be mindful that diplomacy begins from home; diplomacy moves from home to the region. The nation and the region are components of the international interests we are talking about. There is no way you can jump for international interests when you cannot meet your national and regional interests. I know as a country, we have had our own share with President Bashir. But even with that share, we arrive at a position that Bashir agreed to allow our troops to go into Southern Sudan, which led to the routing of the LRA. 

We also know that, the peace in Southern Sudan is greatly linked to Bashir. If there is another person in Khartoum, we may not even rely on the comprehensive peace agreement, and if there is instability in Southern Sudan, our country will suffer.  

I want to advise Government that, much as we think internationally, we should behave locally and regionally first. The AU sat and agreed, and the minister has just said that the Mbeki committee report is still being awaited –(Member timed out) 

3.44
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the minister for this much needed statement. Yesterday, when I returned home from official duty, I was met by this statement, and I also listened to the radio. I really got confused and afraid. The statement of the minister gives us a clue on how we are handling this situation.  

Madam Speaker, the first worry was the conflicting statements from the government ministers. At least, I listened to them myself –(Interruption)

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: Madam Speaker, is it in order for hon. Anywar to start deluding about statements made by the press, when there is an official statement made by the ministry? This is the authentic statement made by the ministry; anything else is speculation. Is she, therefore, in order to start alluding to hearsay?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this is the official statement that you should deal with. 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your guidance. I did not only read the newspapers yesterday, but I listened to the voice of the Minister, hon. Oryem, on the radio instructing Kayihura to arrest President Bashir. I heard his voice! 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, please answer and we end this matter. 

3.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE, REGIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to retaliate to this House that, the relationship between the Government of Uganda and the Government of Sudan is warm, brotherly, and mutual, and we have an excellent working relationship with    the Government of Sudan. 

I also want to summarize that, this House has been informed that we are committed to the Rome Statute. We are also committed to the AU resolutions, and to preserving this warm relationship with the Government of Sudan. 

On that basis, therefore, we are continuing with these diplomatic efforts to ensure that there is harmony between our nations. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY H.E. THE PRESIDENT TO THIS PARLIAMENT ON THURSDAY, 4TH JUNE 2009

3.48
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Madam Speaker, there are 300 copies of my statement, and I understand they are more than enough. I beg to support the motion moved by hon. Rose Najjemba, supported by hon. Alex Ndeezi and hon. Milton Muwuma. 

Hon. Prof. Ogenga Latigo, Leader of the Opposition in Parliament, has made a reply to the State of the Nation Address, and to other hon. Members of Parliament. I wish to focus my attention on the following issues:

Firstly, the recovery of Northern Uganda and Karamoja. Security in the North and north-eastern parts of the country has been secured. Kony has been flushed out of Northern Uganda, and the disruptive armed cattle rustlers have been contained by the UPDF and the Police, through the disarmament exercise. The peace in the region has enabled people to return to their homes, to engage in development activities. With the support of the development partners, civil society organisations and humanitarian agencies, government has mobilised funds to support the implementation of programmes in the region through the Peace Recovery and Development Plan (PRDP) and Karamoja Integrated Disarmament and Development Plan (KIDDP).  The total cost of PRDP is Shs 1.1 trillion over a period of three years, out of which government has earmarked Shs 100 billion as part of 30 percent contribution, this financial year 2009/2010. The same amount of money will be availed for the next 2010/2011 and 2011/2012 financial years. 

In addition, government has secured a US $100 million loan facility from the World Bank to implement NUSAF II under PRDP under a five-year period. Government has also earmarked money for the construction of Karuma Dam, Gulu-Bibia road, Soroti-Dokolo road, Lira-Kamudini road, Tororo-Mbale-Soroti road, Kapchorwa-Suam Kafu-Karuma-Gulu road, and Soroti-Katakwi-Moroto road in the PRDP areas. 

In addition, ferry crossings will be procured between Kumi-Katakwi on Lake Bisinia, Kamuli and Lango sub-region on Lake Kyoga. 

Government has also signed a EU20 million Grant Agreement with the European Union to implement part of the activities under PRDP in West Nile, while another EU 15 million is to support Karamoja. A number of humanitarian agencies and civil society organisations have pledged to make contributions to finance PRDP and KIDDP. Their support is yet to be quantified, but we are engaging them assiduously. 

The KIDDP is a Shs 445 billion 3-year development programme intended to address the peculiar problems of Karamoja, which are mainly related to disarmament and development. So far, government has earmarked Shs 20 billion to implement these activities. Out of Shs 20 billion, Shs 10 billion will be sourced from PRDP budget, Shs 5 billion from NUSAF 2 project and Shs 5 billion has been earmarked under KIDDP. 

In addition, government has signed an EU 50 million agreement with EU to support activities in Karamoja, which will mainly target the provision of water and address the problem of food shortage in the region. 

With regard to PRDP, the 40 districts were required to submit work plans and procurement plans with clear indicators that can be monitored, such as boreholes, to the Permanent Secretary, Office of the Prime Minister. However, some districts have not managed to submit their procurement plans, a problem which the permanent secretary is handling. After checking the work plans, he has sent them to the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

The Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury will release funds directly to the chief administrative officers of the districts. This information will appear in newspapers, an approach which will enable all stakeholders to monitor the use of money in districts. 

We urge hon. Members of Parliament to work closely with districts in order to ensure that plans cohere with the reality on the ground in the districts. 

The PRDP monitoring committee chaired by the Prime Minister and attended by ministers of the ministries implementing PRDP, ambassadors and high commissioners, two representatives of MPs from eight regions of the North and Northeast, chairpersons of LC V from the PRDP region, development partners and civil society organisations, monitor the implementation of PRDP programmes through receiving reports from technical working groups which are discussed with all stakeholders. Day-to-day monitoring is done by the Minister in charge Of Northern Uganda Rehabilitation and Development, who happens to be hon. Wakikona. 

At the technical level, there is the Public Sector Management Working Group chaired by the Permanent Secretary Office, of the Prime Minister. It is also attended by the permanent secretaries from the Ministry of Local Government, Public Service, Finance Planning and Economic Development, President’s Office, Public Service Commission and other accounting officers from other departments and agencies which are engaged in delivery of public services such as National Planning Authority and Local Government and Finance Commission, Chair of Development Partners Group, Resident Coordinator of Humanitarian Agencies Group, representatives of international and national NGOs. Every month, the working group examines the recruitment and staffing levels and motivation of the local government staff. 

The PRDP technical working group is attended by technical representatives of ministries implementing the PRDP, representatives of various development partners, civil society organisations, and the private sector. 

The technical working group harmonises all interventions in the districts to ensure that they are consistent with the strategic objectives of PRDP, and ensures that there is no duplication and overlap. It is chaired by the under secretary in charge of Northern Uganda and Karamoja Pacification and Development. 

At the local level, there is a district council which ensures that work plans that are submitted to the Permanent Secretary, Office of the Prime Minister, for funding are complemented accordingly. The Chief Administrative Officer releases funds to sub-county chiefs and ensures that accountability of funds takes place. 

Government will soon access a US $100 million loan facility from the World Bank for the implementation of Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF II) over a five year period from 2009 to 2014. It will support livelihood programmes such as fish farming, dairy farming, carpentry, etcetera for communities. This will take 60 percent of the annual budget.

The second component which will take 30 percent of the annual budget will cover infrastructural development. It will include building of roads, schools and health centres. The remaining 10 percent will cover operations such as salaries, transport and monitoring by NUSAF technical support team from the Department of Northern Uganda. 

Districts will also monitor NUSAF activities. Districts will be required to submit work plans and procurement plans to the Permanent Secretary, Office of the Prime Minister, showing the number and type of project they wish to carry out. The Permanent Secretary will send them to the Secretary to the Treasury, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development who will send the money directly to the administrative officers of the districts. This information would be published in the mass media.

I now go to the second issue of food security. Fifty two districts in the country are currently faced with food insecurity which can be categorised under three levels: famine, acute food shortages and moderate food shortages.

Famine is being experienced in 17 districts namely: Amuria, Katakwi, Kaberamaido, Bukedea, Kumi, Soroti, Bukwo, Adjumani, Arua, Koboko, Moyo, Yumbe, Moroto, Kotido, Kabong, Nakapiripirit, and Abim. 

Famine is a widespread lack of food caused by a natural phenomenon such as drought that calls for emergency general relief food distribution to the whole community affected. 

Acute food shortage is being experienced in 31 districts namely: Amuru, Gulu, Pader, Kitgum, Dokolo, Apac, Lira, Amolotar, Sironko, Kapchorwa, Isingiro, Tororo, Busia, Budaka, Butaleja, Pallisa, Lyantonde, Sembabule, Nakaseke, Mubende, Kooki, Kabula, Rakai, Nakasongola, Bugiri, Namutumba, Iganga, Kaliro, Kamuli, Kyenjojo and Nebbi. 

Acute food shortages are isolated very low availability of food that may be caused by crop pest or disease, a natural or human induced hazard such as internal displacement. The problem is usually not widespread. This category of food insecurity calls for targeted short term supplementary relief food assistance to very vulnerable groups, including orphans, persons with disabilities, and the elderly.

Moderate food shortages are being experienced in four districts namely: Kamwenge, Bushenyi, Hioma and Kibaale. Let me say that as I speak, the figures are changing. This is a category of mild food stress resulting from sudden shocks such as hail and windstorms, and excessive sale of household stocks. 

The food insecurity situation in the country is caused by a number of factors including the following: 

Three consecutive seasons of poor agricultural performance in Karamoja, continued stay of persons living in IDP camps in Acholi sub-region and Adjumani District. They cannot access enough land for food production. 

Areas that have not recovered from the impact of 2007 floods in Teso, and areas that experienced crop destruction, also dry conditions along the cattle corridor have contributed to food shortages.

In the immediate short term, government released Shs 10 billion during the month of July for emergency supply of relief food to the famine victims; and because of the magnitude of the problem, an additional Shs 10 billion has been released by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for relief food. The Department of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees needs an additional Shs 30 billion. 

For the medium term solutions, the government through the National Agricultural Advisory Services, NAADS, and the Ministry of Agriculture Animal Industry and Fisheries, is distributing free seeds such as maize, sorghum, cassava cuttings and farming implements including hand hoes and fertilisers to affected households at the sub-county levels. 

The long term plan for food security includes a shift away from over reliance on rain-fed agriculture to construction of water for production systems such as dams for irrigation, drip and channel, the tapping of gravitational water sources on higher grounds such as Sipi Falls off Mt Elgon for irrigation downstream in Teso and Karamoja and other areas. 

In the Financial Year 2009/2010, government has allocated Shs 5 billion for irrigation systems, and US $100 million from the Islamic Bank to support the scheme is being secured. 

Government will also encourage local councils to enact ordinances requiring compulsory establishment of granaries for food storage. I have requested the Minister of Local Government to use section 95 of the Local Governments Act to direct districts to make ordinances (by-laws) which will compel homesteads to maintain granaries for food storage.

However, when we discussed this matter today in Cabinet, chaired by the President, it has been agreed that the Minister of Agriculture should bring this matter to Cabinet for discussion.

Another cause of famine and hunger is climate change. Climate change is the increasing occurrence of extreme weather and climate variability, for example, drought, floods, hailstorms, heat waves, etcetera. It is caused by the accumulation of greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide, methane, among others, in the atmosphere. 

Climate change results into hunger and famine due to: rain-fed crop failure hence loss of energy and lives; Stress of social infrastructure; bridges, roads, buildings break down or are de-roofed; Loss of biodiversity; Landslides; increased disease burden; drying up of water resources; deforestation and land degradation; more vulnerable are the Least Developed Countries, women and children. 

Unfortunately, climate change cannot be stopped suddenly even if emissions are reduced to zero today. The present concentrations in the atmosphere will continue to cause weather and climate changes. Hence, we have no alternative but to adapt to the impacts of adverse effects of climate change.

Seasons have become erratic and difficult to predict. While advancement in climate prediction has made it possible to predict climate six months or more in advance, it is still difficult to predict the distribution of rainfall over a season.

In Uganda the season has not performed according to the forecasts, particularly in the current drought stricken areas. 

Actions Needed

a) Global Actions
	The international community must take serious and bold political decisions to:
•	Significantly cut emissions of greenhouse gases at least by 45 percent by the year 2020 and 80 percent or more by 2050. Such mitigation actions would ensure stabilisation of concentrations of greenhouse gases and therefore ensure stable future climate
•	Commit significant sums of money to support mitigation and particularly adaptation activities in developing Countries like Uganda.

b) 	National Actions
•	Strengthen the capacity of the Department of Meteorology to generate accurate and timely weather and climate information and promoting its applications at all levels. A climate change unit has been established and Shs 400 million is earmarked for 2009/2010.
•	Meteorological support to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. The Meteorology Department carries out weather forecasts. The Ministry of Water and Environment has earmarked Shs 2,500 billion for 2009/2010. 
•	We have earmarked Shs 22,800 billion for water for production for 2009/2010. 
•	There is need for agricultural practices; irrigation, mulching, growing flood and drought resistant crops, use of both organic and chemical fertilisers, traditional approaches of food security measures for example mandatory food reserves in every household; taking advantage of good seasons and significantly increasing production to meet deficits in other areas. Sorry, I have been irrigating my throat with water. (Laughter) 
•	Intensifying tree planting activities: Shs 16.5 billion has been earmarked for tree planting and operational activities to support tree planting and forest protection activities, including farm income and forestry conservation. The National Forestry Authority budgets for these activities.
•	Implementation of the National Adaptation Programmes of Action.
•	Investing in climate change related research, for example, agriculture, including emerging pests, health and sanitation, water resources management (supply and demand side).
•	Investing in renewable energy, for example, hydropower plants, solar energy and bio fuels. 
•	Energy saving techniques such as use of energy saving bulbs and stoves, switching off power when not needed, ironing three times a week and not drying clothes completely, et cetera. 
•	Increased awareness creation is required.  

The Ministry of Water and Environment is strengthening its institutional capacity to enhance coordination of the climate change issues. The climate change challenge requires the cooperation of all of us, individually and together, including civil society and the private sector.

Measures to mitigate the negative effects of the global financial crisis:
Hon. Prof. Latigo, on page 2 of his paper, accuses His Excellency the President of, “… being absolutely cunning in hiding the challenges that we must surely deal with in light of the global economic meltdown. A cunning person is good at deceiving people to get what he or she wants.” The use of this word by Prof. Latigo is most unfortunate -(Laughter)- His Excellency the President and his Cabinet were, of course, aware of the effects of the global financial crisis and they had taken steps to address them. They include the following - and I wish hon. Prof. Latigo to listen most carefully -(Laughter)- the remittances to Uganda from Ugandans in the Diaspora have greatly decreased because some Ugandans have been laid off. 

This point was made clear by Dr Suruma, the former Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and by hon. Syda Bbumba, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. This problem is being mitigated by Kenyans, Tanzanians and students from other countries who come to Uganda to join university and tertiary institutions. 

The second consequence is that exports have come down. The purchasing power of areas like USA and Europe has gone down and their demand for exports has gone down. The answer to these problems is to emphasise regional trade. 

President Museveni is a leading supporter of the political federation of East Africa. Indeed on page 37 of his address, he refers to the advantages of regional cooperation. 

The President has also stressed that instead of exporting raw materials abroad, Uganda must export processed goods. For example, instead of exporting lint cotton, Uganda has exported apparels.

The third consequence of the global financial crisis is that the credit facilities available to the Third World have been greatly reduced. Uganda is taking steps to improve on our domestic saving. For example, we propose to adopt a contributory pension scheme. 

Furthermore, the main priorities of the Financial Year 2009/2010 include agricultural production and value addition.

The government has made arrangements for agricultural credit facility to be accessed by eligible farmers and agro-processors through commercial banks and Uganda Development Bank to finance the acquisition of agricultural and agro-processing machinery and equipment.

Agricultural credit amounting to Shs 30 billion for the Financial Year 2009/2010 is to be matched with the equivalent amount by participating financial institutions. It will be lent to borrowers at an interest rate not exceeding 10 percent for a maximum of eight years. This will create a revolving pool “loanable” funds amounting to Shs 60billion in the first year to support agricultural, machinery and equipment for agro processing. 

Uganda will have increased production and products, which will, in turn, increase employment and import substitution. For example, we shall have adequate rice to meet domestic demands, which will help us eliminate the importation of rice. The excess rice will be exported.

I can report that US $7 million has been mobilised through agricultural lending. Furthermore, US $100 million had been sought from the Islamic Development Bank to finance provision of water for production.

Another mitigating factor is that the banking industry is fully regulated and well supervised by the Bank of Uganda and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Indeed when banks collapsed abroad because they had lent money to people who were not credit worthy, the banks in Uganda did not suffer from this problem. The answer is that they are well regulated by the Bank of Uganda. You may wish to clap. (Applause)

We must add that Uganda, unlike some of its neighbouring countries – as Prime minister I cannot mention them – has sustained a comfortable five and a half months of imports. The sovereign country rating for Uganda improved from B to B+. This rating was done by Standards and the Poor, a British-rating institution. It rates the economics performances of countries globally. Uganda managed to get a B+, which made it one of the best performing countries in Africa. (Applause) This rating was done by an external body, which is impartial.

Uganda is operating a liberal economy. This inter alia means that Uganda does not control foreign exchange; it is controlled by the market forces. So when Uganda shows its inflation to be 12 percent; it is real and not managed.

Finally, on page 19 of the President’s address, critical areas of social-economic transformation are the transportation, energy, and the national information technology infrastructures. These priorities have not been disputed. What has been questioned in the implantation of the priorities? I, however, would like to mention that the weaknesses of the implementation are being addressed by government.

It should be noted that Uganda has taken significant measures to mitigate the negative effects of the global financial crisis. Government welcomes advice, in this area, from the private sector, development partners, academicians, hon. Members of Parliament and other groups.

Fourth, fight against corruption. On page 39 of the address, the President pointed out that in the NRM Election Manifesto of 2006, it was stated that the NRM Government would ensure zero tolerance to corruption. I would like to say that this remains the government position.

The President rightly mentioned that Government set up institutions and laws to combat corruption. These are: the IGG, Auditor-General, CID and DPP. The Auditor-General is now independent of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. He has his own budget and recruits own staff. These measures have increased his independence.

Hon. Prof. Latigo – and I saw him laugh – is of the view that government lacks the political will to fight corruption. My view is that although some mistakes have been made, the institutions and laws that government put in place have started grappling with corruption successfully. For example, Mr Teddy Ssezi Cheeye, the Director of Economic Monitoring in the Internal Security Organisation was convicted and sentenced to 28 years of imprisonment for embezzling Global Fund money. He was also ordered to pay back Shs 110 million to the Global Fund. 

Justice Katutsi, in his judgment said: “… in siphoning funds meant to alleviate and ease the suffering of the wretched of the earth, the victims of the scourge of HIV/AIDS, TB and Malaria into his own stomach is no better than a mass murderer, the truth he is”.

Read the New Vision of 9 April 2009, page 1, Justice Katutsi, the Head of the Anti-Corruption Court sent a clear message to the ruthless corrupt Ugandans that they will not only be imprisoned for periods commensurate to the offences they committed but also pay back what they embezzled. And you must have also heard what happened to the two ladies yesterday; they were imprisoned for five years and have to pay back. So, the institutions are already working hard -(Applause)– to handle corruption. Government welcomes advice from the Opposition and other stakeholders in tackling corruption, which is a deadly problem.

Sixth, the Opposition, through hon. Prof. Latigo requests for formal institution of the Inter Party National Consultative Forum provided for in the law so that dialogue may take place to forge a common way forward. I would like to report that the Attorney-General has assured me that he is handling this matter. He says he will inform the political parties when Cabinet has concluded discussions on it. We take it very seriously.

Hon. Prof. Latigo also requests government to indicate the required electoral reforms before the general elections of 2011. Again I would like to report that the Electoral Commission has issued a road map for the 2011 elections.

Furthermore, I would like to say that I requested the hon. Dr Kiddhu Makubuya, the Attorney-General, to present to Cabinet for consideration, electoral laws that require amendments or new laws that should be made. He is handling this matter.

Seven, I wish to appreciate the His Excellency the President who thanked Parliament, on page 38 of his address, for the work accomplished since the last State of the Nation Address. He indicated concrete Bills, motions, and resolutions, reports considered and adopted positions considered and ministerial statements debated. 

I was very happy as the Leader of Government Business in Parliament. Tribute must be paid to him for having covered ably so many vital issues concerning the state of the nation. Madam Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, I beg to support the motion. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Prime Minister for that elaborate contribution. I now invite the Government Chief Whip to be followed by the Minister for Education. 

4.28
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Rt. Hon. Speaker, hon. Members, I too would like to thank the mover of this motion and others who have supported this motion in registering thanks to His Excellency, the President, for his clear and precise exposition as contained in his State of the Nation Address. 

I will make a few remarks in regard to a few areas. Madam Speaker, His Excellency the President commended Parliament on the manner in which we have been handling critical issues affecting our country. I must say the leadership of the NRM Caucus will continue to reach out to all members, including those in the Opposition, to ensure that all of us attend to whatever business brought to us in a timely manner. After all, the legislations and resolutions that we pass here are intended to benefit all of us now and in the future. 

Therefore, the assertion by the Hon. Leader of the Opposition that the leadership of NRM does not value or appreciate the role of the Opposition is not correct. However, the concern and apprehension of the NRM leadership have been in regard to some acts and statements perpetuated by some Members of the Opposition which at times conflict with our patriotic ideals and tend to threaten the tranquility of the country. 

I want to assure honourable members that the Office of the Government Chief Whip will continue to exploit the sound rapport which has been developed with the leadership of the Opposition in Parliament to ensure that we expedite parliamentary business. 

We would also like to encourage the shadow ministers to regularly interact with government ministers on critical issues as opposed to waiting to come and issue statements from the Floor of the House on matters over which we need to secure consensus as a way of ensuring that we handle the business of running this country in a proper manner. 

I must say that the positive attitude and positive approach so far exhibited has helped us to cover reasonable group. This was indeed captured by His Excellency, the President in his State of the Nation Address.

Madam Speaker, regarding peace, security and good governance, His Excellency the President rightly characterised the situation as being excellent. This is because the NRM Government has over time taken a deliberate decision to mainstream investment in security. Over the years, negative elements have sponsored insurgencies against government and the Government of Uganda. This has been contained at a fairly high cost in terms of lives of our soldiers, our people and in budgetary terms. 

It was, therefore, quite ingenious and indeed unfortunate on the part of the hon. Leader of the Opposition, in his statement on this subject matter, to argue that all efforts and resources expended in ensuring peace, security and safety of property of Ugandans particularly in the North was nothing but a scheme aimed at perpetuating the self-aggrandisement of those charged with excellent security being talked about.

In my view, the word “vampires” used to refer to those charged with security operations in this country should never have been contemplated, let alone used in this debate given the history of insurgency, and what has been registered in containing the negative elements and what they stand for.

There has been a lot of talk about corruption in this debate. A number of issues have been highlighted. There is no doubt that political commitment to address these issues is in place. The necessary institutions to fight corruption have been established and given the budgetary support by the House as proposed by the Executive. 

It is, however, also true that the delays in taking decisions and the delays in implementing decisions taken, are compounding the corruption talk. More importantly, these delays are also affecting the pace at which we can develop our country. There is, therefore, need to urgently developing capacity for taking decision and implementing them in a timely manner.

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, my last point is in regard to unemployment which is in my view our single biggest problem at the moment. Incidentally, due to the current global financial crisis, unemployment has become a global phenomenon. Western countries are pursuing bail-outs and nationalisation of private companies to save jobs. 

In our case, His Excellency, the President talked at length about attraction of investment to address unemployment, among other things. 

He also talked about the enormous resources now being directed to public sector investments, for example, roads, energy, educational facilities and other areas.  

Regarding attraction of investors –(Interruption)

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Speaker, yesterday I rose on a point of order. I really do not wish that we abuse the dignity of our Parliament. One is now moving; two other ministers are still in the Backbench. Is it in order for the honourable ministers to sit on the Backbench when there is a Frontbench? (Interjections) The practice in the past was to provide chairs here, and Parliament did it before. It is not proper that ministers sit on the Backbench. This is the practice of Parliament, and I do not think there should be any argument about it. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think the important thing is that they are actually in this House; they are here. If we did not make arrangements earlier for them to sit, that is a failing on our part. So let us proceed.

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When I looked at hon. Latigo, I thought he was attentively listening to what I was saying. I did not know that his attention was elsewhere.

Regarding attraction of investors, my view is that all of us leaders must play a much more positive role in investment matters. Indeed, we must also, as individuals, invest in productive enterprises, to create jobs and income. My hope is that the financial institutions in the country will play a much more preponderant role in supporting local business ventures. 

As regards the enormous funds committed to infrastructural development, my view is that if these are well managed and targeted, they should provide critical interventions for addressing unemployment. This is in addition to improving the state of infrastructure and level of service delivery in the country.

Being a Member of Parliament from a peri-urban constituency, it is my prayer that these resources will also soon be directed to construction of our market facilities like the Jinja Central Market. These markets employ many of our people and they will, therefore, help us in alleviating the unemployment problem in these local areas, and the country at large.

Madam Speaker, I beg to support the motion. I thank you.

4.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE, MINISTRY OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to add my voice to that of my colleagues who have congratulated His Excellency the President on a very elaborate, informative and important address on the state of the nation. I want to congratulate the Leader of the Opposition, and I also congratulate the Prime Minister/Leader of Government Business for effectively responding to issues that were raised by the Leader of the Opposition, which in effect covered most of the issues that were raised in almost all sectors.

My duty is now very brief - to comment on a few specific issues touching the education sector. A number of honourable members raised issues regarding the quality and standards of our education. If I may recall, some of them included hon. Katuntu, hon. Mulumba, hon. Balyejjusa and a few other members.

Let me begin with the Universal Primary Education and Universal Secondary Education programmes. I want to say that its humble beginnings notwithstanding, our Universal Secondary Education programme is doing very well. It is robust and it is hitting the intended targets. It is mobilising and educating our young people who initially did not have the chance to go to school. It has become an example, not only in this region, but globally. 

There may be a few shortcomings here and there, which Government is trying to address, but taken in totality, it is a very successful programme. The numbers, figures and full effect were adequately given in the State of the Nation Address.

Hon. Mulumba pointed out that the capitation grant paid by people is inadequate, given the size and shape of our economy. What Government is paying per student is reasonable in the circumstances. Honourable members, we can only cut our cloth according to our size. We can only provide what we have. 

The capitation grant paid per pupil per year is UShs 6,000. This has been increased from Shs 3,800 for the financial year 2007/2008. It is our submission that in the circumstances, this figure is still reasonable. As our economic base continues to widen, the figure will be revised, but for the time being, this is what we can afford, and this is what we are providing. 

Hon. Mulumba also pointed out that UPE capitation grant is remitted late to schools. Well, to some extent, this is true. Actually, this has been found out by the recent findings of the Ministry of Education. The problem is in the system. Funds may be released well in time from the centre, but because of decentralisation, we get problems at the district levels. So, this brings an artificial delay, which the government is trying to address. 

We are recommending, and we have discussed with the Ministry of Finance, that funds should be released directly to primary schools through the IFMS. If this is done, we shall get significant reduction in the reported delays.

An honourable member was concerned about the quality and standards of our higher education. I want to tell you that, under the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, we have a national regulatory framework that provides for a modality to access and ensure quality and high standards of education in all higher educational institutions of learning. 

Under that framework, each institution is required by the National Council of Higher Education, to have an internal quality assurance unit. All universities and tertiary institutions must have an internal quality assurance unit. This unit is supposed to undertake a quality audit every two years, and submit results to the National Council of Higher Education. After the Council for Higher Education has received the results, it does a counter audit to satisfy itself that what has been provided is correct. 

I must say that, the available evidence indicates that our standards still compete favourably, not only in the region but internationally. That is why so many students have been flocking to our higher institutions of learning, not only from the region, but also from other countries outside the region. 

In addition, the National Council for Higher Education has set up and gazetted standards that all institutions of higher learning must adhere to. It does regular monitoring, supervision and oversight to ensure adherence. 

As I said, the reports we are getting are that the standard and quality of our higher education is still competitive. However, like everywhere globally, I must admit that the standard, to some small extent, has been affected by the mismatch between facilities available and the number of students. 

Honourable Members will appreciate that over time, because of our programmes, and because of our fertility rate, our population has been growing. With the high growth rate of the population, more and more students are being born and are going through all the echelons of school, and our economy has not developed proportionately. Therefore, it could be true that to some extent our facilities have not grown in proportion to the numbers. This, naturally, may negatively affect the standards and quality of education. 

However, Government is not sitting down. In addition to the measures I have elaborated, Government is determined to ensure that as the economy grows, we put in place more facilities to match the increasing numbers. 

At the primary and secondary levels, we are emphasising and reorienting our efforts towards supervision. This financial year, honourable members will look at the budget and find out that a lot more money has been budgeted for inspectorates. Government is going to emphasise the issue of inspection to ensure that inspectors all over and at all levels access all institutions of learning, and oversee and monitor the quality and standards of our educational institutions. 

Hon. Balyejjusa pointed out that we pay a uniform capitation grant for both normal and special needs children. While I agree that in ordinary schools that is the case, I want to point out that there are some special needs education schools which get more than the ordinary amounts that are paid to the normal schools. However, if a special needs child goes to an ordinary school, he may not benefit from the extra provisions which we give the specialised schools. 

The above notwithstanding, Government has provided instructional materials for special needs education to all schools across the board. Two hundred and eighty-nine (289) Braille machines were provided to all primary and secondary schools for the financial year 2008/09, and 1,800 Braille text books were provided to the majority of the special needs educational schools, that is for P.5 to P.7. We have also supplied 100 Braille pierced books and readers to all primary special needs education schools, and we have given five copies to each school. 

We have supplied a total of 150 hearing aids for special needs education schools in the North and western Uganda. All special needs education secondary schools will be provided with the relevant instructional materials under the World Bank supported UPPET programme. 

Hon. Katuntu pointed out that teaching and learning only prepares students to pass exams. I do not agree with that proposition. It is true that the government policy focuses on providing mass education as opposed to elitist education. There is a difference. Our approach is to provide mass education to everybody, especially those who would have never received education. When we do that, we are not unmindful of the need to provide for quality. So, in effect, we try to provide for both mass and qualitative education, and to a large extent, we have been successful. While there are still some small flaws existing, it is not out of the normal, and we try to address them, as I have earlier told this august House. 

The UPPET programme does address both quantity and quality aspects of education through provision of classrooms, science rooms, libraries, teachers, textbooks and all scholastic materials. As I stated earlier, our quality of education is competitive, not only in the region but the world over.   

Hon. Kwizera said that students, especially girls, walk long distances, and as a result, they are sexually abused along the way. She proposed that we should construct dormitories for the students. Hon. Members, government policy, to which we are all privy, is that we provide at least one day school per sub-county, based on catchment size and on demand and availability of resources. We have tried to reduce distances significantly. In those few areas where students are still walking long distances, the World Bank programme and the IDA fund that this House has passed, will to a large extent address the problem. 

In addition, the seed school programme is ongoing. As we talk, only 76 sub-counties do not have secondary schools and even then, the distances are not that long. Boarding schools are only provided in areas that have peculiar characteristics, for example Karamoja and Ssese Islands. 

As I stated earlier, however, the guiding factor is the ability of Government to fund the boarding schools as honourable members would want them. Since our economic base is growing, there is hope that in the future, we shall be able to provide adequate boarding schools to address the concerns of hon. Kwizera. 

Another honourable stated that at Dr Obote College about 300 students were admitted last year, but 260 never reported. He attributed this non-reporting to poverty, because the school charges tuition of Shs 200,000 and the parents are too poor to afford that money. 

First of all, I am not sure about those statistics. To say that out of 300 students who were admitted, all the 260 did not report to school, cannot be accurate. Having said that, one asks himself, “Where did the 260 go?” Definitely, it cannot be that they went back home. Chances are that, having failed to go to that school, which charges Shs 200,000 per term, they went to Universal Secondary Education schools where they are not paying any money. If that is the case, not much is lost because they are at school. 

I would want to check with the honourable where those students who did not report to Dr Obote College are. If I am not wrong, you will find that they are studying in the Universal Secondary Education schools, not because of poverty, but because of choice. The reason as to why we came up with Universal Primary Education and Universal Secondary Education programmes, was to enable whoever could not afford to pay fees charged by the ordinary schools, go and access education through universal primary or secondary education. 

I think those are the few issues I have to respond to. Once again, I thank you very much. I support the motion. 

5.00
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will not take a long time, first, because I already gave a statement on Karamoja, and I do not intend to return to that. I specifically take the Floor to respond to specific issues that the Leader of the Opposition raised in his response to the address by H.E. the President on the state of the nation. 

On page 6 of his speech, the Rt hon. Leader of the Opposition said: “We are satisfied that the peace dividend continues to fuel our economy through vastly expanded cross border trade, savings in military expenditure…” I do hope that those who were here when the Leader of the Opposition said this, gave him a big hand clap.

On page 7, he went on to say: “It is peace that has enabled them to shed the shackles and shame of the IDP encampment and not any alleged resettlement packages from a government that put them there in the first place.” I agree with the Leader of the Opposition that indeed, it is peace that has liberated our people. 

I want to state by way of emphasis that our people in the North, like any other citizens elsewhere in the country, deserve peace. It is pleasing that through the commendable work of the UPDF, working together with the population, the LRA has been defeated and banished from Northern Uganda. I think we need to thank the UPDF and the population for this commendable work. (Applause) 

I add that, it is regrettable that our people in Northern Uganda, and indeed in other parts of the country where insurgency took place, had to live in camps. In the case of the North, they have lived in camps for nearly 20 years.  In the case of the Rwenzori Region, when ADF was there, people lived in camps for close to five years. This is regrettable. 

However, it is important that all of us in Parliament do appreciate that in the circumstances, this was a necessary step to take. If you looked at the way Kony and indeed ADF has been butchering our people, if a population of one million had been left in their homes in Northern Uganda, the atrocities would have been even more vicious. So, in the absence of any other alternative, it was a rational and well considered position that we put people together and be able to provide them with security and basic necessities of life. 

My appeal to honourable members, particularly the honourable Leader of the Opposition, is to appreciate this difficult reality we have passed through. Do not indicate as if putting the people in camps was a punishment and as if we had an alternative as of that time.

What is the way forward for us to ensure that peace remains sustainable? The Leader of the Opposition, again correctly, states that what the people want is sustainable peace. Leader of the Opposition, I would urge that we appeal not just to Ugandans of goodwill, but I think we must appeal to all Ugandans, that the type of evil that Kony and LRA, and ADF meted on our people should never return to our people. This must be an appeal to all Ugandans; that evil should never reign again, not only in the North, but anywhere in our country, so that we can move forward on the path to transforming our people.

Hon. Mbabazi did make a statement on the issue of the new rebel group. For emphasis, I want to return in brief to this situation. The government agencies did move and pick up people we suspected and believed were beginning another rebel group and arraigned them through the due process of law, through courts. When this happened, in my view, it was unfortunate that prominent leaders like MPs came up without checking the facts and started accusing the Government of framing people.  

In a way, we must thank the chairman of Gulu, Chairman Mao, for admitting that indeed, he had information of a security nature and indeed, he had lost his memory stick that contained this information. If Mao had not admitted this faulting on his part, many Ugandans would have believed that the Government was moving to frame people. 

We have put in place intelligence services; and we have put in place the Police and the Army to look after our security. If they have reasonable suspicion that a minister, an MP, a chairman or a mwanainchi is taking steps to disturb our peace, I think all of us should sing one song - “Take that person to the courts of law and prove his guilt.” We should all do this rather than going to the press and saying people are being framed. I will leave that point and go to my last two points. 

My good friend, the Leader of the Opposition, gave very strong criticism about corruption in the Army. If he had only gone as far as being critical, I would have had no problem with what he said; but he made very serious accusations and used very strong words. On page 6, he said: “…some military and political leaders benefited financially and politically from the LRA/Kony war. The recent huge expenditure of nearly Shs 40 billion over just two months in the Operation Lightening Thunder…is testimony enough of how these vampires have lived off the blood of our people in the many years of the conflict.”  

Madam Speaker and colleagues, I take great exception to this statement, and I wish to suggest that the Leader of the Opposition either substantiates this statement or retracts it. My reasons for this are the following: 

First, I think, with due respect, the Leader of the Opposition used bad language or un-parliamentary language. The word “vampire” according to the English Dictionary means “blood sucking evil spirit; -(Laughter)- dead person believed to rise each night from the grave and suck blood from the living for sustenance”. Surely, the people that have brought peace to our country cannot be this type of people. So, that is one of the reasons that I strongly request that the Leader of the Opposition should retract those particular wordings. 

Two, we did actually get a supplementary of Shs 47 billion, and this supplementary followed the normal procedure of how we run government. We went to the Cabinet and got approval, and we went to the Committee on Defence and got a nodding. The Committee on the Budget came here and made a presentation that the Ministry of Defence, among others, needed Shs 47 billion and we gave a nodding for this expenditure. So, first of all, we did the right thing. We needed Shs 47 billion because we had to go to Garamba suddenly -(Interruption) 

MS NAMAYANJA: Madam Speaker, I am standing on a procedural matter. I just want to find out whether all members of the Opposition are boycotting the responses, or this follows yesterday’s submission by hon. Kajeke. There are only two back benchers from the Opposition, and around five this side. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am satisfied that the Leader of the Opposition is here with his Cabinet. Let us proceed. (Laughter)

DR KIYONGA: Madam Speaker, my third reason for objection to the strong statement by the Leader of the Opposition is that, he is aware that when Government discovered that some army officers were playing tricks - that some officers were diverting money and that some army officers were creating ghosts - very strong action was taken. A whole army commander was dismissed and he lost his position. He was arraigned before the courts of law and there is a prison sentence hanging over his head, and many other officers that followed. So, in the face of such strong action from Government, one would have expected a lauding to Government for being firm and proactive.

The situation of Operation Lightening Thunder: This operation was launched on 14th December last year, and on 15th March this year, part of the UPDF force withdrew from Congo, leaving behind intelligence squads to work under the overall command of the DRC forces - the FARDC. The UPDF, therefore, has not spent Shs 47 billion in just two months, because the UPDF is still there and spending part of this money on duty.

The recommendation of the Budget Committee, when they came here, was that a special audit of this expenditure be made. To the best of my knowledge, this audit is not yet done and, therefore, no report has reached this House as yet. What then is the basis for this unsubstantiated accusation by the honourable Leader of the Opposition? 

Let me in summary inform this House that, our forces in the DRC as part of the joint offensive against the LRA, continue to make good progress. In total, since the operation started, 302 abductees have been rescued; 27 insurgents have been taken captive; 147 rifles have been retrieved from the LRA combatants; and 186 LRA insurgents have been put out of action. 

In conclusion, I think we should all praise the army. It has done very well. It has re-stabilised our country. Our brothers and sisters continue to make sacrifices both in Somalia and Congo in order to ensure that the peace we have is going to be sustainable. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.14
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also would like to join my colleagues from both sides of the House to support the motion moved by hon. Rose Najjemba, that thanks of Parliament be recorded for the clear and precise exposition of government policy contained in the address on the state of the nation by H.E the President to this Parliament on Thursday, 4th June. Indeed, it was a clear and precise exposition.

I would also like to thank Members of Parliament from both sides of the House for the contributions they made on the sector that I head, especially the positive, objective and constructive contributions - whether they were criticisms or praises, as long as they were positive and constructive. 

Many of the issues relevant to the transport sector are addressed in my policy statement. We will have time to discuss and debate them in detail in the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, and in this House at a later stage. 

The Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business has also given an overall response and commented on some of the issues in my sector. Therefore, for today, I will respond mainly to six issues raised in the Leader of the Opposition’s statement, and these are covered in his blue book on pages 5, 6 and 7. 

I take it that these are representative of the position of all parties of the Opposition, because I see all the leaders of parties at the back of this book, and I want to congratulate my friend, Prof. Latigo. I see the leader of UPC dressed in red and covered in blue, the leader of DP tied in green and covered in blue; and these others that follow whose colours I do not understand. 

In that statement, on page 6, the Leader of the Opposition states thus: “On rail and water transport, we reaffirm our support of Government efforts to develop these transport systems as they provide cost-effective bulk transport means that enhance our competitiveness and spare our roads, and help prolong their lifespan.” I definitely thank you for this support and the support the Opposition is giving to developing this form of transport. 

When I turn to roads, however, I find disturbing statements and worrying ones. I want to know whether both the Government side and the Opposition are on the same wavelength when it comes to developing our road infrastructure. I wish to quote from the statement, on page 5:”On roads, last year we fully agreed with the President on the urgent need to develop our key artery trade roads and support increments in the road sub-sector budget. We, however, cautioned that the road development process must not be rushed for political expedience, but be preceded by detailed planning, the revamping and building of local management capacity, and a comprehensive review of the extent to which the Ministry of Works has to date handled or mishandled the transport sector, coupled with full political accountability. 

In spite of the caution, however, the President in his address has brought forth a massive road works programme, the scale of which has never been witnessed in the history of our country, not even in less corrupt, better managed and more rapidly developing countries.” 

The fact that the President is bringing a massive road works programme, and yet we have an outcry of a bad road network, should be really applauded. But what he says reminds me of a man who did not like his wife, and he brought meat and said, “Do not cook it, do not fry it, do not roast it; I want to find it ready so that I can eat it.” We have bad roads on one side, we want to bring money in the road sub-sector massively, but then the Opposition wants to say, “Mr President, halt! Go slowly”; and then they come here and say our roads are terrible! I think that is a terrible contradiction.

But let me explain why this massive injection was done. In the next paragraph, I will quote again from the statement by the Leader of the Opposition that, “We are naturally deeply concerned that yet more money has been allocated to the Ministry of Works when a comprehensive report on the more than Shs 1 trillion allocated to the road works last year has not been given to Parliament.” I have a policy statement which states exactly how much money we got last financial year and where it has been allocated. But for emphasis, let me explain this famous and very exciting one trillion.

There seems to be an impression that the ministry had no budget ever, and suddenly last financial year, Shs 1 trillion was given to this ministry. The ministry always had a budget, but because of the situation of the roads and the low level of support from our development partners, both as loans and grants, we could not sit as government when our road network was deteriorating faster than we could accept. It was in that spirit that an extra Shs 320 billion – in fact, government decided that there will be Shs 1 trillion divided over three years, over and above the normal budget. That was always in the MTEF and this Shs 1 trillion was divided. If you check the MTEF in the background budget of the last policy statement and this year’s, you will see that the Shs 1 trillion is divided into three parts. Last financial year, over and above the budget, Shs 320 billion was added, and let me tell this House how it was committed.

One, you know one of our bad corridors, Kampala-Masaka – Mbarara up to Rwanda border. We had hoped that we would get funding from EU, but we could only get funding for the Masaka to Mbarara section. Kampala-Masaka was tendered, but there was no money. So, the first action my ministry did with this Shs 320 billion over and above the normal budget, was to sign a contract for this. That contract has been signed worth Shs 110 billion, and work has started. That is the first one.

Secondly, Matugga-Semuto-Kapeeka; Shs 37 billion. The contract was signed and work started. Third, the outcry for Busega-Mityana which we have just recently patched up; a contract of Shs 94 billion for expanding, widening and fully reconstructing the road work was signed. Kawempe-Kafu, which my friend, Prof. Latigo, uses – (Interjections) - no, in the previous year, the money was not enough. It was Shs 20 billion, and so we added Shs 15 billion to finish the work. We did not have money. We have been waiting to borrow money for even designing roads, so that we prepare for construction.

In the policy statement, over 20 roads all over Uganda totalling to 2,054 kilometres, and another 154 kilometres for making four-lane roads, have been planned, totalling to Shs 45 billion for designs. If you total this, it is Shs 301 billion of the Shs 320 billion we got two months before the budget. As far as I am concerned, we have absorbed this money and we have committed it. There is no need, therefore, to block or to demand and worry about why another Shs 320 billion has been put in this budget to total our budget to Shs 1 trillion. Unless the Opposition does not want roads, let them tell us. We shall provide them with trucks and we shall use the roads that we shall make.

This is another statement the Leader of the Opposition makes: “We are equally concerned about the capacity and competitiveness of the Ministry or Works and National Roads Authority to effectively use such large sums of money and to soundly supervise the extensive road works that are being contracted.” No project has failed since we established this. But there is a worse worry – he says that, “Most important, we recognise that such a crammed roadwork programme distorts the needed sector balance in national investment and expenditure, and will pose government grave maintenance challenges in future since very many roads will be deteriorating and come into disrepair.”

The Opposition is telling us, “Do not do the roads because you might not have money to maintain them.” Do not sleep so that you do not dream and get nightmares? How can the Opposition say that we should not do roads because we fear the maintenance budget will be high? These are existing roads in the first place, and one of the problems we have now, where there was an outcry, is that we had a maintenance backlog, and that is why we have established the road fund as I will explain. You cannot say, if you do too many roads, the maintenance budget will be too high. Therefore, we fear if this country does not have roads, and yet they are the engine of our growth.   

The statement by the Leader of the Opposition says, “To us, hon. Members, this massive road works programme is not driven by product planning and rational investment for well spelt out goals. If it were so, then the ten-year road sector development plan would not have for long gathered dust in the government shelves.” I find this statement made without any research. 

We made a ten-year road sector development plan in 1996. This copy is an executive summary - volume I of three volumes, and I want to quote from it. “The ten-year road sector development programme has been developed with a focus of providing a safe and efficient road network by removing the existing major transport flow constraints from the network.

“We emphasise on the national roads which we called classified roads then, over the next ten-year programme period, through the provision of the following:

i)	An efficient road administration.” Since we made this plan, we have established a vibrant road authority, that is not gathering dust in shelves.

ii)	“Effective road maintenance.” Since we made this plan, we have now established a road fund that will guarantee road maintenance. This law was passed here. It takes time to build laws, but that does not mean dust.

iii)	“Continued rehabilitation.” We have continued to rehabilitate the roads as I have explained.

iv)	“Viable network improvement.” Now, Madam Speaker, I want to read a list of improved roads since we developed the ten-year road sector development programme of the improvement of roads. I will only read out the roads that we raised from gravel to tarmac, and these are:
 
•	Mbarara-Ibanda, 97 kilometres, completed in 1997;
•	Iganga-Tirinyi, completed in 1997;
•	Mityana-Mubende, 86 kilometres; but I will leave that one because we completed it earlier in 1992;
•	Kagorogoro-Kyenjojo, completed in 2002; 
•	Kyotera-Mutukula and Kyotera-Rakai completed in 2002 and 1996;
•	Nebbi-Arua, completed in 2004;
•	Packwach-Nebbi, completed in 2004;
•	Ntungamo-Kagamba, completed in 2003;
•	Kyejegwa-Kyenjojo, completed in 2005; 
•	Gayaza-Kalagi, completed in 2005;
•	Kagamba-Rukungiri, completed in 2005; 
•	Sironko-Kapchorwa, completed in 2004; 
•	Karuma-Oriyo, completed in 2006;
•	Oriyo-Packwach, completed in 2007;
•	Busunju-Hoima-Kiboga, completed in 2007; 
•	Kiboga-Hoima, completed in 2008; and
•	Kafu-Masindi, completed in 2008. 

When you total these, in the ten years, they come to about 1,000 kilometres of gravel roads upgraded to tarmac. No government in the history of Uganda has added 1,000 kilometres of tarmac roads. You can check your records. That is not keeping the programme on the shelves for dust; these roads are there. They are not locked up in safes.

The last issue was to create an efficient local construction industry. A new construction industry policy has been finalised. It has gone through all the processes and Members of Parliament have even participated in workshops to develop it. 

This construction industry policy will harmonise the roles of the public and private sector; establish a Uganda Road Construction Commission; develop and strengthen local capacity for effective participation; strengthen and support the regulatory and professional bodies; promote use of appropriate technology; and remove restrictive practices for women. 

On women participation, I want to add that I have been making statements but people do not want to follow them. I would like this issue of “men at work” on our roads to stop, because even women work on our roads. It should be “work in progress”. I do not know what “men at work,” means. And let me say it again now. “Men at work” should not be on our roads at all. 

Finally, the policy is to ensure a national construction industry that supports sustainable economic and social development. 

So, Madam Speaker, the ten-year road sector development programme has not gathered dust on our shelves.

Finally, on this statement, the Leader of the Opposition in his last paragraph on my sector says, “We also appeal that, given the urgency of the ferry network enumerated by the President, some of the unspent road funds provided in last year’s budget be made available for immediate purchase of all needed ferries.” 

We have provided money for ferries and we do not need to shift road money to ferries as you will see in my statement.

So, as I conclude, I want also to make one or two remarks. My friend hon. Otto is talking about traffic jam. I will mention the traffic jam as I talk about Kampala City Council. Before I go back, let me conclude the issue of roads. I want to say that, for those who are moving around the country, yes it is true that for five years we under funded the sector and a lot of our roads had become a problem to all of us. But since the injection of appropriate money, the situation has started to change and I am sure that those who travel around the country notice the positive change. 

Therefore, I would like Members of Parliament from both sides to support this added budget so that we can move and sort out our road network. And, with the Leader of the Opposition nodding his head, I think he is supporting this budget. (Laughter) 

For those who travel around the country, if you go now to Malaba, it takes two and a half hours. As you continue to Gulu through Lira, you will find road works going on. Moroto will come also. We shall even reach Amudat.

If you go west, you will travel smoothly from here to Mityana, Mubende, and Fort Portal up to the DRC border. The northern corridor is being sorted out up to Kafu and so on. The people of Bunyoro, from Kampala to Busunju, all the way to Hoima, have got a smooth road. We are starting Kamdini-Lira; it is in the policy statement.

In fact, the corridor that is not in good shape is Kampala-Masaka-Mbarara-Mityana which we have started on- (Interjections) – Jinja-Kamuli will also be done. 

So, on the whole, there is positive change, and when I mention these roads, I am not talking about Kampala City Council roads for which I have been a victim for nothing. You have not seen a budget for Kampala city roads in my ministry’s budget, but every morning, people who want to get appetite for their breakfast call radio stations and condemn me, using all sorts of insults for nothing, and yet there is no money in the budget. When the government moves to organise Kampala and bring these roads up so that we can centralise Kampala and develop it, I do not know why I should hear, even Members of the Opposition, challenging the taking over and centralising of the infrastructure in Kampala so that it can be developed, maintained and regulated under one body, and not on this basis of divisions. (Applause) 

My friend Otto says he takes more than two hours to come from near here to Kampala. So, I wanted to use this opportunity to appeal to Members of Parliament that bringing Kampala to order is very important and we should support the Bill. 

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, the minister is making responses to issues raised by Members from the State of the Nation Address by the President. The minister has taken off time to divert to a Bill that was brought before this House, but which has received an accident along the way because it is under contest. He is now acting as if he is debating it. Is he really in order to divert when we cannot respond to that?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Members, I think it is in the Hansard of this House that you have been complaining about the difficult roads in this city. This is what the minister is talking about. Please complete.

MR NASASIRA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. Anyway, I was responding to a comment by hon. Otto about traffic jams in the city.

Finally, as I have said, with this budget and with your support, we will keep our promise to have Uganda’s roads pothole free by 2012. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us hear from the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to be followed by that of Health.

5.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Mr Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to say that I support the motion. I would also like to thank the Members, hon. Najjemba and hon. Ndeezi who tabled this motion. I further would like to thank the President for the very good State of the Nation Address.

Madam Speaker, many issues were raised from the State of the Nation Address regarding Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. I have categorised them – some of them were mentioned in the Prime Minister’s response.

There were issues to do with what my ministry is doing to mitigate the effects of climate change. I would like to say that climate change has become a menace to agriculture. In that regard, it has necessitated both a scientific approach and commitment for us to be productive and maintain the levels of agricultural products that we need in the world.

I want to inform the House that we are providing water for agricultural production and all the existing irrigation schemes are going to be rehabilitated. I can add that on some of them, work had already started.

We are also popularising water for irrigation, water for livestock and aquaculture. I can also report that NAADS is also popularising harvesting of water from roofs at household levels to address issues of small irrigation around the farms, and water needed for agricultural production.

Madam Speaker, through our research, we have made and promoted various high and quick yielding crop varieties that are resistant to climate. We have seven varieties of coffee as of now. We have six varieties of maize, and two of both rice and potatoes. The recent Longe 9, 10 and 11 varieties for maize is a very good example of this innovation.

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is working together with Zzimwe in promoting agro-forestry. We are also encouraging people to always prepare their gardens and use of forecasted information – we disseminate it through the local governments so that people can become aware. 

I would like to use this opportunity to inform Members that dry planting is again being popularised in Uganda, because we just wait for the rains to start before we prepare our gardens. So, by the time we plant, the season is over. That is why we are encouraging dry planting where people prepare their gardens, and plant before the rains start. In most cases, those who have followed this procedure have got better results.

There was a concern on bio technology – Members were concerned whether Uganda has adopted this and what our position on this is. I would like to say, yes; Uganda has embraced biotechnology, only that we are moving very cautiously. The policy is in place though currently it is still at research level with the ministry doing trials. What I can tell you is that we are basically looking at disease diagnostic in crops and livestock. We are also developing disease and pest resistant varieties of crops. The position of Uganda on biotechnology is to consider it case by case. In the crop industry, we are considering whether there are no conventional methods that can solve the problem.

There was also the issue of what strategy the ministry is using to control diseases, pests and weeds. I would like to say that we are carrying out surveillance and monitoring this through mobile plant clinics in the crop sub-sector. This way, we hope to predict outbreaks of pests and diseases together with weeds. We have formed task forces at local levels, and our MAAIF officials are working together with local governments. We are also organizing seminars to train farmers on how to deal with some of these problems. 

We are further monitoring new weeds and pests that may emerge in our agriculture sector any time. Madam Speaker, you recently paraded a weed here, which seems to be growing all over the place – we are very actively monitoring some of these and finding solutions to curb them.

We are also mobilising the local governments and farmers into task forces to control pests and diseases. The ministry is also using preventive actions by being very restrictive on the importation of plants and seeds that have not been tried here. Most of the weeds that are now a menace were imported because either MAAIF officials neglected their duties – we are instituting a quarantine on some of these varieties.

In that same sense, I want to inform the House that we are also carrying out demonstrations and training for farmers. In that regard, we are supporting local governments with technical and pesticide backups. 

Furthermore, MAAIF is also now directly getting involved in epidemic and disease control, and as you may recall, we have recalled the function of disease and pest control back to the centre, as per the provisions of the Constitution.

In the livestock sub-sector, we are actually discouraging unnecessary cattle movement; we are observing quarantine restrictions; and we are providing water for livestock so that we can limit movement. We are also promoting pasture and rangeland management to make sure that our animals are healthy and, therefore, do not succumb to diseases very quickly. 

We have also been delivering veterinary services at local levels. We have improved laboratory diagnostics services; and currently, we are in the process of upgrading our laboratory capacity in Entebbe to make sure  that we can handle some of these problems. We have had problems sending samples abroad; so now the plan is to deal with our problems here.

We are also very vigilant in controlling diseases and pests. We are also doing regular vaccines, and I am glad to inform this House, and also to thank Members of Parliament for supporting government to procure the vaccine for our livestock in Karamoja and other areas which were affected by various diseases. 

We have administered one million of the FMD vaccine; 11 million of Newcastle Vaccine for poultry; and, 0.7 PPR and 0.5 million vaccine for CBPP in Karamoja region. We have also immunised about 500 cows for lumpy skin. 

Madam Speaker, the impact of having vaccines and some of these drugs is that, when it breaks out, you are able to react quickly. I am happy to report that this year, government has appropriated Shs 2.5 billion to react to outbreaks so that they do not spread as the case has been in the past.

I want to also take this opportunity to inform the House that Uganda has been the first country in East Africa to be declared Rinderpest-free last year. This was because of the effort by our staff in surveillance. 

We also survived Rift-valley – which killed a lot of people and an unspecified number of animals among our neighbours. We were able to survive it, not because we had the money for the drugs, but we used the crude methods of strictly observing quarantine, and also using the Characids that contained Ethramicine that kills the insect that spreads this disease.

Madam Speaker, we also survived the Avian Influenza, and it was also due to our vigilance that we managed to stop it from crossing from one of our neighbouring countries in the North. 

Many people were asking for the measures taken by the ministry to enhance availability of fertilizers and reduce costs. We do not manufacture fertilizers here in Uganda. We use manure in form of composite and much of the fertilizers are imported. Uganda is landlocked and fertilizers are very bulky. So, while we are popularising use of fertilizers, we are conscious that we cannot reduce the cost drastically, unless we start making them here. The government is trying to support an investor to take advantage of our rock in Tororo so that we can have our own fertilizers in the region. In the meantime, we are working together as East African Community, with the help of ADB, to have fertilizers here for farmers. 

The slogan that Uganda is ‘The Pearl of Africa; endowed with fertile soils and rain; where crops grow without any care’ - it must be observed that those days are gone. The pressure on the land is very high; the fertility is now gone, we have tampered with the environment, and there is need to fertilize our soils. Therefore, the issue of fertilizers is a necessity.

However, Government has undertaken the following interventions to reduce the costs:

1.	We are making sure that these fertilizers are not taxed.

2.	We are working with our East African neighbours to make sure that we deliver them here in bulk and cheaply.

There were many concerns about enhancing productivity in the agricultural sector. Madam Speaker, in the crop sub sector, we have developed high yielding plant and stocking material; we have popularised improved soil facilities through use of fertilizers and provision of manure; control of diseases and pests; and provision of water for agricultural production. For crops, we are looking at irrigation; for livestock, we are looking at water; and for fish, we are looking at aqua-culture. 

Madam Speaker, we are also very active in reducing post-harvest losses, and through NAADS, we are sensitizing our farmers on how to handle post-harvest losses to ensure that what they produce is not lost.

We are also encouraging people to plant early, and we are also encouraging crop-husbandry so that both productivity and production are addressed, including use of mechanisation and promoting mechanisation. We have already received small tractors - we got a grant from Iran. They have availed cheap tractors, and Government has put aside money, which the Prime Minister has indicated in the budget, to be accessed by farmers who want to mechanise and also to go into agro-processing. 

In the livestock sub-sector, we are preaching production through conservation and improvement. We have designated farms for conserving our indigenous breeds and continuously improve them. In Ishaka, we are promoting long-horn cattle and improving on it. In Isanga we are promoting the Mubende goat and improving on it. 

I am glad to inform the House that, actually, the Mubende Goat is not competing with the Boar. Actually, it is in most cases better because it is resistant and suitable for our conditions.

In Kasolwe, we are promoting the Short East African Zebu Cow and we are also improving on it. We have also developed a Kasolwe Goat which is indigenous in Busoga, and it is good for milking.

We are also improving our nitrogen plant in Entebbe so that we can provide semen at all levels. We have trained farmers, we have asked the cooperative farmers to have one person trained per locality. We have also provided new breeds; we are now collecting semen from cows tested here. I think what the Leader of the Opposition wants me to say is that from a bull, which is not a cow.

Madam Speaker, we are working with Heifer International and we have put up a cold chain facility in the East and West. We are moving to mid-west. We have already put a big one here in the central region. I am glad to inform you that in the dairy sector, we are exporting milk to our neighbours as well as powdered milk. We have so many orders for powdered milk, including from our neighbours Botswana and Kenya. This is very interesting.

Somebody is whispering to me that they have not heard me mention Lira. We are developing Maruzi Ranch for both dairy and beef, and we are planning.

In the fisheries sub-sector, we are encouraging our farmers to move from wild catch, where you go and start hunting. We are promoting aqua-culture, and even where the wild catch is, we are intensifying regulation. We have also developed and made fish landing sites so that we can regulate fishing and increase production.

I want to take this opportunity also, because there was a question which was related to these fish landing sites in Bukungu. I think somebody mentioned this landing site and the ice plant. I want to inform this House that while we have prepared to respond to this matter, this also featured in the state of the nation debate, and I want to say that the Bukungu Ice Plant will stay in Bukungu landing site.

There were issues raised on measures to address food security - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, there was Bukungu and Bugoto. There was also a complaint from Bugoto. Is the ice plant there also remaining?

MR RWAMIRAMA: Yes, these were as per the project. Previously, there were demands, but after consultation, we decided to go as we had agreed.

There were issues about food security. There is a problem, which is not mentioned here now and again. We mentioned climatic change, production, disease and pests, but there is something we don’t mention that is immensely contributing to food insecurity. You are aware that we are a food basket for this region. The practice of selling food in the garden is very dangerous. We have neighbours who look at a cassava garden and they pay as much as $ 5000 per acre. 

The implication of this is that, actually, the farmer is not losing the planted material in most cases, but we are losing a period of nursing this garden because these high yielding varieties of cassava grow for between six and nine months. So, if you have a cassava plantation and it is bought in advance, when these people come, they uproot everything. That means that if you don’t have enough land, you have to plant cassava again and wait for six months. 

So, we are trying to sensitise our people to make sure that while we have liberalised; while we promote export of our produce; and while it is very good news to earn money from agriculture, we must preserve enough food for consumption. We are trying to sensitise farmers that in the case of cassava, they should sell and then propagate their gardens for three years, as they get food and also get planting materials. In the case of maize, we are encouraging people to pound maize so that we can have maize bran for our livestock.

Other issues related to food security include enterprise mix. In some areas, farmers have gone full blast for cash crops. A case in point is in Bundibugyo. Here, they actually uprooted most of the other crops and planted cocoa. At one time, we had to go to Bundibugyo and give them relief. So, we are trying to sensitise the farmers to make sure that they keep enterprise mixes that guarantee both their incomes and also food security.

For your own information, while we have shortage of food in one area, we have a lot of food from another area, and if you look at the aggregate supply of food, Uganda in this region is the leading supplier of food to World Food Programme. Last year, we were second to Canada, and we supplied food worth $54 million. This year alone, if my calculation is correct, we may even go beyond that. We also supply food, which is not actually measured –(Interjection)- Yes, especially from your area, hon. Otto. 

There were also issues to do with NAADS. The Leader of the Opposition - I think on page 21, and if I may quote him - said, “When the President attempted to convert NAADS into Prosperity for All with its high political undertone, the donors who fund NAADS objected seriously to the President’s blatant disregard of the NAADS Act and his attempt to breach the protocol on NAADS funding that they signed with government.”

This is not true, as NAADS is one of the programmes under Prosperity for All. When the President suspended it, he wanted to bring efficiency and effectiveness in the programme to make people accountable. All the new guidelines and all efforts made to streamline NAADS are actually geared towards accountability. I cannot understand anybody who is against them. 

While the donors fund these programmes, you must appreciate the consumers, and we must design these programmes based on outputs. If you sunk Shs 118 million in a sub-county and next year you sunk in another Shs 118 million and failed to realise it, you cannot say I am going to continue because I signed an agreement with donors. The proof of the pudding is in the eating. We shall continuously design the programme based on outputs.

Madam Speaker, there was one Member - I think it was hon. Kawoya - who said that NAADS is for the rich, and not for the poor, because the six selected for demonstration are those who have. The word ‘demonstration’, in the English sense, is about applied training, and the people who are training on these sites - first of all the farmers who are selected, are selected by the farmers themselves. Secondly, it does not exclude the others because, there is an element of co-funding. The money that is sunk in these demos is based on an ISFG arrangement, and at the end of the season, it rolls out to another group. So, we are training. Basically, why we had to choose somebody who has, is because of five reasons that we thought were very important for selection of demos. 

1.	The homestead where we have to put the demo must have land; 
2.	He or she must have excelled in one of the enterprises; 
3.	She or he must be able to write and read, meaning that he can teach others. 
4.	He must allow his farm to be visited by the group members - he must allow the political leaders and everybody who wants to see the demo to come and visit it; and 
5.	Finally, we must be able to recover that money so that it goes to another farmer. 

So, the changes were meant to bring about efficiency and effectiveness in the programme. It is not for the rich. In actual fact, those who are not selected are not limited to planting materials and seeds. 

Finally, there was the issue on NAADS to do with procurement, and this was raised by hon. Tumwebaze. Madam Speaker and honourable Members, one of reasons why NAADS was suspended was because of the problem of procurement. When we reinstated NAADS, we improved on procurement. Procurement was done at district level and sub-county level. We replaced this arrangement with what is called the community procurement committee. This is a committee among the group which selects what they have to procure. If they have to cheat, they will be cheating themselves. Previously, you would give me a goat of say Shs 120,000 and yet its real value is Shs 60,000, and at the end of the season, you want me to sale it to my friend in the group. This community procurement committee is not limited to the village. If you have some farmer in the village who has got good planting materials, or who has got good goats, it is up to this committee to select. Therefore, the community procurement committee replaced the one which most of you were not comfortable with. But most importantly, the politicians were not being involved. Currently, a Member of Parliament is provided for in the constituency NAADS review and we have appropriated some little money in the programme for that activity. So, if you do not visit your constituency and make these people accountable, you will have problems. 

I want to conclude by thanking Members for the support. I support the motion and I thank you very much for listening to me. 

6.08
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Stephen Mallinga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion as moved by the honourable Members. 

There was a lot of concern by the honourable Members of Parliament regarding drugs and equipment in the health centres. (Interjection) Do not worry, I will thank you. 

I would also like to thank the honourable Leader of the Opposition for appreciating the work that the Ministry of Health is doing. I think we were the least ministry to be attacked viciously by him. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, the honourable Members were concerned about drugs in the health centres and in the hospitals. I would like to mention and assure the honourable Members of Parliament today, that actually, we should have enough drugs in all the health centres. 

We have discovered that the problem lies with those who order for the drugs, but when we ask the National Medical Stores, they have the drugs; they have been delivering the drugs every month in every district and all the essential drugs should be available in all the districts, health centres, general hospitals and regional referral hospitals. 

We are working in collaboration with the police, and a special unit is being trained for us to track the drugs. It is surprising that when you go round the country - and one of the ministers has been specifically assigned to make impromptu visits; last night he was in Mbale, the night before he was in Hoima, Masaka and we have covered all those places - drugs should be there, and drugs should be available. If the honourable Members, as overseers, find that drugs are not available in the clinics or health centres, please go to the district. Let them show you the drug stores. In most cases, we have been able to establish that the drugs are actually available at the DHO’s store at the district but they have not been distributed to the health centres. 

Recently, one of the honourable Members went to a clinic called Mukongoro –(Interjection)- obviously she was from the Opposition. When she went there, there were no drugs. I was concerned. I went to Kumi at the DHO’s office, and they showed me the store, and there were drugs in the store. When I asked him why he had not distributed the drugs, he said he had no transport, when actually there is a pick-up at the district which should be used to distribute drugs. So, I beg, and I ask the honourable Members of Parliament, that if you have a problem of drugs in your health centre, go to the district; this I beg you, and look at the stores of the District Health Officer. You will find that drugs are there, but they have not been distributed. We are following up on this –(Interjection)– hon. Kakooza as I have told you has been assigned specifically to make impromptu visits.

An honourable Member from Jinja complained that his relative was taken to the hospital but they could not even give the relative panadol. I have just been to Jinja, and I visited Jinja hospital stores, the drugs are there. So, hon. Members, I beg you to do your oversight work in your constituencies.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, I am really constrained to stand up but can I just get a clarification regarding the execution and inspectorate of where the drugs are because I find it a bit hard for the Minister to go around the whole country? In the other departments, there are inspectors; why don’t we institute inspectors from the headquarters and they really ensure that these drugs reach because they are just there for display? When you see them in the stores, it does not mean the drugs will be supplied to the last Health Centre II. So, why don’t we involve many inspectors within the ministry like it is in other ministries; because one minister cannot manage?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I don’t want to open this debate. You will deal with the policy issues later. Answer what was asked the other time and we move to another sector.

DR MALLINGA: Okay, thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Construction of health centres – (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I wanted to give is that there is a toll free line which has been fully paid for by the Ministry of Health to the extent that people from any health unit all over the country can call that toll free line directly to inform them that there are no drugs; and it is your duty, Mr minister, who gave me that line which you may want to give to all the Members of Parliament. Thank you.

DR MALLINGA: We shall give you the number. Construction of health centres; the policy of the Ministry of Health as we speak right now – actually almost 80 percent of the population of this country is within 5 kilometres of a health centre. Our policy now is to strengthen and equip these health centres. We are not constructing anymore health centre IIs except in very big sub-counties. However, we have the areas where the sub-counties are extremely big and we are going to be constructing health centre IIs; otherwise our aim is to strengthen health centre IIIs, which are almost in every sub-county.  And you know the major purpose of health centres IIIs and IVs is to provide antenatal care, delivery and immunisation. Immunisation actually goes down up to health centre IIs.

General Hospitals: 

There were complaints over general hospitals being dilapidated and some of them being too old. We are going to borrow about US $600 million for the rehabilitation of all the 100 bed general hospitals and any others. We are going to replace the roofs; we are going to work on the water and sewerage systems; we are almost going to do total rehabilitation of these health centres and general hospitals.

Regional Referral Hospitals: 

You might have noticed in your constituencies that we are making available every single year about Shs 2 billion for the improvement of the infrastructure. Some hospitals have done very well, others haven’t done so well. Masaka is an example which has done extremely well with the Shs 2 billion which we are giving them every year. Jinja has received it twice; they haven’t done very much. I don’t know why? Mbale has not done very much. Soroti has not done very much. Lira has done very well too. 

And I would like to inform you that where the medical superintendents are women, they have done extremely well. (Applause) The medical superintendent at Masaka is a lady; the medical superintendent at Lira is a lady and those two have done extremely well. Gulu has also done well.

Ambulances: 

Hon. Ladies and Gentlemen, you remember the CHOGM ambulances; they were distributed to all the regional referral hospitals and also to hospitals along the roads where most accidents occur. So, the 11 regional referral hospitals received them and if you start from this side, Atutur received one; Iganga received one; Kiryandongo got one; Bugiri got one. If you want to see a new ambulance hospital, stop at Kiryandongo and you will see it. 

But we have a problem with ambulances; most health centre IIIs cannot maintain their pickup ambulances which we gave them. Fuel is a problem and again they impose it on the patients. When you have a patient, they will say, “Bring the money for the fuel.” Some of these health centres have not been able to pay for electricity because they are decentralized.  And yet the districts are supposed to pay for electricity; they are supposed to provide fuel but it is becoming as problem. I would like to ask the hon. Members to think very seriously. 

In the Ministry of Health we are thinking of recentralizing health centres up to a certain level. And even the human resource for health should be recentralized –(Applause)- so that nurses can be transferred around the country; doctors can be transferred around the country –(Applause)– at the moment with the present policy, we are actually tribalising health care. You will see that most of the nurses in, say Gulu District are Acholi. The same applies to almost every district, and nobody wants to go and work in another district which is not their district; and the politicians at the district level tend to concentrate on recruiting people of their own tribe. 

I was in Moroto and I was disappointed. We have a shortage of nurses in Moroto Hospital but then the few Karimojong nurses there were insulting what they call foreigners –(Interjection)- even in Yumbe they do the same; okay they insult those people and some of them are getting disgusted. They want to leave but we told them to stay on because the policy is going to change as far as doctors and nurses are concerned. (Applause) They will all be centralized.

Ladies and gentlemen, immunisation: we are continuing with a very aggressive immunisation against all the killer diseases; Diphtheria, Whooping Cough, Tetanus, Polio et cetera. We thought that we had got rid of Polio but unfortunately there was an importation from one of the neighbouring countries. Most of our problems of infectious diseases seem to come in from our neighbours. Unfortunately to the north of us and to the west, our neighbours do not have very effective health systems even if I don’t mention the names of the countries I think you know. 

And as a result, we had an epidemic of Ebola in Bundibugyo. Fortunately we were able to contain it though we had lost some people. Marburg; we were able to contain it; Hepatitis E came from a country to the north of us; we have been able to contain it but there is still a need for us to continue and we appeal to the hon. Members of Parliament to continue with their effort to advocate for hygiene in their constituencies. The only way we can control this one is through improved hygiene as you know the disease is spread by faecal contamination either through water or food. Polio; we have been able to carry out massive immunisation throughout the country. I am glad that it was over 80 percent of the children in every area were covered. When you reach 80 percent it means you have controlled the epidemic. But we are going to continue with –(Interruption)  

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister has just appealed to Members of Parliament to do a lot to mobilize their communities on sanitation. I want to inform this House, like I have done to the Minister on several occasions when I have had the opportunity, that the Ministry of Health has got departments and all departments are led by medical doctors and the Department of Sanitation has been relegated to a section, which is one of the biggest problems we have in the country that we are putting emphasis on curative functions while minimizing prevention through sanitation. I want to ask the Minister; when does he intend to elevate the Department of Sanitation in his ministry so that it is at division level to ensure that it is budgeted for and focused as a contribution? Madam speaker, I want to thank you for your indulgence.  

DR MALLINGA: Madam Speaker, we are reorganizing the establishment in the Ministry of Health. Some of the departments are going to be elevated; everything is going to be elevated. (Applause) So, we are working day and night –(Laughter)– to improve on the health of the people of this country. But as I was saying, the hon. Members of Parliament have got to get involved especially on sanitation. I had to go with hon. Dombo to appeal to the people to increase on the latrine coverage in his constituency. We went with you because latrine coverage in that district is quite low and yet they are vulnerable. River Manafwa comes from high up on the mountains and from time to time during the rainy season floods and the springs get contaminated and that is why we had an outbreak of Cholera in that area. 

Hepatitis E; we are still continuing, thanks to our partners. Polio; we are doing very well. We had an outbreak of Meningitis in Bunyoro, Hoima, Masindi, Arua and the other areas in that area but we were able to contain it. I would once again beg the hon. Members, if your district health officer is slow, please get in touch with us and we shall be able to move. 

In the case of Meningitis, it is actually a Member of Parliament who drew it to our attention because the District Health Officer in Masindi had gone on vacation and there was nobody to get in touch with us. If too many people are dying, get in touch with us and we shall send out a team.

The Leader of the Opposition mentioned the exodus of health workers to neighbouring countries. We are actually addressing that question. As I speak, a paper is ready and will soon be going to Cabinet to try and increase especially the remuneration of nurses and doctors so that we can become competitive with those who are neighbouring us and we retain our own health workers in this country. I have mentioned US $600 million which we are going to borrow from the World Bank and one of the areas we are going to address is accommodation for nurses and doctors.

Of course I should not leave without mentioning the issue of maternal child health. Madam Speaker, I know that you are extremely interested in this area. We have increased the assignment of the budget to this area and we are moving out all over the country to sell healthcare. About 50 percent of the pregnant women in this country go for antenatal care but only about 35 percent deliver in the health units. And we have realized that the major problem has been the attitude of the nurses. But we are trying to address this so that they should act as they were trained; they should be kind and concerned about their patients - although sometimes patients are too many, but they should maintain a smile. And then to encourage our women to deliver in health centres where there are trained people to handle delivery. 

The major cause of death is bleeding after delivery, or what they call the postpartum hemorrhage, and it is very easy to treat. Once they are given an injection of Egometrin - and there is a new medicine called Mesoprestol on the market - the uterus just contracts and the bleeding stops. 

So, we have to sell the idea of delivery in the health centres and then after delivery, there is what they call postpartum check-ups. Usually, we encourage men not to have sex with their wives until after six weeks, because they need to go for a check-up to make sure that they have healed well after the episode of delivery, and then at that time we can start them on contraceptives. 

Our contraceptives coverage is very low; it is only about 30 percent -(Laughter)- and we think that if we start women on contraceptives, they are able to space these deliveries quite effectively instead of getting pregnant and delivering every year. The body doesn’t have enough time to recover. 

So, it is important that while campaigning, hon. Members of Parliament, you should also sell this intra-partum or postpartum haemorrhage and death to them. We are working hard to see to it that we reduce this. We started off with 700 per 100,000 thousand deliveries and we are now at 345 per 100,000 deliveries for the deaths; still, 345 deaths are very high.

For infant mortality, we started with about 200 and now we are at about 76 per 1,000 live births. It is going down but still, it is not at a level where it should be acceptable. Madam Speaker, I beg to say that I support the motion –(Interjection)- oh, I almost forgot Swine Flu!

What you call Swine Flu has been given a better name – H1N1 and we have had five cases in the country now. The first case was a man who came from England to Nairobi and ended up in Entebbe and he had Swine Flu. We were able to trace him, and he was isolated at Entebbe and he got well. He is very happy. Our isolation unit has a TV and quite a number of luxuries and he is going to throw a party for the workers there. 

The second case was again a man who came from England and he also had the disease. He was isolated and has been treated. For the third case, they were one family. The mother had been in England and when she came, she developed the disease but she stayed at home. Her son, and the husband who is a very famous engineer here, were infected. Our people went there and were very able to confirm that this was H1N1. They were treated at home and the home was quarantined and they are doing very well. 

So far, the infections we have had here have been very mild. If somebody is in good health, most of them respond very well, but if people have some other conditions like chronic lung disease and/or heart disease, they are most likely not to respond well. Most likely, the disease will not be very severe in the tropics but in the countries where there are winters, we anticipate that it is likely the disease will be worse and perhaps the deaths from it might increase in those countries, especially as those same countries are the ones which have an old population of people of over 60 years -(Interjection)- it is alright, I am 65. So, that is all I have to say, and I support the motion. Thank you, very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Members, I have been told that the toll free line in case people are stealing our drugs is 0772-497261. So if anybody is running away with our drugs, you should ring that number. 

6.36 
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Ms Mary Mutagamba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Members, I want to thank the President for the State of the Nation Address, but I also want to thank the Prime Minister for the exposition he gave this afternoon, because he did most of the work for me in as far as water for production and the environment are concerned. To that effect, I will try to answer the few areas that were raised by three honourable members that I was able to capture. 

One was from the hon. Member for Bukwo, but I did not get her name. She was talking about gravity flow schemes in Tororo. I want to assure her that in this financial year, we have funds for Bukwo and the Tororo gravity flow schemes. We have been doing the planning; the plans are ready and this time we are ready to implement. 

There was also one from hon. Nampijja who challenged government for failing to come up with the national adaptation plan of action and for that matter I brought this document which we launched in 2007. This is the Uganda National Adaptation Programme of Action (UNAPA). This was a recommendation by the global community and Uganda as usual responded by producing a roadmap for our adaptation, and the adaptation mainly zeros on areas of afforestation, rainwater harvesting, soil conservation and irrigation among others. So, these documents were distributed at that time in 2007, but my ministry can still provide copies on request, because we do not want to put them in the pigeonhole and people will not read them. So, this time it will be demand-driven.

Having said that, I want to add that the situation in the country, of course as has been highlighted, rotates around the drought and that is as a result of climate change as has been pointed out, but mostly, because we, the people in Uganda, have actually disturbed our environment. We have done a lot of encroachment especially on the volatile eco systems like the rivers, lake shores, wetlands and forests. So there is a serious danger for all of us to note and to take action. I am happy that on page 10 of the Prime Minister’s statement, he has been able to point out exactly what needs to be done. 

In our adaptation plan, on page 6 and 7, we are talking of nine activities that we are undertaking as government. That is community tree planting which is covered by the farming/family income projects and this is implemented at sub-county level, and we have made sure at that level that we initiate nurseries that are meant to supply seedlings to the communities. 

We are also looking at land degradation management; this is work that we are carrying out with the Ministry of Agriculture together with Makerere University Department of Soil Science.

We are also looking at strengthening the meteorology services; this has been highlighted by a number of people. Of course for quite some time we have been talking about turning the meteorology department into an agency that can be independent. And we are almost there - a Cabinet paper has been prepared and we believe that before the end of this year we shall have an autonomous meteorology authority.  

We are also talking about water for production. The Prime Minister highlighted about Shs 22 billion put aside for water production this financial year. In my ministry, we have an extra Shs 5 billion that has been put aside for water production in areas of Karamoja and North eastern Uganda.

We are also talking about drought adaptation. This is mainly water harvesting, and I ask this august House to make it our preoccupation to teach people to harvest water at household level, community level and district level, and as government, we shall do the harvesting at national level. And when you look at our policy statement, you will see that government has already committed funds to construct a number of dams. But we must start at the household level. 

And the last time I came here, I requested Members of Parliament to interact with the plastic water tank manufacturers. We have negotiated with a number of them to provide tanks to micro-finances in your constituencies so that people can access these tanks for rain water harvesting on credit. Once again I call upon Members to visit these manufacturers; they are already waiting for you.

We are also talking about vector control which is a joint effort with mainly the Ministry of Agriculture. It is an adaptation activity, but we are also emphasising tapping into the knowledge because most of the time we think that we are going to solve problems technically with the new science technology; but I think we still have technology as old and traditional as ourselves and we want to tap into that technology and skills.

We are also saying that as a ministry, we need to help the entire community to internalise issues of climate change and for that purpose, we have been able to put a climate change unit and funding has been highlighted by the Prime Minister.

What are our challenges?
The challenge now is inadequate understanding of climate change, and I am happy the Members of Parliament here have created a forum of climate change and global warming, and we shall be addressing you through that forum. 

But we are also saying that we need to have adequate technical capacity. So we shall be requiring training for more people and we are also looking at the financial resources that are required to translate the objectives into activities. We are asking and we hope government will respond and making sure that the weak institutions are strengthened.

That is my contribution. Once again, I thank the hon. Members for their contributions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just one small question. Nobody talked about the issue of gravity water on Siyabona Hill in Bukooli, something which the people of Busoga have been asking for from the President for about five years.

MS MUTAGAMBA: We have a programme of gravity flow and in fact it is the second easiest technology that we can adapt. The easiest is the borehole, and I think we have exhausted that one. But it is also being affected by climate change and global warming because the water levels have gone down and most of our boreholes are affected. So the next easiest is the gravity flow and for every gravity flow that we can harness, we are willing to do that and we have the funds. But unfortunately, when most people see water coming, they think they can stretch it as far as the last drop can go. We cannot do that. In most cases, we have had to turn off people’s requests because a certain gravity flow must have a certain capacity. If we stretch it further, then everybody along the way will lose out. That is what inhibits our capacity to expand.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But I wish you could answer us and tell us that the request is not feasible because we have been asking and asking. Please, write back to us.

MS MUTAGAMBA: I will look at that, Madam Speaker.

6.45
THE MINISTER FOR THE PRESIDENCY (Ms Beatrice Wabudeya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to register my thanks to the President for a clear and elaborate State of the Nation Address; and I would like to thank colleagues who have supported this motion and for the contributions they have made. 

I have one or two issues I would like to refer to from the contribution of the Leader of Opposition. I feel that it is not fair to leave them the way they are because they are not reflecting the true situation, as I know it. 

On page 14, the Leader of the Opposition is stating that RDCs and their assistants and internal security organisation operatives are vigorously mobilising for the NRM as if they are not public officials. 

I want to state here that RDCs, the DISOs and GISOs are indeed public officials, but by the nature of their work, RDCs are mandated to monitor and mobilise for government programmes. It is, therefore, not surprising that an RDC in the course of doing his work will have to interface and interact with the communities because that is where his work is. 

I would not like us to see the work of RDCs as mobilising for NRM. They are actually mobilising and monitoring Government programmes and they will do it for whichever government will be in power. If they are –(Interjections)– yes, I know you do not like them because for example the Leader of the Opposition is quoting Teso, Karamoja, Lango, Acholi, West Nile, Kasese in the whole country, and he quotes them as areas where there is a problem with RDCs. I know for sure and I can quote that some of us have been demobilising against government programmes and have inevitably had to clash with the RDCs. I can quote, and even name people, if it becomes necessary. So I really wanted to make this point clear that it is their job to mobilise for and monitor the government programmes.

He actually went further on to bring back an issue which had come to this House one time concerning the utterances that His Excellency the President made while he was in Arua in February this year when he claims that the President said, “If you vote for Besigye, you would have voted for civil war. It is not a joking matter but a serious thing that you vote for NRM.”

I would like to state here that quoting newspapers in this Parliament has had its own problems because the majority of newspaper reports normally misinterpret and misrepresent the situation and the statements that are made by many of us. This has also happened to His Excellency the President.

I do not wish to leave this matter unchallenged; the matter on page 20 of the statement of the Leader of the Opposition under Prosperity-for-All, and I would like to quote because he says, “You see, in the early years of his address, the President used to confidently refer to this programme with its campaign name of Bonna Bagagawale. This year the nomenclature has been dropped, it being a damn reminder of a promise un-kept.” 

I want to say that it is not true that the nomenclature for Bonna Bagagawale has been dropped because Bonna Bagagawale was only the Luganda version of the programme of Prosperity-for-All. The English name for this programme is Prosperity-for-All and we are encouraging every district, tribe and language to have its own version of this programme. So, it is not true that the President is running away from his promise on Bonna Bagagawale and that he has dropped the name because he is not keeping his promise.

On the contrary we are going ahead with the implementation of the Prosperity-for-All Programme. The Leader of the Opposition uses the word “rapid”. He says, “…also previously, the target of the programme was the rapid empowerment of the more than 68 percent...” I believe he put this deliberately so that in future it can be used to justify the assessment of how far we would have moved. I want to state here that this word “rapid” has never been used and it is not part of the programme.

I also would like to go a little bit lower in the next sentence and quote, when he says, “Prosperity-for-All is once again being realigned and is now hinged on the framework of the old failed Plan for the Modernisation of Agriculture.” This is also not true. 

I would like to remind the House that PMA is a framework which has not failed. It has delivered but we have only misunderstood it. It covers many issues including the roads that the Minister of Works was very ably explaining here. So, it is not right for the Leader of the Opposition to state here that this framework has failed. Indeed I want to confirm that the NAADS is just a mechanism of delivering the Prosperity-for-All Programme and it was restructured for the reasons that hon. Bright Rwamirama stated here. 

In the next paragraph, the Leader of the Opposition is criticising the President for making the statement that the programme will continue to require Government’s concerted intervention in the following areas: holistic integrated development of agriculture and rural development; development and maintenance of infrastructure, including rural, national and regional roads; energy and communication; development of human resource through education, skills and vocational training; continued peace and security for all; and good governance including the fight against corruption and rule of law. He is criticising this. 

I want to state here that these are complementary programmes for the overall package because they all work towards Prosperity-for-All. So, I do not agree with this misleading conclusion at the bottom when he states, “…how far this is from the Bonna Bagagawale in his manifesto!” and he uses an exclamation mark at the end. It is not true and we should have the right position. 

Prosperity-for-All is still our programme which we have started delivering. When you see NAADS working that is Prosperity-for-All; when the SACCOS are operating that is Prosperity-for-All; when we are doing the roads and allowing people to access markets, that is Prosperity-for-All and we shall surely deliver on this one. (Applause)  

So, I want to state that there is no drop of nomenclature and the President was very clear in his message on the programme for Prosperity-for-All. I want to thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Members, we have listened to several responses, but we still have the Ministry of Gender, the Ministry of Energy, the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the Ministry of Finance and that of Ethics. I am receiving indications that Members are tired. So, let us adjourn to tomorrow and the rest of the Members will respond tomorrow. The House is adjourned to 2 o’clock tomorrow. Thank you.

(The House rose at 6.55 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 16 July 2009 at 2.00 p.m.) 

