Wednesday, 12 July 2006

Parliament met at 2.47 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to welcome you to today’s sitting and to request you to give a very big welcome to the pupils of Iganga Boys Primary School from the Kyabazinga’s kingdom represented by hon. Muyima and hon. Magoola Zirabamuzale. You are welcome.

Secondly, I have now been given the full list of the Members of the Pan African Parliament and I wish to inform you that the following will be our representatives: hon. Ndawula Kaweesi, hon. Bartille Toskin, hon. Mary Mugyenyi, hon. Lokii Peter and from the opposition, hon. Sam Njuba. So, that committee is now fully constituted.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2005/2006, SCHEDULE 3

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, maybe when the Minister comes, he shall lay the papers on the Table.

RESPONSE BY MINISTERS TO ISSUES RAISED DURING THE DEBATE ON THE STATE OF THE NATION ADDRESS DELIVERED BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I had asked hon. Kasaija to be available for a few minutes but hon. Wasike, you had something to ask.

2.51
MR STEPHEN WASIKE (NRM, Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Madam Speaker, there are some incidents that are going on at the boarder during revenue collection, which I wish to bring to the attention of the Minister for Internal Affairs. For some time there have been some extra judicial killings of smugglers. Last year there were some killings; this year there have been killings. I am not aware whether it has been followed up. I do not know whether the Minister of Internal Affairs is aware? These killings sometimes are accidental; sometimes as a result of some struggles between the smugglers and SPRS. We appreciate that there is need for collecting revenue but I think killing is not justified. 

Just last month on the 18th somebody died in an exchange - it was not even an exchange actually because the other people were not armed. I wish to bring it to the attention of the relevant minister to investigate and also to stop it at least.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Mugenyi, can you say they were in such a village or on water or something?

MR WASIKE: Just in the town, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, tell him where these things occurred because you want an answer.

MR WASIKE: In Mawero; just in one of the parishes in Busia town council and then an old man was shot by a stray bullet from the SPRS. Last year somebody called Ngolobe or Babi had died. I think this should be condemned and it should stop.

Madam Speaker, if you can allow me to just chip in another point on energy because energy is very vital; he can pick it and follow it at a later stage and the point I wish to chip in is that ESKIMO of South Africa has some excess energy. Has the Minister of Energy thought about importing some energy from South Africa? We have some network and it is possible because the energy they are generating is sufficient for East and Southern Africa. Maybe the Energy Minister can also think about it.

There are these taxes on inverters and these deep cycle batteries; taxes are making the inverters very expensive. If the Energy Minister can work with the Minister of Finance and maybe these taxes are reduced or removed all together, they encourage the use of inverters and these batteries and it will help the situation in the energy sector. Thank you.

DR ARAPKISSA: I want to get clarification from the Minister of Internal Affairs. Yesterday when he was responding he mentioned a programme to combat cattle rustling using anti-stock safety units and he only cited Teso and Lango regions. I do not know whether he mentioned Acholi. 

The clarification I want is, is the Minister aware that districts of Sironko, Bukwa and Kapchorwa have suffered from cattle rustling for decades and they still continue to suffer? If he is aware, what programme does he have for those districts in terms of combating cattle rustling; after all the same people who carried out the cattle rustling are the same who do it in Sironko, Bukwa and Kapchorwa? Thank you.

MR ARUMADRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The last time I reported to this House the large movement of cattle keepers into the West Nile region, I did mention that some of these herdsmen were armed. I want to find out from the Minister whether he did due investigations and what he found out.

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to ask the Minister about the maintenance of the prisons in districts. We had passed a Bill to centralise the maintenance of the prisoners and I would like to know from the Minister; how soon are they implementing this programme? A small district like Koboko cannot maintain the prisoners and they are being starved. How quickly are we implementing this programme of centralising the prisons? Thank you.

2.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, once again I take this opportunity to thank you and thank the colleagues, especially those that have asked the questions. 

The Samia-Bugwe North MP has asked about extra-judicial killings by our force that protects the revenue collection authority. We are aware of this case, but I would pray the indulgence of this House and the honourable member that at an appropriate time I will come with a full statement on this case. 

All I want to assure the House is that we are doing everything possible to prevent the repetition of this. May I also hasten to add that these smugglers are also armed in some cases, so when our forces confront them, they do not confront them lightly. They are also armed, they are dangerous and if our forces react the way they react, then the case should be understood.

The programme of countering stock theft for the areas that are located southeast of Karamoja; that is Kapchorwa maybe a bit of Sironko and Bukwa, yesterday the honourable member may not have listened carefully but I did say there is a programme for that as well. Indeed as I said, 1,660 SPCs are now under training and are going to be absolved into the anti-stock force. Definitely we are aware of that area, just like we are aware of the others, but again we have to prioritise because of shortage of manpower. But we are aware of that problem too and we are addressing it.  

Whether the Ministry of Internal Affairs is developing a policy about cattle keepers who are moving around the country; I want to inform this House that between my ministry and the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness, we are trying to develop a policy on resettlement. What do I mean by that? 

We want to ensure not only cattle keepers are kept in check and they must move and settle with the approval of the leaders in the area to which they move, but even non-cattle keepers. Our belief is that although the Constitution gives Ugandans freedom to move anywhere in Uganda and settle, the movements and settlements should be orderly. So, we are developing that policy and I have already talked to the Minister of Disaster Preparedness to that effect and we shall at an appropriate time let you know how far we have gone.

The decentralisation of prisons asked by my sister hon. Baba Diri, actually the intention is so much to decentralise because the new policy, which at an appropriate time again I say we shall bring before this House, is to get all these personnel especially the local Government prisons, including the local Government police into the centre. The only problem again is funding. 

I have been to some of these prisons; it is very pathetic. Some have never seen any paint ever since the colonialists built them and when I asked why; it is because year in, year out, the prisons department is under-funded. Again as I said yesterday, when the ministry’s estimates come here, I know we have a ceiling but if you want us to deliver an efficient pro-people police, you want us to deliver efficient prisons service, we need funds. That is the problem. Once that one is addressed, then I want to assure this House, we shall be able to deliver efficient service. Thank you very much.

3.05
MR EMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. According to the question asked by hon. Mugenyi about the SRPS, I want to get one specific clarification from the honourable minister. A number of times the SRPS people have been shooting at and killing people and the Minister has said that at times the smugglers are armed and that is why the SRPS have behaved that way. I want to find out, is it the official position of Government that under such circumstances, the SRPS should shoot to kill?

Secondly, is it true that all people who have fallen victim to this ruthless behavior by these SPRS people, the circumstances have been that the victims have been armed and have fought back?

Thirdly, under what department does the SPRS lie? Is it under Revenue Authority or under the Police? In case I am aggrieved, who would be the right person to complain to? That would help to clarify the situation on the ground to help our people. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am not going to reopen this debate. Just answer those.

MR KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, it is not my habit to bring food on the table when it is not prepared properly. May I ask this House to allow me to go back to my ministry and I will come back with a full menu on this question? Thank you.

3.07
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Hillary Onek): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The difficult areas that the Ministry has at the moment are several. There is the area of water for production, which we are now as Government working with our colleagues from the Ministry of Water, to ensure that the area of Karamoja all the way to Mbarara along the cattle corridor has sufficient water for these animals so as to avoid unnecessary movement of these animals. 

Along with that we are also looking at water for irrigation, particularly during this period of drought where we can have irrigation schemes to enhance agricultural production. We have had many challenges in the ministry, which we are working on. Most of the issues I spelt out in our policy statements, which I believe every Member of Parliament, has already received. 

We also have a special programme for the Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) in Northern Uganda who are now returning to their homes or to parishes. We are developing a comprehensive programme to organise them in the field of agriculture because agriculture is the only enterprise in the villages in Uganda. That is the only economic activity that goes on in our countryside. 

So, we are making a comprehensive programme to enable these farmers who are now going back to their villages to have improved seeds to support them with agricultural tools and then to organise them into business groupings so that they sell whatever product that comes out at a good price and they get value out of it. So, I think for the rest, I believe Members can ask a question in relation to whatever is in our policy statement.  

To deal with the recently talked of Foot and Mouth Disease, which has spread due to animals coming from Tanzania entering Uganda, I would like to call my colleague - he has been in the field, he will give you more details and then we shall see where the gaps are to talk about are. I invite hon. Bright Rwamirama.

3.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Maj.) (Rtd.) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, the issue raised in the House was about these people from Tanzania; “who are they and what steps has Government taken”? It is very unfortunate that these people had to come in such a manner with a lot of cattle estimated to be over 100,000 head of cattle, and this certainly has brought a lot of pressure on the otherwise scarce pasture and water mainly in the regions of Rakai, Isingiro, Ntungamo and parts of Masaka.  

These people are in various categories. One, they are those people who happened to be in Tanzania because of our colonial borders and they claim to be naturalised Tanzanians but they have found themselves here. Those of you who come from that region, we have the same culture and actually the border is not tangible. You cannot touch it. In the recent opening up of boundaries, there were people who were believed to be in Tanzania who found themselves on the Ugandan border and there are those who were in Uganda who found themselves in Tanzania. 

The second category includes those of the recent border boundary opening. The third category is those we believe are not Ugandans and from the Prime Minister’s Office they are still in the camps. I think they are trying to see how this can be sorted out. 

The fourth category is those who just meander around borders. Most of them are Ugandans, some of them have families this side but because of lack of pasture, they have been grazing around the border and these are known –(Mr Kibanzanga rose)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why do you not let him finish his answer?  

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: I am coming to that, hon. Kibanzanga. So, the fourth group is of those Ugandans who have just been shifting and looking for pasture and they are there with their animals. The Government has taken the following steps – but before I say what Government is going to do for the whole group, there is a group I think, which is his concern, the Basongora who have been living in the eastern Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). These are indigenous Ugandans whose land now is Queen Elizabeth National Park and they have been actually almost – once their area was gazetted as Queen Elizabeth National Park and hence a game reserve, a portion of it was left and most of them found themselves in Zaire. But now it seems the Democratic Republic of Congo has chased them away. These are also now camped in Queen Elizabeth National Park. There is another group also in Ntoroko, which came with around 50,000 head of cattle; they are in Ntoroko County in Bundibugyo.

The Government has taken the following steps: we are working with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to ensure that if our neighbours want to expel these people, they should do it in an organised manner for the safety of the people and also the animals so that we can find a way of dealing with animals, vaccinate them and relocate them. That is, if they are Ugandans.

The second step is to make sure that what we do on this border of Uganda is also done on the borders of our neighbours, especially in disease control.  We have mobilised resources. The first batch of vaccines has arrived in the country; we are vaccinating all animals at those entry points and all other affected areas indiscriminately for Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD). We are also aware that there has been occurrence of CBPP in Northern Tanzania. For avoidance of doubt and in order to keep our national herd safe, we have secured a vaccine for CBPP and we are going to administer it concurrently with the FMD vaccine.

The other point is that we are going to ensure that those who are Ugandans must sell some of their cattle to get land where they can stay permanently. I think Government is going to launch a campaign to make sure that these people do not move. Meanwhile, we have imposed a quarantine. There is no animal that is allowed to move on foot. It is only animals destined for slaughter houses and only for identified and declared safe routes that are permitted to move out of those districts that are not affected by FMD.  

I will now move to the other general remarks on disease, which were raised by most Members. One was that about the position of Government, and I was instructed by the President that wherever I go, I tell the local governments that we should not evict Tanzanians who are living in Uganda because they have ancient historical linkage with Uganda and they are not the ones who fixed the border. We are also trying to see that we co-ordinate with our neighbours so that we do not otherwise undermine the East African Community.

Finally, about the movement of cattle in the North and all over the place, several Members from the Northern region raised this point. They say we have so many people moving with guns and with many herds of cattle in Maruzi farm. I would like to tell you in this House that the cows you see in Maruzi farm were shifted before the outbreak of FMD. We had shifted 500 head of cattle to that farm in preparation for breeding quality animals for restocking of the North as the area stabilises. However, we have information that people living in Bululi areas and parts of Masindi crossed on a ferry and they are now wandering around the place.

As a ministry we have made sure that our ranches are secure. We are working with the local authorities and some MPs to make sure that Government farms are secure. Those people are not there illegally. They are not defaulters and we have urged the local authorities to handle them like any other citizen. However, what has been found out is that they do not have guns. The Minister of Defence will have to clarify, if it is true these people had guns. The veterinary officers who are there and whom I met a few days ago told me these people do not have guns.

Finally, honorable members, -(Interruption)

MS AMONGI: Madam Speaker, I think the honourable minister should take the issue of those wandering in Maruzi as a serious incident. The reports I am getting now are that the locals want to take the law in their hands and they want to start either killing the animals of those people or killing the people. For a long time the issues have been raised and there are no tangible steps being taken. What is the Minister willing to do and in what time framework? This should not only be to secure the government restocked cattle but also to make sure that these people leave the area and go back where they have come from with their herds of cattle.

MAJ.(RTD) RWAMIRAMA: I am terrified to hear that the honourable member knew that the people are about to kill people and she kept quiet. She is now raising this now on the Floor of the House! The killing of people is not something that should be taken lightly. I am working with some MPs and with the local authorities. We do not allow the movement of cattle without permits. It is illegal and people should be taken to court and prosecuted. Therefore, we are working with the local people and Internal Affairs and Gen. Kaihura is aware. We are going to make sure that actually the movement of cattle is curtailed. Those who are there illegally will have to be forced to go where they came from.

I urge you to tell your community that Government is in place and we are not living in a country of lawlessness. We are going to catch up with them. I want you to take my word as I have already indicated to you that we have shifted animals for breeding. These are very healthy animals and there is no way we can expose them to animals, which are not treated.  

Finally, it is our desired goal to make farming a business. We want to venture and penetrate the export market of both beef and milk. Therefore, we want your support and very soon we are organising a workshop for all stakeholders so that we work out how we shall move together. I thank you very much.

MR ODIT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two short questions. The first is about the cattle that is coming from Tanzania. You know that Tanzania recently had elections and they have a new Government. It is a declared policy that there should be no over grazing on wetlands and so they want to reduce the number of animals that have been grazing in their wetlands and protected areas. Could the Minister confirm to us that it is the impact of that policy that has brought about the influx of these cattle owners into our country?

No. 2, the honourable minister was surprised to hear that there are people who are carrying guns in Maruzi but last year we raised this question here. The Minister of State for Defence and the Minister of State for Agriculture admitted that their officers, especially the Veterinary Officer in Masindi, was being harassed by some soldiers to give movement permits for animals which were coming in. Some were even coming from as far away as the Democratic Republic of Congo but they do not have grazing land in places where they would have otherwise settled. 

“This senior army officer”, we were told in this House, “was still on training in Jinja and as soon as the training was over, investigations would be instituted”. Unfortunately, we learnt that this officer died. But the Minister of State responsible for Defence had promised that this Col Sula Semakula who was highly responsible for facilitating the animals to cross would be investigated. Probably this is an opportune time for the two ministers to corroborate their information and clarify in this House whether or not the fact that some soldiers were behind assisting these cattle keepers to move with guns to new found land is true or not. These are the two short questions for the two ministers to jointly explain. Thank you.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Until 1996 I was the Commissioner of Lands for ten years. In the early 1990s, a group of people moving with animals invaded Lake Mburo National Park. The Ministry of Lands was contacted and eventually the national park was split into two. Half was given to these people. We did not know where they came from, but there was a report that they were from Luweero. Soon after, another group of people moving with animals invaded the former Government ranches by force. These were ranches that had already been sold to Ugandans. Eventually, the ranches were restructured. In other words they were split into two and half was given to these invaders. They own these ranches without paying anything. 

Later on a group of people moving with animals moved up to Teso and settled in wetlands. The Government asked for six months for all these people to stay there while the government looked for where to resettle them. They are still there up to now. This issue has come up again. These are the same type of people moving with animals. First of all, who are these people? (Laughter). Who are they? For more than 40 years, after independence we still have people who belong nowhere? I would like to know from the two ministers, when will this saga come to an end so that we live where we belong?

Two –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Honourable member, you are making a very long submission. You have asked a question about people who move with animals.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I have another question.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Give others a chance.
 
MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like the Minister of Agriculture to help Ugandans with this. What is the current carrying capacity of the available pasture and water resources that we have for animals? This would help our farmers in managing and focusing on how best they could utilise the available facilities. Could they conveniently carry the additional lots that were coming in from Tanzania and Congo? If not, could the owners of those animals be encouraged to sell them so that they invest their resources elsewhere, other than damaging the environment?

Finally, we were informed on this Floor that the Vice-President’s Office piloted the rice scheme in 11 districts. It has now expanded to about 35 districts in Uganda. Doesn’t the Ministry of Agriculture think it is prudent now for this project to be taken over by them? Or does he think it is still wise for it to be conducted as a project under the Vice-President’s Office? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yesterday the Vice-President’s Office said that the money the Vice-President uses does not come from Agriculture. This is a project he is conducting himself. Why should it be taken away? I disallow that question. 

MS BOONA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Mine is some additional information for the honourable minister. I was secretary for production in the district of Mbarara where FMD is rampant right now for eight years. Every year we had to talk about FMD in the district. I have not been in this Parliament but I wonder if the gravity of the situation ever came to this Parliament. For all those eight years, what is happening right now has always happened. I would like to advise the Minister that the fire brigade approach does not help the district. For us to wait for the disease to break and the animals die and then we import the vaccine, it is rather doing a postmortem. 

I would like to propose that every year we get prepared for this because even though we keep proposing to the Tanzanian Government, the people and the animals still move in and outside at the border post. I would like to say that the revenue we are missing now has always happened every year in that district through the same symptoms he is diagnosing right now. I think something should be done more serious between the government of Tanzania and us. Thank you very much. 

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, about hon. Odit’s concern, I cannot answer why those people were chased from Tanzania. As I already told you, the matter is being handled at the diplomatic level. All I can tell you is the impact they have caused on us and the steps we have already taken, which I have explained. 

Concerning the soldiers helping the movement of animals and headed by Col. Semakula - who unfortunately passed away before the investigations were complete – I agree with you. We have some people already arrested who were being hired by some of the – not only herdsmen but also traders to move lorries at night through quarantine areas and from quarantine areas. We have some army men and police officers who are already arrested in this practice. And if you get such information, you could actually call the Inspector-General of Police or one of the senior police officers who are really doing a good job. 

My honourable colleague who worked in Lands asked, “Who are these people?”  I have explained the four categories. As I told you, some are Ugandans who have land here and they have little pasture. They transfer some of the animals along the border. These we are telling off because they have to sell their animals and they must buy land. The Government has no responsibility for them. The other group has to be verified through the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Prime Minister’s Office. Some of them actually claim to be Tanzanians. And the third category of non-Ugandans I think will have to go to where they belong.  

Hon. Dombo, I thank you very much and I want to tell you that we on the government side will be very happy to work with chairpersons like you who think in that manner. What we are telling people is, “To turn your farm into business, you must consider the holding capacity, and not the numbers.” They should consider whether they have the capacity to keep these animals, profitably. Whether it is animals or crops, when we are going into this era, we must look at farming as a business and not a tradition. Therefore, I thank you very much and I will continuously interact with you as the Chairperson of the Natural Resources Committee. (Laughter)

Finally, hon. Boona, I have already indicated that the government is addressing this issue in four dimensions. One, internally here, what do we do about the disease? Two, the people; three, our common borders with Tanzania, Kenya, Rwanda, Sudan and DRC, we want to make sure that we move together. If we vaccinate for CPP on this border, it is also done on the other side. If we put quarantine this side, it is also put there. 

We have also handled it diplomatically and the Ministries of Internal Affairs, Foreign Affairs and Agriculture are working together with the Prime Minister’s Office and the President’s office to make sure that any activities to do with either chasing or resettlement is done in an orderly and organised manner to avoid pressures on human beings, pasture and water for production. With those few responses, Madam Speaker, I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Trade, Tourism and – oh, you are still –(Interruption)

MR HILLARY ONEK: Yes, Madam Speaker. Since we still have to wind up as ministers from the ministry, I just want to comment briefly on the comments from hon. Amongi on Maruzi ranch stating that they are contemplating killing human beings. It makes me shudder, really. At this age, it is us the politicians who should make sure that such things do not happen again in Uganda. We have had enough killings. There are laws in place that could be evoked to correct any –(Interruption)

MS AMONGI: Madam Speaker, I want to correct the impression the Minister is creating. I said - and I think my colleague the Member of Parliament from Maruzi made a substantive contribution on this matter - what we are saying is, we started talking about this issue in the Seventh Parliament. Now it is reoccurring and I told you I got reports this morning that the people are asking, “Where is the government?” They have been having this problem for a long time and there seems not to be any help coming forward and actually the real information I got is that they have killed five cows of those people. That is the information I have got. The level of annoyance on the ground could go further than that according to the report I have got.  

I asked the Ministry to give a time frame within which this problem could be sorted, but the Minister wants to insinuate that we want to kill. What I am telling you is that I am told five cows have been killed. It is good that I bring the information on the Floor since you are the Minister concerned. Could you just give us a timeframe within which you will handle this problem fundamentally and not to treat just the symptoms?
 
MR ONEK: Well, at least I am happy about that clarification. Honourable member, play your role to diffuse such, if it is going to happen. For one reason, I want to assure you that the government has always taken steps to ensure that those people who move there illegally are going to be removed from there. The Government is taking steps to do that and I want to assure you that Government is here and we are there on the ground. We are going to put the situation right. We shall ensure that law and order is enforced. So, there is no question about –(Interruption)

MR MUKITALE: We have restrained the people of Buliisa for the last one year against using our own means against the people who invaded us last year. I informed this House last week that we were invaded by cattle keepers with over 35,000 animals over and above our holding capacity. They had armed escorts, no permits and they did not have the consent of the local administration. When we were still trying to do that, instead there is a police station, which was created not to defend the natives, but to defend the invaders. (Laughter) This was a very hot issue during the campaigns when we were looking for votes and the President took on the matter.  

Col Kyanda was sent to Buliisa. It is also true that last week the neighbours of Masindi were accusing Masindi to be the ones exporting these cows but actually Masindi and the whole of Bunyoro are on the receiving end. Cattle have come from as far as Congo, Tanzania and between the areas of Kibaale corridor. When these people were trying to talk to us, they talk a bit of Runyankore but when they are speaking to themselves they speak Kinyarwanda. Therefore, I would like to say that if this problem is going to be contained, we must know. 

I managed to move with Col Kyanda for three to four days and I would like to request the Minister of Internal Affairs, the Minister of Defence and the Minister of Culture to get some findings from Col Kyanda, because there are indisciplined operatives who are trading and accompanying these animals. That is the only way we can handle this problem. If we do not concede, there are these selfish individuals who are accompanying these - they even compromise the Police as you go down Butyaba. So, they were taking the cows for all these months and this police station, which was created to defend the invaders, have coerced and intimidated the indigenous people to the extent of almost saying, “We are accepting you”. By the time we came in they had gone as far as applying for lease offers.  

I would like to request the Minister of Internal Affairs not to overstretch the local people by saying that we can continue to tell them. We have restrained people but these people are now applying for lease offers, so what do you want us to do? I thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

MR ONEK: Madam Speaker, let me finish my part then I will allow the Minister for Internal Affairs to comment on those others. 

I want to talk about the rice project. The rice project, which was initiated by the Vice=President and has been very successful and it is something our ministry is going to take on. Actually we have already been involved in Upland Rice. In our next programme we are going to ensure that we commercialise rice growing and organise our farmers to produce en masse. This will enable them to earn income out of the rice because it is one of those high yielding crops. Indeed there are many other varieties now in the market, which take a shorter time to grow and get better yields. However, this applies across the board to maize and all other crops. 

As I mentioned earlier, our new team is putting together a framework within which we are going to manage agriculture along business principles. We are doing this so that our people gain from it, other than the unscrupulous traders who buy at peanuts and then make big money outside. As regards Bullisa, that is more of a police case. I would wish to rest our case in the Ministry of Agriculture. Madam Speaker, thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members of the Executive, you know this matter of people walking around with animals and guns is not a new matter so it is not something we should gloss over. I think we really need solutions. The other day I asked why you have not prosecuted anyone under the Firearms Act. You walk from the border of Bukanga up to Adjumani with a gun and animals! I think this is the only country where anything like that happens. It is really a serious matter. I think we should find out who these people are and the state should help us to relocate them somewhere with their guns and animals.

3.47
THE MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There was only one issue raised about Mt Elgon. The Member asked whether the boundary is of 1983 or 1993. I have checked with my officers and they indicate that there is only one boundary. Mt Elgon was a forest reserve but people went on encroaching on the forest reserve hence the 1983 boundary, but then people continued moving inside the reserve. Now they demand that the permanent boundary should be what is actually available now.  

The Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry had started on the process of actually reopening the boundary but because of the elections we decided to wait. Now that the elections are over, we are going to start reopening the boundaries. I am going to visit with my Minister of State for Tourism. The Cabinet decided that actually the boundary should be where the boundary for 1983 was. Anybody who will have encroached beyond that boundary should actually leave. 

I want to appeal to the leaders, both the Ministers from that area and the MPs, it is in their interests that we actually secure Mt. Elgon because of the ecosystem. The water that is at the top of the mountain is the only source of water that they have. 

I also want to inform them that their communities are going to benefit more because Mt Elgon tourism between Kenya and Uganda is on the increase. The local revenue that is generated is shared between ourselves and the local community. So, it is imperative that we actually secure this ecosystem. I want to tell you that once we get there and open the boundary, I will seek your indulgence to support Government to talk to your communities to look for elsewhere. We must enforce the law and secure this land. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MRS MUSEVENI: Madam Speaker, I just want to make an observation. There is a problem with leaders in this House. When you hear them referring to their own people as “who are these people?” and “what should we do with them” and “people who are preparing to kill each other”, it looks like leaders themselves do not take the responsibility of advising their own people. Ugandans, whichever corner they may be, are Ugandans. 

If this problem started in the Seventh Parliament, as the honourable member just said, that was before this House became a multi-party Parliament, a time when the whole Parliament belonged to one group. So I would have imagined that every Member of Parliament would have the responsibility of the area in which they are, to find out or to search for solutions for the problems in their area, and then of course work with Government to find everlasting solutions. However, when we throw problems across one another and use that kind of attitude, certainly it will take forever to solve the problems that would have been solved if we were willing to work together to look for those solutions.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to inform the Member holding the Floor that on the issue of the Maruzi ranch, we have always coordinated with Government. That is why hon. Odit even made reference to the meeting or the report we gave to the Minister of State for Defence. We have always gone to the ministry to report and to seek lasting solutions. 

When the issue has emerged in the Eighth Parliament now, we have given all the chronological approach on what is happening. We have met the Minister for Lands; we have even sent all these issues to the relevant ministry. I think what you need to address for us - maybe you are closer to Government –(Laughter)- is how long it does take for Government to act and harmonize positions. 

I have already told you this thing began in the Seventh Parliament. We have coordinated with Government, just like we have always coordinated with Government on issues to do with peace and security in the North. So, it would be good to know from Government how long it would take for us to co-operate and coordinate for the issue to be solved.

MR KIBIRIGE: Madam Speaker, I really want to know; are we talking about Maruzi County or are we talking about Maruzi, the government ranch? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, during the last debate, this matter of people of wetlands came up. Members are talking about people in different parts of the country with guns and cattle under unexplained circumstances. This is what they want the government to assist them with.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, I would like to give information to Mrs Museveni on this matter of haphazard movement of people and whether this matter has been put before Government before. I want to cite the example of Teso wetlands. I think on their way to Teso, these unknown people came through Lango. They came to settle on the wetlands and we sounded an alarm as Members of Parliament expecting a response from Government. 

Government did respond: a huge delegation of ministers led by the then National Political Commissar, Dr Kiyonga, came to Teso. Nearly a quarter of Cabinet came down to Teso. As local politicians, we accompanied them and made on-spot visits to the wetlands that we were talking about. 

Indeed, Government did understand what we kept talking about in this House. We returned to Kampala, nothing was done. The debate continued and nothing was done. It is only up to recently, during a meeting that was convened by the Rt hon. Prime Minister who is in the House here now, Prof. Nsibambi Apolo, that the matter was raised again. That time the then Minister of Lands was challenged to tell the meeting why no action had been taken.  

Hon. Baguma Isoke, who was the Minister, stood up and said an eviction warrant had actually been issued by Government. The Inspector General of Police was in attendance and again our good Rt hon. Prime Minister challenged Maj. Gen. Kaihura as to why he had not effected the warrant of eviction. He promised to do something, but nothing has been done.  

I do not know whether we should continue this way. As leaders, what do you expect us to do, Madam Speaker? I think the tolerance or the patience of our local communities has been overstretched. If we stand in their way, we stand the risk of losing politically, being called lairs and people who are not serious about the problems that affect our people. This is not what we are. Madam Speaker, thank you.

MRS MUSEVENI: I just want to conclude. I still think that there are many problems that we discuss in this House that include Police not fulfilling or playing their role in certain measures and people do not give up on that. Unless you are trying to say that people who are roaming around with animals are being sent by specific people in Government. As somebody said, “You should tell us since you are nearer the government.” Why am I nearer to Government? You are in the legislature and the legislature is part of Government! You just have as much power to speak in this House as I do, I believe. So, why are you claiming I am nearer to Government than you are?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Museveni Janet is a Member of Parliament for Ruhama. She is not Government; talk to her as an MP.

MR GUDOI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to give information to the Minister in charge of Wildlife.  I have heard them saying they will soon open the boundary at Mt Elgon zone and Namatala Forest Reserve. The issue of Mt Elgon National Park and Namatala Forest Reserve is very crucial. You should take drastic steps and settle the boundaries immediately because as I talk now, people near Mt Elgon Park and those near Namatala Forest Reserve are being harassed. They are being caned and their crops are even being slashed down. 

When you say you took time because there were elections, I get worried. The people within wildlife have always surveyed that forest. There are three to four surveys, which have been done. When the President came to campaign in Mbale, he said he would entrust people like you to go there physically and get the real boundary. But when you depend on these managers in wildlife – (Interjection)- I cannot because I am not a forester. You know better, so I will not get the correct information.  

My request is that, within a week or so you go there, let the elders who are near that Mt Elgon National Park and the Namatala Forest Reserve have a meeting, open up when they are there so that we curb this ongoing rumour that Government is not helping people. The foresters say the people around are not helping them but as politicians we shall help either side. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, I have just been a Minister for Tourism, Trade and Industry for one week. But I have also told him that there are three claimed boundaries. The only people who can give us the boundary are the surveyors. I said we are going there soon.  

MR BUSIMA: I would like to say something on Mt Elgon for the benefit of the Members and the minister. Sometime in May, all the stakeholders in this Mt Elgon issue had a meeting in Mbale; it was chaired by the Minister of State in charge of Tourism. During that meeting, there was no dispute about the border of Mt Elgon National Park. We all agreed that the border was the one we agreed on in 1993.  

Now there are two problems on Mt Elgon: The first one is that, at the time that border was passed there were a number of people who were on the other side of the park. There were families that were living there. Up to this time those people have not been –(Interruption)

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, is it procedurally right for somebody to debate this issue? We are going into the budget. This Member will have an opportunity to come to my committee and give me that information. I have already answered the question as it was asked. Now it is a debate. I was not aware that there was going to be a general debate on UWA because I would have come prepared for the information. I can say the information he is giving is wrong. Now does he want me to say it is wrong or right here in the House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Busima, we have allowed some clarification according to the answer she gave. Now, when you make submissions, which cannot be settled on the Floor, it is a problem. He was talking about three borders and you are talking about the real border. I do not know any of them.  You go to the committee and discuss how many they are and where they pass and so on.  

MR BALYEJJUSA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to seek clarification from the Minister of Tourism, Trade and Industry. There is an issue concerning trade, which falls under that ministry. In Uganda today, when foreign investors come, they are given some subsidies and tax holidays. This is a very good Government policy, which encourages foreign investors to come; but when it comes to the local investors, they are not given such facilities. I would like to know from the honourable Minister responsible for Trade why Ugandans are not given the same privileges as an incentive as given to the foreign investors? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, I appreciate that all of you are new. But that is not my mandate; that is an issue for the Minister of Investment. But I have recorded it for him and at an appropriate time he will have to respond.

4.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE (URBAN DEVELOPMENT) (Mr Urban Tibamanya): I thank you, Madam Speaker. This being my first time to speak in Parliament, I wish to congratulate you and hon. Ssekandi upon your re-elections. 

There were a few issues raised with regard to the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development.  The first one was raised by hon. Mabikke and it has to do with the mandate of Urban Development. Much as we shall be here very soon with the ministerial statement, for the moment we can say that Urban Development is responsible for initiating and developing appropriate legislation and guidelines for organized and planned urban development. It is responsible for approving, regulating and controlling the purpose, the way and standards of public and private sector land use. Together with local Government, we also enforce urban development decisions. We carry out education and information programmes to create public awareness for organised land development.  

As for the planned output for the financial year 2006/07, we shall develop an urban policy and an urban databank. We shall make urban inspections and we shall raise awareness on urban development among the stakeholders.

Secondly, there was a question to the effect that Parliament is on leasehold and that the leasehold is about to expire. That is not true. Parliament is on freehold land. The freehold is known as FRV 208 Folio 25. It is on Plot 13 to 15, 17 to 19, Apollo Kaggwa Road, as it was then known. It is a total of 5.29 acres. The land is in the names of Uganda Land Commission and indicated on the title deed as belonging to the Legislative Council, as it was known then.

The third issue was that, there is sale of land taking place around Kampala, for instance, Shimoni land and others. Madam Speaker, the answer from the ministry is that that land is being allocated to investors so as to boost the economy and create more employment opportunities. Respective ministries who house departments on those pieces of land are more familiar with the details of acquisition. Yesterday one such minister did explain, I think it was about Nsambya Police Barracks. The rest can be answered by the respective ministries.  

The last issue, Madam Speaker, was that the Resident District Commissioners (RDCs) are messing with land matters, what does the minister have to say. The minister says that he is not responsible for RDCs. There is a ministry responsible for RDCs.  But he is aware that land dispute resolutions are strictly governed by law as enshrined in the Constitution, the Land Act and other land statutes, and courts of law. No incidents of land messing have been reported to the land office. If these cases are reported, it is our assurance that they will be handled quickly and expeditiously. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR BARTILLE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker –(Interruption)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I ask those in the lobby to either come back or keep quiet wherever they are? They are making noise and disturbing the House.  

MR BARTILLE: Madam Speaker, having heard the minister explain to this House about the role of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Development, we are beginning to wonder. When we move around the capital city here, the whole city is becoming a slum. When you move out to the new urban centres, there is no plan at all. One would wonder what will become of this country. Even on the access roads in these small cities, go to a city like Kira Town Council, everybody is just doing whatever he is doing.  

Can the minister explain what the ministry is planning to do, so that we can have properly planned infrastructure within the cities and the urban centres. Thank you.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  Government has been gazetting a number of towns to become town councils. According to the Local Government Act, for every new district that is created, the new district headquarters automatically become a town council and Government votes some substantial amounts of money to enhance the operationalisation of the town. 

I want to find out from the minister in charge of urban planning whether these town councils are also going to be formally planned so that their development can be systematically planned. Given the available resources and facilities like electricity, water and also road network, you can plan for future infrastructure like stadia and the kind. Is Government making a deliberate effort to ensure that these town councils are formally planned?  

MS OBURU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to just add something to what hon. Bartille talked about regarding urban planning. We have got a lot of slum dwellers in this city. I wonder whether the ministry is making any effort to have these slum dwellers get appropriate dwelling houses. Thank you.

MRS SSENTONGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I seek clarification from the minister in regard to the city planning or urban planning. As we talk now, we have a lot of sewerage blockages going on around the city. It is almost spreading all over and people step all over such infections. Do you have any plan that can probably get a remedy to this kind of thing? Thank you.

MR TIBAMANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  There is international and national concern regarding urbanization. Government is aware that there is rapid urbanization and there is no way we can stop it. People are rushing to towns, that is why Government is compiling a comprehensive policy to guide the arrival of future huge populations. My assurance to you is that, a policy is in the offing. Sooner or later, we shall come up with a policy on urbanization.  

A Member said that town councils are also coming up. It comes to the same thing. The policy we shall come up with will also include these town councils. With due respect to an honourable member, sewage and its breaking down is the responsibility of the Minister of Water and Environment under whose ministry the Department of National Water and Sewerage Corporation falls. Thank you, Madam Speaker.  

4.20
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Maj. Gen.) (Rtd.) Kahinda Otafiire): Madam Speaker, there was a question asked here by hon. Sam Njuba. He says there are allegations that districts are discriminating against workers who are FDC. Now, I am really sympathetic to hon. Sam Njuba. He knows POA prohibits public officers from declaring their allegiance. Any officer who declares themselves FDC, NRM, CP, I do not know what, is supposed to be discontinued. Now what does hon. Sam Njuba expect me to do? No public officer is supposed to declare themselves partisan. “Sasa anataka nifanya nini?” (Laughter) Hon. Sam Njuba is making my life difficult. He is telling me that there are Government workers who have declared their allegiance and they are FDC. Does he want me to dismiss his sympathizers?  

Madam Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to warn all public servants who are serving in the Ministry of Local Government. This should be the last time –(Interjection)- I am talking for the Ministry of Local Government only; I do not know whether the others are as tolerant as I am, because I am a good man. However, if there are officers who are being mistreated because they are both suspect –(Interjections)- now that is a different issue. If I am wrongly mistaken for being a sympathizer of a political group, you may look at my face and say, “This man belongs to FDC or NRM”, I can guarantee that there is a procedure through which they can raise their complaints, which will be addressed and those officers will be protected.

There is another question raised by honourable Sekiziyivu, which says: “Three secretaries are too few for a large district like Mukono.” Now these are very broad question –(Interruption)

PROF. APOLO NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like also to draw your attention to Article 173 of our Constitution. It says: “Protection of public officers.
A public officer shall not be-
    (a) victimised or discriminated against for having performed his or her duties faithfully in accordance with this Constitution; or 
    (b) dismissed or removed from office or reduced in rank or otherwise punished without just cause.” 
So, Article 173 of our Constitution protects public servants. I would like to give an example. When I was the Minister of Public Service, one Permanent Secretary was suspended but when he appealed to me, I wrote to His Excellency, the President and said that this Permanent Secretary was innocent. He was protected by Article 173 and he is still secure and still carrying out his functions. 

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: Thank you, honourable Prime Minister, for that information. There is a question by hon. Sekiziyivu, which says three executive secretaries are too few for Mukono District. This also causes a bit of problem because you say we are spending too much money on public administration. When we reduce the secretaries, you say they are too few and when we increase them you say we are spending too much, now what do we do?  

Our experience in this case is that, three secretaries including the chairman and his vice who have also been given portfolios now should be enough. If it is found later that they are not enough and there is need to increase the number of secretaries, we shall come back to this House to amend the law and increase them. But for the moment we are convinced that they are enough because we do not hear of complaints from the district administrations about inadequacy of three –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, she based her request on the geographical features of Mukono District of which she says that a good part is in the islands and that makes it difficult for them to be coordinated. That was the background.

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: You see, formerly slightly more secretaries served Mukono District, but we have not imposed a district on anybody. You know people keep demanding for districts and the more they become the bigger the cost of administration. So, we have to cut our coat according to the size of the cloth we have: if you give me more money, I will increase the number of secretaries. If I do it then Butaleja and Kitgum will demand and why should I say yes for Butaleja and Masaka and not for Kabale and Ntungamo? So, let us work with the ones we have because once you assign responsibility to the chairperson and his vice that comes to about five, which is adequate. 

Status of the demand for Tororo district: Yes, Tororo district was coming on board like any other district. But, you see, managing people is not like managing cars; you do not take them to garages and repair them overnight and tomorrow you start driving. We are still doing consultations and the hon. Ekanya knows, we are trying to create Tororo district, but with as less pain as possible to those who have other views. There are so many views contending and we are trying to narrow them to reach consensus and then finally grant the district and have harmony. When the time comes it will be done because these are not mechanical issues. I can guarantee you that Tororo district will be created to the satisfaction of those who demanded for it. The same thing goes for Kagadi –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the minister finish then you can –(Interruption)

DR OTAALA: Madam Speaker, I am just seeking for more clarification from the honourable minister –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Otaala, you are a Minister of State for Public Health in the Cabinet of Uganda, please, do not embarrass the Cabinet here. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, order, please.

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: Madam Speaker, the same thing goes for Kagadi district; there is demand for the creation of Kagadi district. I would like to assure the people of Kagadi and the people of Kibaale that this matter is under consideration. We are still doing consultations and when the time is due, we shall come to this Parliament and seek approval and if granted, Kagadi district will be created. My job is only to propose the question; and to grant or not to grant belongs to this honourable august House. 

When will elections for LCV and women MPs for the new districts take place? This is like asking a herdsman where the stick for mixing millet is. Elections are a responsibility of the Electoral Commission and not mine. However, since it is provided for in Section 187(1) of the Local Government’s Act, I will liase with the Electoral Commission to make sure that these elections are carried out in accordance with the law.  

As for the women MPs for the new districts, the current district women MPs will continue with the district of their choice. They will either go to the new ones or they serve the old ones. They are supposed to write to the Electoral Commission to indicate their choice. I am told by the law that elections are supposed be conducted within 60 days in order to create the bodies that run the new districts.  

Question six was that, only rejected civil servants are being sent to the new districts by the mother districts. How do I know this? I do not think this is proper because under Article 185 of the Local Government Act, only staff that were deployed aside responsibility in the new districts before the coming into effect of the new districts are deemed to have been appointed under that Act. I do not know how the honourable gentlemen assess the rejected civil servants. Even then, that matter can only be addressed by the district service commissions and in case of CAOs, by the Public Service Commission. It is not the Ministry of Local Government that recruits and employs civil servants.

Number seven; there was a question that assets are not being equally distributed. Government passed a criterion for the sharing of assets and then I in particular have issued guidelines to this effect. If there is any disagreement between two districts over the sharing of assets, they can address the matter to the ministry and we shall attend to it. For your convenience, if you are interested in the copies of our guidelines about sharing assets, we shall be pleased to avail them to you for ease of reference. 

Exploration of petroleum: How will the local governments benefit? Article 244(2) and (3) of the Constitution envisage a law to spell out the interests of individual landowners, local governments and the government. So, when that law is put in place, your question will be answered. Madam Speaker and honourable members, I thank you for your attention.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, a few clarifications.

MS KABONESA: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Otafiire for his very good response. He said that consultations are still going on in connection with Kibaale and Kagadi district in particular. I hope and it is my prayer that the Members of Parliament from Kibaale district are also consulted. Because I, as a Woman Member of Parliament for Kibaale District, have not been consulted and I hope the consultations won’t end without the Members being consulted. Thank you.

MS BETI KAMYA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. The Minister for Local Government was quoted one time - his quotations are usually very famous and we do not forget them - saying that people who do not support – he actually gave three options for Ugandans: you either support the Movement or you hang or migrate. Those were the three things that were quoted in the papers. At that time, he had been appointed Minister for Local Government and I assume that he was talking as Minister for Local Government. Now, when you told people to either join the Movement or hang or migrate, it sent shivers among the people of the Ministry of Local Government.

Madam Speaker, I really do not want us to trivialise this matter. I am referring to the matter that was raised by hon. Sam Njuba. Previous to that, the vice-chairperson of the NRM party had said that people who do not support the Movement will not get jobs. And before that, RDCs were quoted as saying that people who do not support NRM will not get jobs. Now, which jobs does Government give? 

Government only gives public jobs. So, if you sit here and tell us that there is no risk, when people are intimidated, people are threatened - I can even tell you that one Francis Mallinga, who was employed by Civil Aviation in Entebbe, first lost his job in 2001. He remained unemployed for four years, a job was publicised in the papers for which he applied and through a competitive process got the job. But Civil Aviation Authority did not give him –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kamya that part about employment should come as a question. Because now I do not know how hon. Otafiire can answer about civil aviation, the Minister of Works is not here. Maybe you can raise that as a question formally, but ask him about what he said. He cannot answer about civil aviation.

MS KAMYA: Madam Speaker, I was raising the question of people who do not support NRM because he referred to hon. Njuba’s question and said it does not arise. And I am quoting the honourable Minister for Local Government who is quoted to have said, “You either belong to NRM or you migrate or you go and hang.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No that one you can ask him. But the one of the other man of 2001, really I do not know whether anybody has answers today.

MS KAMYA: Thank you, honourable Speaker. I will leave it at that, but I would like assurance from Government especially for people who are working in the Ministry of Local Government that they are safe on their jobs and that there will be punitive measures against people who trample on peoples rights. Thank you.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, mine actually now serves more as a supplementary to what hon. Beti Kamya has said. The honourable Minister of Local Government is also the minister for local governments some of which actually are dominantly not NRM. If you look at the local Government for instance in Soroti, the whole council besides maybe two or three people is FDC. If you go to either Kaberamaido or Gulu, most of that part of the country is not NRM. When the honourable minister says they should hang, what is his proposal for the local governments where all the councils are going to commit suicide, who will remain? (Laughter) 

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank hon. Otafiire and the government for proposing to create the new districts of, for example Bukedea. The proposal to create Bukedea, which we are going to endorse, has shown that this Government is not partisan in some of its actions -(Applause)- and it has given hope to the people of Tororo that their issues will be sorted out. (Laughter)

And I want to leave that at that because, Madam Speaker, some people in Tororo were wondering whether they should all cross to the Movement before they get a district or they should become FDC before getting it. I want to be very clear that now the people of Uganda know that some of the actions of this Government are not partisan. And I want to urge Government to continue with that spirit.

I want Gen. Otafiire to put it here on record that, the Ministry of Finance will respect the role given by Minister of Local Government in collection of local revenue. We are facing embarrassment in Malaba because the Ministry of Finance through URA has denied Malaba town council its right to collect parking fees and that is embarrassing Uganda in the transport corridor of Eastern and Southern Africa. Can we have it on record here that the Ministry of Finance will not embarrass and overtake the role of the Ministry of Local Government? Thank you.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank hon. Otafiire very much for saying that he is considering and consulting to create Kagadi district. I had raised earlier on this issue, I went last weekend to consult and I had a very charged meeting of around 500 people in my constituency, and their concern is about the time frame. They want to know when? Is it after two years, is it after one month, how long are these consultations going to take? 

Because when the President said he was giving the district, he did not say he was going to consult. He said, “I have given you a district” and we also gave him the votes. And that is what they are demanding. So, honourable minister, we beg that you clarify to us through the Deputy Speaker when this consultation is going to end. Thank you very much.

MR OKECHO: Madam Speaker, I have heard what the honourable Minister of Local Government has said, regarding the question we put here. But I specifically asked a question as to whether the final report of the Local Government Committee, which went to Tororo to investigate the issue of creating Tororo district, was going to be discussed here and when? I have not had that answer. It appears that is the stumbling block now in the creation of that district. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, when we handled that report here, the work of the Seventh Parliament ended. The rest was for the Cabinet and I think that is what is being addressed.

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am glad about the question asked by hon. Sekitoleko and I would like to assure the Members of Kibaale that we are going to consult them because they are stakeholders. We are going slowly, but steadily we shall get to them. We shall seek their cooperation and understanding and we hope the matter will be amicably concluded. We shall bring it here for the House to grant Kagadi district.

As for my friend, hon. Beti Kamya, you know, the other day I was asking a question about our journalists. I asked them one question and I said: “Did God create you on Friday when he was learning to do these things or on Sunday when he had run short of spares?” They have never answered this question, because I have never said, “Anybody who does not support NRM should hang.” No, I have never said it.  

If you want evidence you go and listen to my address to the LC V chairpersons when they were in Jinja for their retreat. I entreated them to stop politicking and concentrate on development. I said politics was for getting where you are and now that you are there, our problems are common, we have a common destiny, we need each other in order to get this country from where it is to where we want it to be. (Applause)

Now, the same person who speaks this kind of language cannot be the same person who tells my friend hon. Beti Kamya to go and hang because you do not support me.  I hope you will not jump in the league because Otafiire said it. (Laughter) Surely, how can I stand up and say, the whole Member representing Lubaga North should hang because she does not support me? I was misquoted and you know the press when I say this is a shirt, they say, he said it was a bus. When I donate a cow, they say the man gave a hyena. (Laughter)

Obviously, the question of this gentleman Malinga who was in civil aviation has nothing to do with me. I have never worked for civil aviation, I have no knowledge about civil aviation, I do not intend to go there and I am too old to fly a plane or bring it down. If you ask me, you are looking for disaster. 

In any case, when Malinga left civil aviation or whether he was dismissed or not, there were no political parties. He was not dismissed because he was FDC, or if he was FDC and he declared himself so, then he had to pay for it because the law says thy shall not declare your colours, keep your identity to yourself. That is what I said at the beginning of my statement here in response to a question posed by hon. Sam Njuba.  Not colours, I may look unpleasant but I am not as dangerous as I sound. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I would beg the indulgence of the Member of Parliament from Tororo about Malaba.  Please, do not start reaping from where you did not sow; the Ministry of Finance governs Malaba parking yard and URA, which created it. So, if Malaba town council wants to partake of the proceeds of Malaba, there is a procedure, that is, approach the Ministry of Local Government, which consults the Ministry of Finance and we look for a proper legal modus operandi of sharing that revenue.  

My only problem with my gentlemen is that, they did not even listen to the courts of law. There was a court order telling them to stop interfering with revenue collection; they ignored it and sought for my assistance. I told them the best assistance I could give them, having ignored the court order, was to go and hide furthest from the law enforcement officers; otherwise, they were going to be locked up for six months. 

If you disobey court what happens? You expect Otafiire to protect you and I end up in jail?  Excuse me! I am not going to protect lawbreakers. We shall have to follow the law, the correct Government procedures and hon. Ekanya I can assure you, your people will be given their due share of the collections in Malaba.

Hon Besisira was saying there were –(Laughter)- hon. Tinkasiimire I am sorry and I apologise.  Hon. Tinkasiimire, you are very impatient, you buy meat and give it to your domestic maid and then you go and sit in your sitting room and say you want food ready. You must allow this lady or gentleman to cook the meat and make it ready. You come up with 500 people who are angry, now what do I do, they are angry with who? You say, “There were 500 angry people demanding for a district.”  

Kagadi district is bigger than 500 angry residents.  That is their democratic right to be angry and I sympathise with them if they want their district.  You know, there are people who have been criticising us that we are spending too much money on public administration. When somebody gets a rat and eats it before it is cooked, that is a statement that is loud and clear. It means, short of doing something else, I am going to eat this rat.   

So, hon. Tinkasiimire, you are right to get angry, but please, direct your anger through the proper channels. The Minister of Local Government - and I am a friend of the people of Kagadi and Kibaale. Please rest assured that you will get your district in accordance with the wishes of the President and the demands of your people, but give me time. Let me cook the food properly because if I give you half cooked food, you are going to suffer from constipation or stomachache. (Laughter)

The subsequent question was: “How long are the consultations going to take?” You know, this is a very philosophical question. How long is long?   How long is a short time and how long is forever?  If you can answer those, then, I will tell you how long these consultations will take. I told you at the beginning and I humbly pleaded that you know I am now managing human beings. It is not like when I was in lands and forests and what, when I could say do this and it is done. I am now managing human beings and human beings do not need to be pushed too hard.  

I want proper consultations so that we can have a smooth local Government and peace in the country.  That is my responsibility so that this Parliament is happy with my operations in the field. Would you not be happy if the local governments were happy?  Madam Speaker, everybody would be happy. So, please, give us time; let us do a good job and we shall give you a good report, which will satisfy everybody.

As for the report of the commission of inquiry into the affairs of Tororo, which was handled by the Seventh Parliament, the matter ended here. What remained, Cabinet has resolved and directed me to go and try to establish a district as painlessly as possible. That is why I am engaged in pains making consultations with the wise men and women of Tororo County, the municipality and West Budama. And I promise this Parliament that I am going to bring good results. I thank you for listening, Madam Speaker, ladies and gentlemen. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Ministry of Water. (Interruptions) No, honourable members, I informed you that the Parliament finished with that matter, and we handed it over to the Cabinet. The minister says he is “cooking,” really how much more can we do, please.  And that is for these ones who are in a hurry. The Government has given the impression that when the President says this, it happens tomorrow, but things do not work out like that. I do not know whether your local governments have ever sat to make resolutions, they push them to district council; all these steps are there. So, do not think that when he says yes, it will happen tomorrow. There are things that have to be done.  

4.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER (MS Jenipher Namuyangu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to congratulate you for having been chosen as the people’s choice of Kamuli but also for Parliament to have confidence in you to steer this House as Deputy Speaker. I equally want to congratulate colleagues, the Members of Parliament, ministers, shadow ministers and I pledge my commitment to working with all of you. 

I want to thank colleagues for the concerns that were raised regarding the Ministry of Water and Environment. I have about seven issues to respond to and I will begin with the concern regarding the provisional of water to Kooki, Rakai District. Kooki County is one of the areas that are water-stressed and we have the following interventions: In December 2005, nine valley tanks were commissioned and three of these are in Kooki County. 

But, honourable members, you are aware that Government is sending money in form of conditional grants to the districts for water and sanitation and this year we are sending to Rakai district Shs 962,792,000. I want to appeal to Rakai District administration to ensure that when they are allocating the money for boreholes, shallow wells and spring protection, they give Kooki the priority because it has a lower water coverage. 

My ministry has been able to make a programme regarding rainwater harvesting where they have been able to construct shelters and underground tanks in Kyabulangira area. But equally for water-stressed areas like Kooki, we have come up with a programme, which is code-named Bulky Water Transfer. We are going to pump water from areas of plenty to stressed areas like Kooki, Nakapiripirit, Nakasongola, Kiruhura, Bukanga, Isingiro and Kakuuto. We are going to do fast trucking in those areas but also move to cover most of the areas especially in the cattle corridors. This programme is intended for multipurpose use: for irrigation, livestock and other uses like fish farming.  

The other issue that was raised was about provision of water to Amuria District. Amuria District is going to receive Shs 527,094,000 as conditional grant under the rural water scheme. Amuria town has already been designed under the urban water scheme. We are only looking for Shs 580,000,000 for the Directorate of Water to install piped water in the area.

Another concern was about water production in Kayunga District by my colleague, hon. Nayiga. The Ministry of Water and Environment is embarking on a programme to rehabilitate the dams that were established in the 50s and 60s in the course of this financial year. We are doing a feasibility study and venturing in rehabilitating these dams, because they are strategically positioned but silted; and Kayunga District will be one of the beneficiaries because they have these dams.

There has been inefficiency in the supply of water to Kapchorwa town due to the break down and segmentation of the water system, but my ministry is going to do the following: We are going to improve on the water source at river Atali, construct a water supply treatment works, construct a reservoir at Kyebugati hill to serve Kawuwo community and rehabilitate the town reservoir. 

We are also going to install bulk meter and control valves and replace all the asbestos cement pipes with plastic and G-one pipes. We are going to strengthen the operation and maintenance of the structures and also intensify on the water connections by adding new ones. My people are already on the ground; they have started on this programme. Some of the issues will be covered in the short term and others in the long term but I can assure you that we are going to work on this.

There was an issue raised about the Lake Albert intervention as far as environmental protection is concerned. We have the Nile Basin Initiative programme whereby all the countries that benefit from River Nile have come to work together on trans-boundary projects. On Lake Albert, we have a programme, which is being undertaken by both Uganda and Congo, which mainly includes waste management along the lake basin, environment restoration and agricultural farming.

We also have another issue we are handling with Congo that is about the borders of Lake Albert. We have had landslides and the lake keeps eating into the Uganda border. We are negotiating so that we can settle the issue of the boundaries between Uganda and Congo at the borders.  

Hon. Ssentongo raised the issue of the sewage system in Kampala. It is true, of late, we have had breakdowns of the sewage system in Kampala but I want Members to know that most of this sewage system was developed in the 70s. They are outdated but we have got some funding and we are looking for more to renovate the entire water system in Kampala. Some donors have shown a positive response to support us in this area.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, there was a remark by one of the colleagues about Namatala Forest Reserve boundary. An incident occurred where an LC III chairperson led a delegation of about 100 people to go and confront our forest workers. We condemn this act in the strongest terms because as forest authorities we want to collaborate with the leaders. They came carrying pangas and this trend will not take us anywhere. 

I want to assure members that the forest authorities are doing their best to open the boundary. We shall be consulting you as members of Parliament and all the leaders because we want harmony and we want to encourage tree planting.  I thank you very much.

5.02
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The minister has talked very well about sewerage but I think the problem we have in this country is lack of planning.  

In 1970 the population of Kampala was about 50,000 people. What has Government put in place now that the numbers in Kampala are about a million people? This is a serious matter. It is not a matter of saying that during the ‘70s there should have been a plan. What plan do we have now and what plan do we have for 2020?

Secondly, I always pass via Bukoto and there is a man whom I will not name who has a very big hotel. He gets exemptions every now and then from URA and Ministry of Finance. 

The sewerage in this place has smelt for the last number of years and I am sure the Speaker, the Minister in charge of Justice, the Vice President and Nandala pass there but no action has been taken on such an individual who is polluting the area. That place is called Kabira Club.

On the issue of Namatala, Madam Speaker, it is true we need water. We are treating the symptoms of the water problem but we need to maintain the eco-system and be careful. We who come from the Mountains of the Sun and who have lived on our land for more than ten years as the law says can assure you. You know the law says that anybody who has been on the land for ten years or more has to be compensated if you want them to get off the land. 

The Government is coming to River Namatala, which is our river in Masaba area. However, they want to chase people without giving them an alternative simply because they want that land. This is not forestland anymore. If it was then where was the forest when we slept there?  That is our land and if you want it compensate us. Only then shall we find alternative places. You have compensated those in Kibaale, why not us from Bugishu?  Thank you.

5.05
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable minister in her statement said that in particular the people from Kooki and Rakai have a deliberate policy and apt resources allocated so as to get coverage. 

In my maiden speech, I made reference to most of the districts in Eastern Uganda like Kamuli and several other districts in Busoga including Tororo where I come from. The water coverage there is below average. 

The water statistics that I have been able to peruse say the national average is at 67 percent. However in our districts the water coverage is at 46 to 47 percent. 

I have scrutinized the policy paper that was presented and there is no cite of a deliberate policy to ensure that other districts actually achieve the national levels that are there currently. I would like to request the honourable minister to elaborate on whether the government will come up with a deliberate policy so that we access at least the national average.  Thank you.

5.06
MS FLORENCE HASHAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to catch your eye once again and speak in this august House for the second time. 

Allow me to express my concern on the issue that has been raised by the Minister for Water specifically on the water meant for production and livestock. 

I support the transfer of housing, which was originally –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we are dealing with the Ministry of Water only.

MS HASHAKA: Yes, I am using it as an example. I want it to be moved from Ministry of Water to the agricultural sector. I also support the transfer of the housing department to Ministry of Lands. 

Similarly, the water meant for production and livestock, which is currently in the Minister of Water, be transferred to Ministry of Agriculture so that this sector implements its objectives very well. 

When you look around, Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Agriculture has really declined. Therefore, if we leave the water department to be catered for under the Ministry of Water and Environment it will do better than if this department was transferred to the Ministry of Agriculture. That is my concern, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Unfortunately, this department was only recently brought to the Ministry of Water from Ministry of Agriculture so maybe they will give you the logic behind that.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to seek clarification from the minister as to whether among the dams that were constructed in the 1960s and the 1970s Namadope dam that is serving Iganga, Mayuge and Bugiri is also going to be catered for?  It serves as a last resort whenever drought strikes the district and it is the only resort for all the primary and secondary schools in Iganga district. However, as we speak it is almost phasing out. 

I now seek clarification from the minister as to whether it is one of those that is going to benefit from the scheme?  Thank you very much.

5.10
MR DEUSDEDIT BIKWASIZEHI (NRM, Buhweju County, Bushenyi): I thank you, Madam Speaker. If I have heard correctly the honourable minister has said that they are looking for funds to expand the Kampala water system. 

To the best of my knowledge National Water and sewerage Corporation has been a success story and has been raising revenue. I am wondering whether in its good performance this corporation has been making provision from its revenue for capital investment to expand. This is because continuing to beg for funds might cause us a problem in future. I thank you.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am seeking clarification from the minister. She was mentioning districts that are stressed and talked of Nakapiripirit among others. As far as I am concerned, Mayuge district is the lowest served area. We stand at 23 percent. 

The clarification I am seeking from her is that during last year’s budget, the Minister of Finance allocated Ugshs 20 billion for Central Government intervention. 

I would like to know whether Mayuge has been scrapped off the list of districts that are badly off considering the fact that we are looking at 70 or 65 percent at national level. This is a matter that we have talked about for the last five years and promises have been made. I need to be assured about where Mayuge stands. 

MR OLEGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker for giving me this opportunity. This being my first remark, I would like to congratulate you and the Speaker upon your re-election.  

Madam Speaker, I wish to thank the minister for giving us elaborate responses with regard to the issues raised particularly concerning water. When you look at Yumbe district it stands at 30 percent and this is the worst in this country. 

When he was explaining, he actually focused more attention on animal corridors. I would like to know whether any intervention is forthcoming to support Yumbe district in particular. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.12
MR CHARLES NGABIRANO (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to raise a number of issues. 

The first is about the maintenance aspect of the water sources that we protect. I have seen that over time we just build and forget. When you look at most water sources that we have constructed, majority of them are not functional. 

If I may give one example, in Mbarara district we have a total of over 500 boreholes but to date only about 150 are functional. When you look at the national coverage, it even includes those ones that are not functional.  

The other point is about investment. This money in particular is a conditional grant that goes to districts but I find that in most cases it is diverted to hardware only while the soft aspect has been neglected. I would like to look at a guideline that helps us have a definitive ratio of investment between the software and hardware aspects of rural water supply.

The other point is about rainwater harvesting. In my district of Mbarara we have been told that rainwater harvesting is not a priority. However, we have forcefully tried it and it has worked.  Even when we try it areas that benefit from water harvesting like Rwampara and Isingiro have to contribute to the cost of water by say 50 percent. This is despite the fact that other water provision technology like gravity schemes are given at 100 percent of the cost. Why don’t we also get a subsidy as people who are more stressed? Why are we made to pay?  

The other point is about baric water extraction. From experience and of course with the energy crisis I am concerned about the source of energy for the baric water extraction. I am also concerned about the instability that is whether baric water extraction is going to deal with house water supplies, which must involve a lot of operation and maintenance, which our local people may not manage. 

As we zero down to the water supply in rural areas, household based water systems or point water are more maintained than public systems. Therefore, I want us to look at the policy, that is how we are going to maintain those baric water systems that are for bigger communities when they have been failing in many other aspects. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before I give hon. Oboi an opportunity I want to announce that we have been assured of power tomorrow from 6.00 a.m. to 6.00 p.m. Therefore, we are proposing that we sit tomorrow morning and afternoon so as to finish all the work on the Order Paper.

5.15
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Madam Speaker, thank you. Honourable minister, one of the mandates of your ministry is to provide clean, safe water to the population. 

In your response I heard you say that your ministry is trying to source money in order to replace asbestos pipes. However the use of asbestos for anything is being discouraged globally. In fact it is known that asbestos causes a form of cancer called “asbestosis”.  Asbestos tiles are being removed from roofs. 

I am therefore shocked that the ministry still uses asbestos pipes for transmission of water, which water is used for human beings. Is your ministry really sensitive to the health of the people?  What have you done to stop the use of asbestos pipes? 

Also I would like to ask a question about what your ministry considers as water coverage and this relates to a question that was asked by my brother from Rwampara.

Madam Speaker, boreholes across the country and especially those in areas where the water table is low have been unsuccessful. I have noticed that the mentality in the ministry is to count boreholes and consider that water coverage. 

I think that is not correct. By constructing a water source, you are not necessarily providing water especially if that water source is inadequate and does not provide any water or when that source provides water seasonally. I want to inform you, Madam minister that you have seasonal boreholes –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Amuriat you are making a submission. You asked about asbestos and we have understood.  As regards coverage, hon. Kubeketerya has already said that some of the water sources that are reported are not working.  

MR AMURIAT: In conclusion, what is your ministry doing about Kumi water and the other water supply systems that were promised?

MS NAMUYANGU: Madam Speaker, I want to thank colleagues again for raising these many issues. I will go in the reverse order and begin by responding to the issues that have been raised by hon. Amuriat.  

He pointed out that asbestos pipes are poisonous but if he listened to me he would have heard that I said we are replacing them. That means we are aware that they are not good.

Madam Speaker, he was also concerned about the coverage of water vis-à-vis the counting of boreholes. We have a mechanism of establishing the water coverage and –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have asked many questions; let her answer first. She said she is replacing the asbestos pipes so what do you want? What is it, hon. Ngabirano? She said she is replacing the pipes.

MR NGABIRANO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was giving information that there is nothing called asbestos pipes in the world. Since the world was created we have never had asbestos pipes.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Anyway, there is something she knows is asbestos and that is what she is going to replace.

MS NAMUYANGU: Madam Speaker, I was responding to a concern by the honourable colleague who does not believe in the system that we use to establish water coverage. 

I want to inform him that you have heard even members saying, “My district has a coverage of 23 percent.” What we do is establish the population that is accessing water vis-à-vis the total population. Then we come up with the total percentage that is lacking water.

He also talked of the issue of seasonal boreholes. I entirely agree with him, but there are several reasons for this. 

First of all, when we have contractors doing the work, some of them have been coerced by the communities who insist on being shown the sites. We have a whole department of water resources in Entebbe and this department has all the data about the quantity and quality of water available in the entire country. 

Normally our local people insist on where a site must be even when the water in that site is salty or there is no water at all. I, therefore, want to encourage you honourable colleagues to sensitise the people to leave this work entirely to our engineers so that they can do the right job.

On the issue of broken boreholes, normally after we have drilled boreholes the issue of maintenance is left to the communities. There are some communities, which have not bothered to maintain their boreholes. If we are going to ask the ministry to begin handling maintenance then definitely we shall never cover this country yet we have a commitment to ensure that the rest of the country has access to safe water. 

I want to encourage colleagues to advise members of their communities to make a simple contribution. We normally encourage them to open an account and deposit some money there so that in case there are breakdowns they can easily repair them. Also in every area we encourage the private sector to set up shops with the spares for these boreholes because they are available.  

He also wanted to know the programme for Kumi water. This programme is on course as we already have the money and are going to work on it. 

However, let me add that Kumi would have already got water by now but I am told that at one time the ministry was moving in to provide water but the programme was sabotaged by people in the community who were getting water from that area and selling it. 

Therefore, I want to call upon my colleagues, the members of Parliament from Kumi to mobilise the people to support this particular project.  

Madam Speaker, there were issues raised by hon. Ngabirano.  He says we normally build water systems and abandon them.  I believe I answered this when I was saying communities have the obligation to continue maintaining the boreholes.  

He also said that the funds that we send to the district normally cater for the hardware and the software is not considered. This is noted. 

He also talked about rainwater. If you went ahead to start the programme on rainwater harvesting and it succeeded then we encourage you to continue doing that because we encourage those who can afford to do it. For those who cannot, we are moving in to build underground water tanks.  

We are also coming up with valley tanks and in fact just last week we were commissioning valley tanks in Nakasongola. We also have communal dams. For those who can afford, please go ahead and install your own rainwater harvesting equipment. You have seen water tanks at schools and so forth.  

He was also wondering if we can manage to maintain the bulky water transfer system, which we were talking about.  I want to assure the honourable member that we shall manage because we have been maintaining the water system through National Water and Sewerage Corporation, which is covering big towns. That is why I talked of a feasibility study because all these issues have to be considered when we are coming up with any programme.  

There was a concern raised by hon. Ashraf Olega of Yumbe district. I want to assure hon. Olega that we have already finished the designs for Yumbe town and have the money to install piped water there so the water coverage will be higher than 30 percent.  

Hon. James Kubeketerya of Mayuge district is wondering if Mayuge has been scrapped off the list. Mayuge is on the list but it is in a different programme because unlike these other areas that I was referring to like Bukanga, Kiruhura and Nakapiripirit which are far away from a water body, Mayuge is near a water source so we are going to cover Mayuge district under a different programme.

Hon. Deusdedit Bikwasizehi of Buhweju said National Water and Sewerage Corporation has done so well, they are expanding water- If he listened to me carefully, I was talking about the sewage system. 

As for the water system, as I speak Gaba 3 is almost through; I suspect we shall be commissioning it by December. The only problem we have now is regarding the sewage system part, which covers only eight percent.  

Hon. Mulumba was wondering if Namadope dam in Iganga is included in the programme. Yes, I said all the ancient dams are going to be covered countrywide. He was also telling me that all the schools and people in the area drink water from here. I agree and want to add that in Iganga we are constructing the water system so very soon you will have water in the entire town.  

Hon. Florence Hashaka of Kamwenge was saying the water for production should be transferred. I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, that you gave her the right information. This particular function of water for production has just been transferred to our ministry. 

I also want to inform colleagues that when we talk of water for production it is not only water for livestock and irrigation but also includes water for rural industries that is commercial water. So, it is not just that particular sector. 

In essence if you insist that that particular section be moved to Agriculture then you are saying that water for health should go to the health sector, water for education to the education sector, water for domestic use to local Government and so forth. The ministry will eventually remain with nothing. (Laughter) 

Definitely when we are providing water for production we involve all the stakeholders. We have people from Agriculture who are part of us and we handle this programme jointly. When we were commissioning those dams in Nakasongola the Ministry of Agriculture was well represented.

Hon. Tanna said Eastern districts have a lower coverage and was wondering if we are going to intervene. Definitely we are. You are aware that even before this we had programmes like RUWASA. Now the ministry is coming up with other programmes to ensure that there is adequate water not only in the East but everywhere where there is low water coverage. We are trying to look at these areas and come up with interventions to make sure that we are all at par as far as water distribution is concerned.

Hon. Nandala was talking about River Namatala and saying that the land is theirs. We shall sort this out because as far as I know we have a forest reserve there and as I told you we believe in dialogue. We shall interact with you and the people who are affected and come up with the truth. 

Concerning Kabira Country Club and their sewerage system being in a terrible condition, I will check on this. 

Lastly, he was asking why Government does not plan for Kampala. Definitely we have strategic work plans and I want to tell you that what was installed in the ‘70s is not what we have now, we have expanded. That is why I am talking of expanding even further beyond Kampala to Entebbe. We are on course and all we need is your support. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS (Dr James Nsaba Buturo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. May I take this opportunity to appreciate the honourable members who raised questions on the state of corruption in our beloved country. 

I would like to recommend very strongly the paper that has been distributed by the honourable member for Ruhama. In that paper she makes an excellent point, which I would like to share with members –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you are breaching Rule 60. The matter may be on that paper but we cannot discuss it now.

DR NSABA BUTURO: I am obliged, Madam Speaker. Can I remind honourable members that the subject of corruption is one that has not been given particular thought?  In many cases it is looked at in a very narrow sense such as abuse of public funds for personal gain. I am saying this as a preamble to what I want to say in response to what honourable members raised last week. 

Corruption is much wider than abuse of public funds for person gain and today we are seeing a new phenomenon in our land where homosexuality for example is being given the kind of respect that we would normally find repugnant. I am suggesting that when we are talking about corruption we consider that very important subject in its wider sense and I hope I will have another occasion to say something more about this.  

The charge is that this Government has no political will to fight corruption and those who make this charge give several points in support of that allegation. 

One is that the anti-corruption agencies are weak and unable to deal with corruption. 

The second point they raise is that Government has relatively few cases of serious convictions and punishments. 

Thirdly they point to the weakness of the current legislation as evidence that this Government has no a political will to fight corruption.

Last but not least, they are consistently pointing out that the number of commissions of inquiries that Government has put in place over the years have not yielded results. 

I want say, first of all, that there is a general mistake that I appeal to honourable members to correct. One is that it is Government, which is responsible for the state of corruption in our land. I want to quickly remind honourable members that this corruption we keep talking about is a multifaceted social vice which has immerse ramifications on our way of life –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I have sat here for over ten minutes now I am not getting what the Minister of Ethics is trying to say. I want to seek a clarification from him as to what he is aiming at.

DR NSABA BUTURO: Well, Madam Speaker the honourable member has not been attending all the sessions and that is why he is trying to take us back. 

Let me remind honourable members that the charge against this Government is that it has no political will to fight corruption. I want to say that the will is there and if you bear with me I will explain how. 

I also want to remind honourable members that actually instead of pointing fingers at Government constantly I suggest that you look at yourself first because corruption is a subject that many of us have contributed towards. It is better you start with yourself before you look elsewhere. The fact of the matter is that external interest under the guise of development aid and grants continue to fuel this phenomenon that is disturbing the conscience of our land.  

Back to the charge, this Government is completely determined to transform Uganda into a first world country, which is shaped by God centred morale values. I recognize that many of us may not be aware that there is a battle going on for the soul of this great land. I implore honourable members to wake up and know that we must fight together to defeat this situation in our land that many of us are unaware of.

Madam Speaker, if I may come to the practical solutions or actions, which this Government is taking, I want to remind honourable members about the leadership code and go further to say that recently the Constitutional Court did identify a few gaps in the leadership code, which this Government has attended to. 

Very shortly, I will be tabling before Cabinet proposals, which are intended to address those gaps that the Constitutional Court has identified and Parliament will have the opportunity to consider these for enactment into law very soon. 

Secondly, Cabinet has passed the Prevention of Corruption Bill, and this is a very important initiative. This Bill will provide a wide the scope of corruption as well as stronger sanctions for new offences such as conflict of interest. And for the first time, it will also provide for the confiscation of proceeds of corruption. 

I do think that this is a major break through and so far at least until now those who have stolen have got away with it but when Parliament cooperates and gives us an appropriate law along these lines, proceeds of corruption will be confiscated by Government.

The other legislative initiative is the Whistle Blowers Protection Bill, which is intended to ensure that persons who report over culprits of corruption to the anti-corruption agencies are protected from reprisal. 

This is also important in our view, for many of our people are not bold enough to come up and say look, this is what is happening. But if we provide protection, and culvert means of reporting, we do feel that many will come out to give us that vital information we need. 

Following that together with another Bill, which I will soon be tabling before Cabinet, - this one allows a private citizen to sue on behalf of Government and will receive a share of any financial penalties. In essence, it is a reward system for whistle blowers. These are a series of initiatives, which do clearly confirm that this Government is determined to raise the level of attack against this pandemic that has brought disgrace to this great land and rather affected the way of life for many of our people. 

I also want to say that my office will soon promote an environment of integrity by establishing an integrity system that is made of inter-related principles and structures, which will create change in perception and values in the public.

I, therefore, want to say that this Government is determined to raise the temperature against those who have caused so much mayhem on our lives and economy and we have identified a number of measures that we should be taking shortly. 

We are reviewing the existing legislation, we are introducing new legislations and we are strengthening inter-agency institutions, which are there to try and minimize the level of corruption. 

Very shortly my office will be reporting on all the commissions of inquiry this country has had and demonstrating that action has been taken on a number of them. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it seems that we are expecting a First Readings of all those Bills he has mentioned. So, maybe we hold it until he brings the Bills because I do not know the contents of those Bills -(Interjection)- no, he has talked about his plans in the future; they are all in the future.

MR MBALIBULHA: Actually I want the minister to make a commitment as to when he is bringing these legislations to Parliament so that we arm this Parliament, and Government to fight these mafias. When are you bringing these legislations?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister; he is very determined to fight corruption. But, we have very clear evidence that Ugshs 15 billions was stolen through a pay role system and you have identified the people. 

I have not seen you come here to tell us – even the Minister of Finance mentioned in the budget that we have got the Ugshs 15 billion they were stealing, but you have not come up to tell who the guys are and you crucify them!

Secondly, the IGG reports; we have got so many reports from the IGG, but you have not come up to tell us what you have done with these reports!

MR ODUMAN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister has assured us that Government is committed to fighting corruption in this country, and we know that the government of Uganda and this House rely on the work of the Auditor General in order to get independent reports. The office of the Auditor General has complained for several years about the need for their office to attain independence - semi-autonomy from the ministry. 

So, I wish to know from the honourable minister what Government is doing alongside that commitment to fight corruption, to grant the office of the Auditor-General the required autonomy to enable them discharge their functions of oversight. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know whether he is the right minister, but –(Interruption)

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since it is my first time to speak in the Eighth Parliament, I also congratulate you and the Speaker for having been elected again to those high offices. 

When the Minister of Ethics read his answers to the questions that were raised, he seemed as if corruption is the only issue, which the minister has the mandate to deal with. 

I have a problem, concerning pornography in this country. I have been privileged to travel to about seven countries within one month. And I have been trying to see whether I can get newspapers publishing pornographic pictures like the ones we have on the streets of Kampala and I have not seen any. I want to find out from the minister whether there is any move by Government to stop this kind of pornography on the streets of Kampala.

Lately, there is this newspaper called Mamba, Mamba can publish any pornographic picture and nobody says anything. I seek clarification from the minister whether there is a programme to stop these kinds of publications. Thank you.

MR WASIKE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Article 235(a) of the Constitution talks of the establishment of the Leadership Code Tribunal. I have not heard from the minister’s submission anything to do with the establishment of that tribunal. And in a way, the absence of that tribunal makes the work of the IGG very hard because he tries to do both the investigation, and reporting the prosecutions of the court tribunals.  

So, could the minister include in the Bills that he is bringing to Parliament, the establishment of the Leadership Code Tribunal?  Thank you.

MR TOSKIN BARTILLE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want the minister to clarify two issues related to these pornographic publications and the problem of the sex workers. Has the ministry got any clear policy on this, because we have heard contradictory statements from ministers and from some leaders of Government? We want something clear so that we can be able to control the society. 

The other one is about the consumption of alcohol. Honourable members, I think all of you will agree with me that the country is facing a big danger of idleness. Our people are drinking from morning up to afternoon and this is really affecting the production in this country. Can’t we come out with a clear policy on this issue so that we maybe able to make people produce for the improvement of our economy?  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank the minister for the presentation. My area also supplements what the honourable from Mawokota said. We have the minister emphasizing the area of corruption. But so often, I have heard leaders in high offices using very unattractive language. I want to know whether the ministry has an arrangement to work on this type of element that is forming a very bigger ingredient in the speeches of our leaders? 

Secondly, the appropriation of neighbourhoods, we have had a confusion in the neighbourhoods by unruly people overtaking residential areas, shouting and making all sorts of noise every time, save those who go specifically for prayers. 

Here I refer to people who sit on verandas and have very uncouth language from morning to evening; if a lady passed by, they would make very terrible comments, comments you would not wish to be present when they are uttered. But unfortunately, you may be the one present at that time. We want to know whether the ministry has any arrangement to have a system that is going to weed out this type of behaviour? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS NAKAWUKI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am really glad that, the issue of corruption is being addressed.  But my worry is whether it is really going to work out. Because it is always alleged that actually the Police is very corrupt - it is alleged, but not yet proved. 

However, I believe the conditions these people are in force them to be corrupt. I would urge the minister, that they first address the issues of Police and other sects in order to address the issue of corruption. I happened to visit the barracks in Naguru and the way those people sleep is so bad.  

Those people sleep in uniports, which now have holes; even water can enter. They just put sand bags around and I believe even the way those people are remunerated is not the best.  So, we need to look into such issues if we are to bombard, I would call it the sin of corruption.  Thank you very much.

MR KIYINGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two questions and they are very specific. Mr Minister, there was a report written by the IGG about the affairs of National Medical Stores, with recommendations. I am not sure whether you are aware about that report, but I would want to find out from you, whether actually Government intends to do anything about that report?  

Secondly, there appears to be no policy on the use of public vehicles. I pass a number of joints or bars in the evenings and find Government vehicles parked. In the past, if I am not mistaken, during Amin’s days, Government vehicles were parked by 5.00 a.m.  But now, you find Government vehicles on all private functions, even in bars. I want to find out whether there is an intention by your ministry to work out a policy on that matter?

5.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS (Dr Nsaba Buturo): Madam Speaker, I want to thank all those honourable members who have raised various issues and let me start with the one concerning public vehicles. 

Cabinet has been discussing this matter and very soon something will come out that honourable members will be informed about.  The concern, which the honourable member has raised, is very well appreciated and I suggest that, the honourable members do wait a little bit longer and we will inform them on what Government intends to do about this.

On the matter of medical stores, I am not yet familiar with the subject. I can promise a report on this next time if you allow me.  And the resolve I am talking about is that we intend to leave no stone unturned. 

But in doing so, I will remind honourable members that it is not Government in this thing alone, we are in this thing together and there is a suggestion that they and not us should change, because this corruption is affecting all of us and it is better we work together.  

But Government will not shun its responsibility to lead and that is why I am informing honourable members about all these initiatives. From the reviews, which were taking place to strengthening and empower the general public, I must say we are partly to blame for the state of this pandemic in our life. 

Many of our people do glorify those who steal, who amass wealth and they despise those who do not steal regarding them as foolish for having not used public resources in an ethical way. So, it is a challenge, Madam Speaker, and I am inviting honourable members to take it on. It is a very complex one, but together I do believe we shall make headway.

The issue of unattractive language that public officials use - I totally agree with you. It is really unbecoming and I think we should set high standards and use the kind of language that edifies, that gives Government and our offices great respect. 

 It is our duty to impeccable manners in and out of Parliament so that the general public can take on from us and we have a country, which is at peace with its self. So, I agree with that concern. 

Then there is this issue of noise at night.  I have sometimes read about reports that Resident District Commissioners here and there have frightened to close down places of worship because congregations are making noise. 

I have written to those concerned that frankly they have no business stopping people from worship because that is a direct violation of freedom of worship. I have urged the Resident District Commissioner to punish individual culprits rather than have a collective punishment that does not make sense and also undermines that constitutional right that people do have.  

On the issue of noise at night, it is one we should all be concerned about. I will hold discussions with the city council authorities and others who are concerned so that within the limits of what is possible in terms of freedom, we allow normal processes to take place. 

Worshiping is that fundamental right that we all have but I also recognize that it should be done in a way that does not undermine others rights.  Madam Speaker - (interruption)

MR ODIT: The Minister of Ethics seems to be very religious just like most of us; but the fact that you allow one category of people to make noise throughout the night at the expense of others in the name of freedom of worship is not right. 

I think something must be done, you need to regulate this noise, noise itself is a pollution of environment and even the Lord Jesus Christ taught us very well how we should pray - close your door, and then communicate with your God. You just do not pray in the air like that and think that you are practicing your freedom. That is what He meant when he rebuked the Pharisees. 

So, really it is not in order to allow these noisemakers - hypocrites to keep on making noise, disturbing the peace of the rest of the societies, moreover at wrong hours. I do not agree with that philosophy. Thank you.

DR BUTURO: Well, first of all, I am encouraged. I did not know that my colleague has those very sympathetic views concerning the importance of worshipping. But, first of all, I must really say that there is a distinction between praise and worship. 

The kind of noise that you find in bars and those kind of places that we should be concerned about but  - I take the point, Madam Speaker, that much as there is freedom, freedom must be exercised in the context of others freedoms. It is an issue for debate; I certainly do think that –(Interruption)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you Madam Speaker. At the moment I am staying at Bulange and my neighbours used to make a lot of noise at night when worshipping. So, one day, when they were worshipping and making a lot of noise, I joined them. I danced with them but after dancing I told them that you are selfish. You must think about your neighbours; you should not make such noise and they never repeated that noise. 

So, I also agree that it is wrong to worship in a manner where people make a lot of noise up to 3.00 a.m. That is indiscipline of the highest order and I believe that the almighty, the creator would never, support such people.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, honourable minister, when you said that you have been telling RDCs not to chase people who pray the whole night, I got worried because I think you should be aiming at designating proper places of worship. But if every other place is a place of worship, and then your house is caught up in the middle of these two places and they are all shouting until morning, then I think that license should be better handled.

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Our Constitution provides for our rights but it also says that in the enjoyment of those rights, you do not infringe on the rights of others. I think it is the responsibility of the minister to ensure that those rights are enjoyed without infringement on other people’s rights.

DR BUTURO: Madam Speaker, I appreciate those points of intervention. First, from the Prime Minister and the Leader of Opposition, certainly I do agree with them that it is important that in the exercise of these freedoms, we do not infringe on the freedoms of others. But these are very delicate matters, which I do think that at the right time, we will be able to moderate and convey these concerns. 

Can I suggest that this issue - the way we use words to explain some of these things that are unpleasant, I think needs to be considered carefully. The matter of making noise may not actually be making noise to those who are worshipping. I can strike a compromise though and that is something we will work on, Madam Speaker.

On the issue concerning the Leadership Code Tribunal, you remember that when the Constitutional Court challenged some of the provisions of the Leadership Code, we agreed. We reviewed the proposal to establish a Leadership Code Tribunal to cure the lacuna identified by the court and I will be coming out with an announcement on that in due course.

On the matter to do with the extent of erosion of our morals, I did start with a remainder; people did not know that our country is veering on a very serious course that many of us are not aware of. There is a gradual cessation of what used to be the moral high ground of this country ten years ago. 

Homosexuality was unheard of; today we have a section of our people who are pushing for homosexuals to be defended, that the law must be in place that provides for people to enjoy the freedom to exercise homosexuality.  

Now, Madam Speaker- and they do this under the guise of individual freedom, they want to be free to exercise homosexuality and by so doing, they are imposing this despicable way of life upon the rest of our country. 

I think the country must stand up and define its values and defend those values no matter what development aid and grants we lose in the process. We must as a country be able to say these are our values and others can have their values if they so wish. 

But once we have agreed and defined what those values are, we should all come forward and defend them. That is why I will be bringing a Bill on pornography in this House. I am praying that honourable members will give total support so that we continue defending our way of life, our own civilization, which is currently under threat.

May I remind the honourable members, Madam Speaker, that His Excellency the President recently announced that there is going to be a new initiative, which is clearly about zero tolerance for corruption. 

Before any one smiles at this, I should say that zero tolerance is not going to be delivered by the NRM Government alone; we are all going to play our part. Government is going to play its part very well and you have seen some of those initiatives and courses of action that we will take. 

But let us also look at ourselves; you will find that some of us actually are contributing to this menace and yet very busy at the same time pointing figures at others when we should collectively address this very serious matter. 

Madam Speaker, on the issue of sex workers, prostitution is something that rose out of foreign interests in connivance with our own interest. Just like you saw slave trade, the Africans fuelled the trade. 

We now have a new phenomenon where external interests are taking advantage of the poverty of our people to introduce these new values that are mostly unwelcome in this land, and prostitution is in that category of homosexuality and pornography. I will be making announcements on these in due course and I am praying that your support honourable members will be forthcoming.

Madam Speaker, I think that is all I have been asked to comment on, but I will be coming forward with much more and I hope to count on your support.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, we shall take the next responses in the following order: the Minister for Northern Uganda, the Minister of Finance, the Third Deputy Prime Minister, the Leader of the Opposition and then the Prime Minister.  So, the rest shall be handled in tomorrow’s morning session. I would now like to return to item 3(2) or 3(3) on the supplementary.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

6.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I take this opportunity to lay on Table Supplementary Schedule No. 3 for financial year 2005/2006, both the details and the summary.  I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is committed to the Sessional Committee on Finance – (Interjection)- honourable minister, you are instructed by the Prime Minister to apologise for your late arrival.  

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker and honourable members, I was not in traffic jam. The flight that I took from the sixth floor of the Ministry of Finance to the first floor, there was a problem of power and I was in the lift for 30 minutes and so I would like to apologise for being late. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please provide sufficient money to the Minister of Energy so that you do not get stuck anymore. 

I commit the supplementaries to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to handle and report back at the earliest opportunity. The House is adjourned to 10.00 O’clock in the morning.

(The House rose at 06.07 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 13 July 2006, at 10.00 a.m.)




