Thursday 12th July, 2001

Parliament met at 11:23a.m in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Ssekandi Edward, in the Chair).

The House was called to order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The Oaths were administered to: 

Prof. Nsibambi Apolo

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you have just witnessed the swearing in of Prof. Apolo Nsibambi. He was introduced as a Minister, but I have information that he has been appointed the Prime Minister of Uganda. (Applause). So, congratulations!  

Hon. Members, I want to thank you for having passed through the exercise which started on Tuesday, of going through the Rules of Procedure. I want to thank the facilitators of this exercise for having ably carried it out. 

I have received communication from His Excellency the President. It is dated 12th July, and it reads as follows:  “RE: VARIATION OF THE NUMBER OF MINISTERS: ARTICLE 114(3) OF THE CONSTITUTION.

One of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policies is that all organs of state and the people of Uganda shall work towards the promotion of national unity, peace and stability. In seeking to realize this, it is important that key institutions are seen to be reflective of this objective. 

The Cabinet is a central and active engine of State at which our aspiration of national unity must be reflected.  In addition to satisfying our aspirations of national unity, the composition of Cabinet must ensure that all major national interests are represented. This also ensures that the whole country is effectively supervised politically.  

I am aware that the provisions of the Constitution governing Cabinet Membership put a limit on the number that may be appointed. These numbers are not sufficient to accommodate and balance all national interests and more importantly, to ensure Government efficiency. I am aware that Parliament is empowered by the Constitution to approve the variation of these numbers. 

For the reasons advanced above, I request that Parliament under Article 114 clause (3) of the Constitution, do vary the number of “Other Ministers” from 21 to 45.”  

You see, there are Cabinet Ministers and other Ministers.  The number of Cabinet Ministers listed in the constitution is 21 but he wants to vary the number of “Other Ministers.”  This is within your powers to agree to this appeal, and we shall see how we proceed with it.  I think this can only be done if there is a resolution of this Parliament.  
So should the need arise that we have a motion, I will have to adjust the Order Paper so as to include an item for the motion.  But before this is done, there is another subject I want to talk about, that is to constitute the Committees of Parliament, especially the Sessional Committees.  

It has come to my notice that although our rules allow a Member of Parliament to be a Member of one Sessional committee, a number of you have registered for more than one Sessional committee. Therefore, the list of these various Committees will be put back for you to decide which particular Sessional committee you want to belong to so that the process of constituting these Committees can start.  

MR. LWANGA: Thank you Mr. Speaker. With regard to the Sessional Committees, was it not agreed in the last Parliament that one could belong to the Appointments Committees and still belong to another Sessional Committee?

THE SPAEKER: The appointments committee is a standing committee.   You can belong to a standing committee and belong to a Sessional Committee, but for Sessional Committees, you can only belong to one.  

MR. MULENGANI: I am seeking clarification, Mr. Speaker. Have I understood you correctly that those that registered twice are the only ones going to –(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Yes, of course. If you registered once, then it does not arise.   But there are a number of you who have registered more than once.  Now, in view of the appeal from His Excellency the President, what do we do?  

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. F. Ayume): Thank you Mr. Speaker.   In order for the House to proceed with the motion along the lines of the communication received from His Excellency the President, it is necessary to look at our Rules of Procedure and ensure that any motion moved along those lines is not inhibited by rule 39 of our Rules of Procedure, which requires a notice of three days.  

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I propose to move the following motion proceeding under rule 44(d) and invoking rule 8 of our Rules of Procedure that the requirements of three days’ notice namely, the application of article 39 of our Rules of Procedure be suspended.  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Seconded?  Okay, proceed. Maybe you may do us a favour by reading the various rules you have mentioned in your contribution.

MR. AYUME:  Mr. Speaker, rule 44 of our Rules of Procedure provides as follows: “The following motions may be moved without notice -
(a)	any motion by way of amendment to a question already proposed by the Speaker,
(b)	any motion for adjournment of the House and ,
(c)	 any motion for the adjournment of a debate, 
(d)	 any motion for the suspension of the Rules of Procedure.” 

Mr. Speaker, this is the particular item I am applying in moving this motion.  Now rule (8) of our Rules of Procedure provides that any Member may, with the consent of the Speaker, move that any rule may be suspended in its application for a particular motion before the House. And if the motion is carried, the rule in question shall be suspended for the time being. 

The rule I am seeking to suspend in my motion is rule 39, which provides as follows: 
 “A Member shall give written notice of a motion to the Clerk not less than three clear days previous to the sitting at which it is intended to move the motion.”  It is this particular rule that may cause impediment to the motion moved by Her Excellency the Vice President along the lines of the communication that you have received from His Excellency the President, if it is not suspended.  

The reason why I would like this rule suspended so that we do away with the requirements of a three days’ notice is that we have just gone through two important exercises.  The first one being the election of the President.  This was followed by the election of Members of this august House.  It is now necessary that the process of the formation of government is dealt with and concluded as expeditiously as possible so that government programs, some of which may still be in abeyance and some of which need to be undertaken as quickly as possible, can proceed and the country moves forward.  I beg to move, Mr. Speaker.

DR. RWENDEIRE (Rubanda County East, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Hon. Members, l beg to support the motion with the major reason that some of the business for this House has to be brought to the House by Government, and there is quite a lot of business that is pending as well as new business that is required.  So we need to be expeditious in decisions that we make so that we can enable the Executive to operate. I beg to support the motion, Mr. Speaker. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this motion is only to suspend the rule requiring notice for a motion to be moved. It has nothing to do with the approval of the motion. The reasons have been well articulated and I think I should put the question to this particular motion. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE VICE PRESIDENT (Dr. Wandira Kazibwe): Mr. Speaker, I want to move a motion that this House approves the request by His Excellency, the President, to vary the number of “Other Ministers” provided for under Article 114 Clause (3) from 21 to 45. I beg to move.  

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? The motion is seconded.  Justify, please.

DR.WANDIRA KAZIBWE: Mr. Speaker, at the expense of repeating myself, I would like to congratulate you because when I first congratulated you, I was actually a Member of Parliament for Kigulu South only. I want to congratulate you on your being elected in your constituency and also for having been elected to steer this august House in my capacity as the sworn-in Vice President of the Republic of Uganda. (Applause).

THE SPEAKER: Congratulations.

DR.WANDIRA KAZIBWE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also want to take this opportunity to congratulate hon. Apolo Nsibambi and hon. Francis Ayume for being the new Prime Minister and Attorney General respectively, to guide us on the deliberations in the House on the Executive side in this Seventh Parliament. I also want, as Vice President, to congratulate all Members of this august House because although I was almost not sworn in yesterday, I am now sworn in. I can assure you that I am looking forward to working with you in your constituencies. 

Given the scenario where you have a President, Vice President, and Prime Minister with no Ministers and an Attorney General with a minuscule cabinet or Executive to guide, it is imperative, and I pray, that this august House moves to expeditiously accede to the President’s request. 

When we read our Constitution and look at the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policies; unity, non-discrimination and government reaching every part of this country, we must make sure that the mirror that is held by the Executive has a reflection of every part of this country, every gender, every group, every political thinking, and all the interests of the people of this country.  

Since the NRM came into power, this principle of broad-basedness around a minimum programme has enabled us to bring much of the country on board. I must say that bringing on board the interest groups has ensured that the aspirations of all people of Uganda are represented here. But we also must ensure that that is carried further to the Cabinet, which is the central engine of state, which directs Government programmes and policies.  

When you look at all the institutions the NRM Government has put in place, you will notice that this unifying factor has been catered for as much as is feasible. We must, therefore, continue with this policy of making sure that all these institutions in Government are actually representative of the very image of our country.  

There are two main reasons, therefore, why His Excellency the President wants us to increase the number of other Ministers from 21 to 45. We must give political supervision to the numerous programmes that have come on board since 1986. 

One may say “yes, these programmes are there but we have technical people to ensure that they are put in place.” Since 1986, we all know that the programmes have increased, but also that the budget of our country has increased, even going beyond what many Ugandans thought was not possible. From a budget of Shs.50 billion a year to almost Shs.1.5 trillion a year! 

One may say that few Ministers are efficient but I would like to borrow from my own experience because I have had opportunity to work in a number of Ministries. The most recent one was Agriculture. Yes, that is the file that is closest, the one I closed most recently as a Minister. 
We all know that in the President’s manifesto, the Programme for Modernisation of Agriculture is at the centre of modernising our country.  Currently under that Ministry or in the last Executive, we had one Cabinet Minister responsible for Agriculture and one Minister responsible for the Livestock Sector. And before I got into that Ministry, there was no Minister responsible for the Fisheries sub-sector. I recommended that that sub-sector be given a Minister. 

With our programme for modernising Agriculture, I also want to submit that even with these three plus one Cabinet Ministers, we will not have enough political supervision in that Ministry. Why? Because while you are talking about PMA, you are talking about production, which production will come from the results of research, which research will have to be translated through extension to the farmers! You will have to market and you will need to control quality. While you are doing all this, diseases are attacking the crops, the fish and livestock. 

I want to give a recent example. When I went to do “kakuyege” in my constituency. We had those small caterpillars called “sundya”. They ate the potatoes.  Because now everybody is concentrating on mobilising for production, the disease sector in both livestock and crops is still an area we have to address from the political angle.  I am giving this through my own experience in that Ministry.  It is a big Ministry, we need to look at all these sectors so that we move to modernize agriculture as we move to modernize the country and develop and improve on our income. 
We must look at this Ministry as an example that I know very well to ensure that we do have better political supervision and accountability.

Mr. Speaker, the argument that technical people are there – the Permanent Secretaries, the Commissioners – I want to tell you that these people have been there for a long time. And I must say that whereas we have targeted a good number of departments in government for improvement, which improvement we would wish to see as more people oriented than office oriented, we still have a long way to go with the technical departments under the Public Service.

I want to submit that while in the same Ministry we did have these technical people, hon. Kibirige Sebunya in Kawanda had developed clonal coffee but it was sitting there! We had wonderful projects on extension, training and visits, and we have had a lot of technology on the shelves developed by these brainy sons and daughters of Uganda but before the political leadership went out to talk about it, this research was still sitting with the hon. Kibirige and his colleagues.

I want to submit here that, the element of supervision, mobilization, awareness building, explanations to the population lies squarely in the hands of the technical people. They are the people who are politically charged with the responsibility of making sure that Government reaches the people and who can also feel the pulse of the population to know that they are politically accountable to the population for these programs.

Talk of Kampala, people are still drinking polluted water despite the fact that it is the center, the Capital of our country!  Where are the technical people?  I know that they are regularly supposed to even sample water from the pipes and everything but they will merely tell you, “You boil the water”.  But what is the rationale for me to boil the water?  What is the load of bacteria in that water?  You may find time to find out for yourself but the technical people who are there are not people oriented and therefore, are not going to help us move as fast as possible in a number of these areas.

Mr. Speaker you know the Fish industry was generating almost 80 million dollars per year.  
I remember at that time I was being shaken up by Parliament and we woke up one day to find that the fish exports had been banned.  The technocrats had sat down and they wrote and said, “Fish ban” because the law says “Fish ban” but they had not even looked at the totality of what was envisaged. It was not until the political leadership came in that we were in a position to put things right through the Ministers concerned.

I want to say that this is also the reason why you find, maybe because of our training, we are still lagging behind many countries in Africa on the policies and implementation of irrigation for our people. They believe there is more than enough water so to get them to move is a problem. Why? We do not have enough water for our livestock.

This is not to say that ministerial oversight is all that is needed for us to have no problems in implementing our programs and policies, No!  The difference is that there will be a supervising political head that would have been given a budget by this Parliament, which Minister will be answerable to this House, which august House is full of representatives of the people of Uganda. That will then mean that this Minister will be on his or her toes all the time to know what is happening, why things are not happening, and will be in a position to discuss with the Committees of the House. He will also be in position to discuss with the whole of this august House so that we can all move together to ensure that within the next five years, we implement the President’s Manifesto in these very critical areas. 

I would like to say that having first come to sit in this august House in 1989 on an affirmative action ticket, I am one person who knows why it is important to look in the mirror of the political leadership of this country. And know that yes, I am a Ugandan; yes, this is my country; yes, I am there; decisions are being made and I am there, and these women right up to the village, when they see me here talking, when they hear me talking, they will know that the woman of Uganda is in Parliament, is in leadership and things will move in her favour -(Applause).

That also goes for the many regions in this country; the many ethnic groupings which have also been undermined for lack of representation at the political level.
 I have moved in this country and I have seen that when people have their self-determination through districts, you see them really rejuvenated because they know they have their destiny in their own hands.

As usual, I told you that I will be very frank, without fear or favour and it is through such examples that we are able, as a legislature, to move ahead to make policies and support Government in its program’s. An example is Nakasongola District where the Baruli are the majority. I want to tell you, that area has moved!  Another example in as far as service delivery is concerned is a district that is half Batenga and half Samia in Busoga – Bugiri District. It is doing much better than even the parent district!

I want to put it before this august House that, when we as much as possible get representation from the different zones and regions in the country, we shall not only bring our people on Board, we shall also be calling them, whispering to them, as our President says, that you are important and because you are important, the President’s Manifesto which was passed overwhelmingly by Ugandans is also your responsibility to make sure that it is implemented.

Apart from being here in Government and being seen by our people from the different zones, it is also my experience that when you have people from the different parts of the country, you will find that they put pressure within Cabinet to make sure that programs are implemented.  This may not happen all the time but it happens more often than not. 

That is why, in your own experience when you were being elected, people were saying, “Are you ministerial material?” -(Interjections). Yes, yes!  This happens all the time because when they talk about being ministerial material, they are not only talking about you becoming a Minister but being a pressure agent here in the House; somebody who will not fear to enter a Minister’s office; a Commissioner’s office to put pressure on these people to do work in your constituencies!  Because we cannot have 290 Ministers, but being ministerial material means you will actually be able to move to these departments of government to do so. 

I want to submit that when we have the different zones represented at the drawing table in Cabinet, we shall be able to do more than less, if I may say so. We shall be able to do more work through political supervision in the different parts of the country.  

When I say small is beautiful, I am saying it figuratively. I am not small but I think I am beautiful -(Interjections)- and when you say small is beautiful in Africa, the men will not like it and the women may also not like it. But the argument is that when you have a small Government, you have few Ministers and you are going to be able to deliver. This is the economics of countries that are already developed, but even then, when you get down to the ground, the reality on the ground is the opposite.  

In Britain they have over 88 Cabinet Ministers and Other Ministers. In America, there are various people at ministerial level. A Minister represents Africa, a Minister represents the Middle East, a Minister represents the Americas, a Minister represents China, and a Minister represents Australia. You find that just under Foreign Affairs, you have as many junior Ministers as the interests of the country. And we know that this is what will actually help us to move on.  

In our country, our interest is to make sure that those critical sectors that affect the development and the welfare of our country are adequately given political supervision to make us move.

I would like to urge this august House to approve the request by His Excellency the President to vary the number of “other ministers” as provided for under Article 114 (3) of the Constitution, from 21 to 45. Indeed, overseeing or political supervision is a minimum condition for our work to get moving. Thank you very much. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I will give the Seconder of the motion an opportunity to make a contribution.

MR. WAPAKABULO JAMES (Mbale Municipality, Mbale): I thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the opportunity you have given me to second this motion. This is a motion that presents to this House a request from His Excellency the President for variation of the number of Other Ministers from 21 to 45. I will point to some constitutional issues and make general observations in support of this motion. 

The principal source of this request is contained in the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy, more so in the second category, which are the Political Objectives. 

I would like to invite Members to look into their Constitutions, page 2. Under the Democratic Principles which are generally under Political Objectives. It is provided specifically as follows in the fourth principle: “The composition of Government shall be broadly representative of the national character and social diversity of the country.” That is one of the principles to be found as a political objective in our National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy.

I will start with the directive relating to implementation. The first one says: “The following objectives and principles shall guide all organs and agencies of the State, all citizens, organisations and other bodies and persons in applying or interpreting the Constitution or any other law, and in taking and implementing any policy decisions for the establishment and promotion of a just, free and democratic society.”  

Then a demand is made of the President under (ii). It says: “The President shall report to Parliament and the nation at least once a year, all steps taken to ensure the realization of these policy objectives and principles.”  

What the President is doing here is to come to this Parliament and say that there is a principle, which says that the Government of Uganda must be broadly representative of the national character and social diversity of the country. He is saying that in his deliberate assessment, the provisions of Article 114 in so far as they relate to the numbers of Ministers now provided for in that Article, namely 21 Cabinet Ministers as provided for in Article 113(2) and the “Other Ministers” who we normally refer to as Ministers of State, do not enable him to fully comply with the provisions of the principles enshrined in the National Objectives and Directives of State Policy. 
He is saying that the numbers do not enable him to fully comply with those principles and it is a requirement that the composition of Government must be broadly representative of the national character and social diversity of the country. Therefore, the President is saying that in his assessment, he needs an increase, not in the number of Cabinet Ministers, but in the number of Other Ministers as provided for under Article 114(3) of the Constitution.  

Last time Parliament was called upon to exercise this power, we did exercise this power. There was an attempt to present this exercise of power as an Amendment of the Constitution. It was said that Parliament had unlawfully, and contrary to the provisions of the Constitution, amended the Constitution by raising the number of Ministers at that time, from the numbers provided to the numbers now in office. We took pains to explain that this is not amending the Constitution. And I would like to comment on this so that Members are not misled.

This is the power vested in the Parliament by the Constitution that the number shall be 21, unless Parliament in its deliberate wisdom increases that number. Not by way of amending the Constitution, but rather by way of a resolution as presented to us by Her Excellency the Vice-President. I thought I should make that clarification.

So, Sir, the Constitution enjoins a broad base and diversity of the country but the President says he is unable to achieve it, yet he is required to come to this House and answer the question “how have you implemented the principle relating to broad baseness in the government of our country?” 

So this request constitutionally is correct in its application and Parliament does not in anyway deviate from the provisions relating to amendment of the Constitution as was alleged by some people. It is a deliberate policy decision by this House based on the fact that it has powers to increase.  

Now, of course one would say, “what about the costs?”  But let’s look at Uganda as a corporate entity.  A corporate entity of 22 to 23 million people, seeking to grow out of poverty.  A country where the bureaucracy or the Civil Service was heavily disrupted for a long time and the process has been slow and painful in bringing together a performing Civil Service. At this point in time we are recovering in that direction and we must have a continuous and effective political supervision. 
 
The Vice-President did a very good job elaborating on this, but I just want to touch on it. We have been building a Civil Service out of disruption to be able to deliver and grow but until we have reached this stage, there is need for strong political supervision.  I had one experience with the late former Minister Kiingi, by then I was Minister for Co-operatives, and under me there was a Minister of State and a Deputy Minister.  Now, Kiingi was Minister of State, so I asked him, “Could you go to Mombasa and check on why the process of wagons delivering coffee to Mombasa was not taking place?” I asked, “where is the bottleneck?  Is it in warehousing or is it in the damrage?”

The Minister having been a very senior public servant he said “Mr. Minister that is a Civil Service job, for me I am a Minister, I only discuss policy”.  But I had under me another Minister, as I said, the Deputy Minister, Peter Akure, and now the RDC Busia.  So I said “Peter, you go to Mombasa and do one, two and three.”  He came back with a very good report out of which we were able to organize answers to the bottlenecks, knowing that coffee was our oil at the time.  

This is to give you an example where political supervision is of paramount importance. Hence, the request is that we should not be carried like accountants into the narrow area of considering costs only.  We should look at the broad benefits apart from the political. We should also look at the economic and other social benefits that our country will get.

Sir, in fact I would say that the developed countries can afford to do with a smaller political level because their systems are stabilized.  They can in fact manage without political supervision but in our case, we need it. 

Therefore, in summary as I conclude, it is a constitutional requirement to base on the social and economic needs when training a broader cadre of managers, particularly at the political level. Sir, I beg to second.
MR. SSEBAGGALA (Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Mr. Speaker, allow me to congratulate you for having been elected to steer the 7th Parliament and it is my wish and I pray that you take your usual road of objectivity and justice for all. 

I stand to oppose the motion that seeks to increase the number of Ministers as requested by the President on basically three grounds. I am aware that Uganda is among the poorest nations, and it is among the least developing countries. I believe we cannot afford the luxury of having many Ministers at the expense of the taxpayers. It is my belief and conviction that having many Ministers is not a justification for service delivery.  I believe we should concentrate on ensuring how effectively we can deliver services to our people.  We have the Local Councils at various levels and I believe that if they are empowered, they can do a very good job in order to achieve development in the whole country.

I appreciate His Excellency’s interest for national unity but I believe that national unity can be achieved without increasing the number of Ministers.  Let us request His Excellency the President to ensure that the unity being spoken of is reflected at various levels of leadership. Even if Ministers are few, national unity could be achieved if we try as much as possible. It is unfortunate that we honorable Members can compare Uganda to developed countries like Britain and US.  I believe most of our people live below the poverty line. There is no way we could increase the number of Ministers because this will mean extra costs and funding. 

It is my wish that this august House could politely convince the President that having a few Ministers could do more good than having many Ministers at the expense of the tax payers. So, there is no way we could increase the number of Ministries when our tax base has gone down. Lastly, it is my conviction that if Ugandans have a lot of expectations from this 7th Parliament, let us not let them down. 

So, we must think in the right direction in order to ensure development of our country. If we have as many as 66 Ministers, even the President may at times forget the name of a certain Minister and the Ministry he holds. Yes, this has ever happened! I would like this august House to avoid such a scenario where a President may even forget the name of his cabinet Minister.

It is my wish and prayer that if you have looked at the list of Cabinet Ministers and my name appears, for the good of national unity, let it be excluded. I thank you.

MR.KIBAALE WAMBI (Budadiri East, Sironko): Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I would also be wrong if I did not congratulate you for having achieved that great seat. Hopefully you will always steer this House as you have done before, for the good of this country.

I shall state my position whether I support this motion or not after I have made one or two comments on the motion.  First of all, the motion has been brought to the House at a time when almost everybody except the hon. Member from Kawempe North is expecting to be a Minister. I think that is not good because we are about 300 and if everybody is expecting to be a Minister, I think that is too much for us. So, at this hour, the truth is that you may not get anybody opposing this motion. It is at the wrong time! You cannot oppose a motion because you do not know whether the hammer or the good lot may fall on you. That is my worry –(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, there is no reason why I will doubt the objectivity of Members and that when they are debating this issue they are objective rather than subjective.

MR.KIBAALE WAMBI: I thank you for the advice Mr. Speaker. What I know is that I may or may not support the motion but I have to state my position first. The issue at hand is that probably this kind of motion should have come after having done the normal constitutional part because by then everybody would have settled down, and no one knows what position it is. But at this hour, I know definitely that by the time I sit down, a question will be put and it will be “aye” for sure and for real.

Lastly, we now have 56 districts. I want to be assured that for national unity, social development, political equity, for sharing of the national cake and for balance, every district shall partake of this increase we are about to make. 
Of course, we are sure that the Member for Kawempe North does not want but for me, if there is an opportunity, I want it -(Laughter). For that matter, I support the motion. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think let us balance the debate by being gender sensitive. The hon. Member next to that from Kapchorwa.  

MRS.AANIMU ANGUPALE (Woman representative, Arua): Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. For purposes of efficiency in running the state, I urge the House to support the motion. As most honorable Members are saying here, for purposes of sharing the cake which will foster unity, peace and political stability, I ask the august House to support this motion. Because when you mention ministerial posts and other districts are missing, it causes a lot of instability in the House; people are not comfortable. Though I am supporting the motion, it does not mean that I am urging for the post. I am supporting it for purposes of stability so that when we are delivering we are doing so at point of action and we shall be happy.

To oppose the argument that the technical people are there, we all know that the political arm is there but if there are checks and balances without political will, nothing will take off. I therefore urge the House to support the motion.

We have all gone through the Manifesto of His Excellency, the President. When you look at the ministerial sector where a Minister is compelled - for example you, the Minister for Labor, Gender and Social Development. It is very broad and yet we are talking of gender: We want to increase the number of women in politics; we want to increase the number of schools in the Local Governments. I think if it is divided up and other Ministers take part, it will increase efficiency and also promote women. 

Very many Members of Parliament have promised heaven on earth and it is through this proposal that we shall also feel comfortable and solve the problems of the people. We are stating that we need to observe and give respect to the mandate of the people –(Interruption).
CAPT.GUMA: Mr. Speaker, is it in order for the hon. Member of Parliament from Arua to impute improper motives that all of us promised heaven on earth to our voters? I did not promise heaven on earth in Ibanda North!

THE SPEAKER: Well I do not see anything wrong for a Member promising heaven on earth to his constituency. So there is nothing there. Proceed.

MS. AANIMU ANGUPALE: Thank you very much Mr. Speaker, for your protection.  All what I need to state for this august House is, let us go by the motion and we support the motion to increase the number of Other Ministers from 21 to 45. Thank you very much Mr. Speaker.

MAJ. JOHN. KAZOORA (Kashari County, Mbarara): Thank you Mr. Speaker. Let me also take this opportunity, to congratulate Her Excellency the Vice President, for having been sworn in this morning and to state that I am proud of her, since I saw her from LC I to the present position. I also congratulate my Lecturer, hon. Prof. Apollo Nsibambi, now the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister.

Now on the motion, we are again going through a ritual that the 6th Parliament went through, the Mover being the same and we passed the motion.  Of course the arguments are also the same and we have experience of “no change.”  We passed here Ministers but this political supervision that is being talked about was put to test and it failed and there are examples. 

When we had problems with the Valley Dams money, there were Ministers headed by a whole Vice President but this did not stop the money from being embezzled.  When we brought it here, they were saying, “No, it is the Permanent Secretary; No, it is the Engineer–” (Interruption).

THE VICE PRESIDENT (Dr. Wandira Kazibwe): Mr. Speaker, is it in order for hon. Kazoora, who first actually said he knew me from LC I to insinuate that political supervision had failed with the dams programme when in actual fact I came to this august House, the 6th Parliament, and explained the sequencing of political supervision which even now has proven that the dams are there and there is water in the dams?  -(Interjection) 

Yes the report is there and I want to urge the hon. Members who are new and even the old ones to refresh themselves by reading that report.  

The dams are there and those that were not finished were not finished because a Committee of this august House stopped them.  Is he in order to insinuate that there was no political supervision when I even showed films of me supervising those dams here and Members saw the dams but did not know that those were the dams?  Is he in order?  (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I do not know. You see my following his contribution was not to that effect.  I think he was saying that even with effective political supervision, something might go wrong.  I think he was praising you that in spite of that, things went wrong.

MAJ. KAZOORA: I thank you Mr. Speaker, and indeed the records speak for themselves – (interruption).

MS. BYANYIMA: Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I would like to give information. I come from a district where cattle rearing is a big economic activity and I want to inform the House that while Her Excellency the Vice President with the assistance of three other Ministers were supervising this project, thousands of our cattle perished in a drought because there was no water in those dams she is talking about.  I thank you Mr. Speaker.

MAJ. KAZOORA:  Mr. Speaker, it is common knowledge that Government recently instituted a probe committee under Justice Julia Ssebutinde on the junk helicopters.  These were meant to protect us from the enemies but we instead ended up with junks and yet there was a Minister and a Minister of State.

Let us go to the Ministry of Gender.  Six Ministers in that Ministry, but where are they known in this country?  How are they felt in this country?  

MRS MUKWAYA: Thank you very much Mr. Speaker and hon. Kazoora. First of all, I have delivered on the Workers House and we have delivered on the Disability Council.  At least the disabled people are there. 
The Youth Councils have been facilitated and the Women Councils have been facilitated.  I have been at every district in this country and my Ministers too.  The Youth Program is also progressing very well but I want also to support that even in the Ministry of Gender, the Minister for the Youth should be a substantive Minister, the one for the elderly would have another Minister because these are technical issues and I think it was over burdening. I thank you hon. Speaker.

MAJ. KAZOORA:  I thank my hon. Sister, Janat Mukwaya and I am sure she is aware of the problems that the Workers House went through under her supervision and it was never finished on time. But what is the use of having Ministers who are not facilitated?  Hon. Mukwaya you know very well that hon. Mateke for a long time was walking.  I went in hon. Nayiga’s Office, it was a disaster and in fact I can use the word “disaster.” I also remember now that we have a ministry or department of Disaster Preparedness that remained a disaster itself because whenever we had disasters, it was never prepared. Just Ministries remaining in name! 

I want to tell this House that I campaigned with an opponent who was heavily supported by people who thought they were very big in Government but whom the electorate told that they were immaterial. These people brought this man to the people of Kashari and said, “this is the man the President wants to give a Ministry, vote for him”. I did not campaign on a ticket of being a Minister.  I stated this in 1996 and I am repeating it here; It is because I am an effective Parliamentarian.  I delivered in my constituency, I can supervise my constituency better without being a Minister and you know it.  

With due respect to my former colleagues, if really it is so important that in order to be a mobiliser, in order to deliver services you must be a Minister, Ministers would not be competing, they would be coming here straight! 

I also want to add to what hon. Wambi said. I must confess that some of those who were Ministers, about half of them, did not know where they were seated and what they were doing because they were really immaterial! 
So, I do not believe that mobilisation can be done by Ministers -  (Interruption).
MR. BAGALANA: Mr. Speaker, I realise that many of the Ministers who were appointed by His Excellency the President in the former Cabinet were Parliamentarians, and a few came from outside. These were people who were elected by the people! Is it in order for the hon. Member to use un-parliamentary language and say that many of them were immaterial? I am amazed!

THE SPEAKER: Well, hon. Kazoora, you can proceed because this was not a matter over which I should rule. He did not raise a point of order. He just made an observation. Proceed!

MAJ. KAZOORA: Indeed, he should be amazed because, why should one be a Minister and he is not known by a Member of Parliament? But my point is that people back there, when we were campaigning, were talking about water, they were talking about hospitals, they were talking about schools, they were talking about roads. As long as these are there, they will not mind as to who is a Minister.  

If Government is finding it a problem to come here every time to pass through this ritual, why don’t we have a constitutional Amendment and appoint a Minister for every cell so that we finish with this problem once and for all?   

When you talk of mobilisation, what is the work of the RDCs? Why are they paid? What is the work of the mobilization department in the Secretariat? Unfortunately, most of these directors went because they do not do their work. There are organs, there are institutions, and there are officers paid for this. I do not believe that increasing Ministers will solve this problem.  

As hon. Wambi said, why can’t His Excellency the President first use the number of Ministers given to him by the Constitution and after that, he can say, ‘having studied this situation, I need this number for these reasons’? 
They are serving food, you have not started eating, and you are already saying, ‘I am not satisfied’?  It is really queer! Those are my few observations, and I am making them in good faith. I do not think it is proper. Thank you, Sir.

MR. OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the motion on the Floor be amended. Instead of increasing the number of Ministers from 21 to 45, we give a symbolic increase of four, and increase it to 25 from 21.  I beg to move.

MS WINNIE BYANYIMA:  Seconded!

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, this Constitution has been with us for the last five years or so. It was promulgated in 1995, and it has been put in practice ever since. That Constitution was debated for close to two years and it basically reflected the broad wishes of the people of Uganda. I had the pleasure and privilege of being one of those who were in that Constituent Assembly.  

In the previous Constitutions of 1962 and 1967, there was no restriction on the number of Ministers that the President could appoint and I wish to tell this House that when the Constituent Assembly decided in its wisdom to restrict the number of Ministers, it was from the experience gained between 1986 and 1994. I was a Minister at one time and also a Deputy Minister, so what I am going to tell you is from experience.  

For us to increase the number of “Other Ministers” from 21 to 45 which is more than double needs advancement of exceptional reasons - I want to emphasize the words, “exceptional reasons” - from His Excellency the President.  The Vice President and those who are supporting this motion have given us no such exceptional reasons, except national unity and effective supervision.  

National unity is not going to be brought about by the symbolic appointment of somebody to be in charge of Wildlife. Hon. Akaki was in charge of Wildlife and he is from Akokoro, somewhere in Apac. I do not know how far it contributed to the Langi being nationally united with the rest of Uganda. Betty Okwir was a Minister in the Vice President’s office. I do not know what her assignments were. I do not know how far it contributed to the Langi being united. We are already part of this country and I can assure you that as far as the people of Otuke are concerned, as far as the people of Lango are concerned, no appointment of a Minister is going to contribute more than necessary to our being united. 

In fact, we would prefer service delivery - tarmacking the roads from Soroti to Lira, from Apac to Lira to Kitgum, putting up a hydroelectric station in Karuma, all without the Minister. That will contribute more to our national unity and development. 

I can assure you, as far as this issue of national unity is concerned, it is not exceptional. In fact, if I may tell you, the appointment of the last Cabinet was a source of disunity.  We kept on increasing the number of Ministers from 42 to 61, which is now being demanded again.  As far as the north was concerned, from Koboko to Karamoja we had two Cabinet Ministers, Brig. Moses Ali and Betty Okwir, and we kept on raising this issue to the President. The way the previous Cabinet was appointed contributed more to disunity of Uganda and reflected the way the President got his votes in certain areas.

The issue of effective supervision, I do not know how Ministers are supervisors because to me in management the word supervision is technical.  Somebody at the level of management makes policy, and at the level of supervision is physically there looking at his Permanent Secretary and Commissioners. In other words, supervision at the level of scientific management is a closer watch to the person next to you to see that the implementation of a decision is made.  I do not know how Ministers are supervisors. That is the question I put. 
 
I am looking at it in a more important way.  I am looking at the supervision of Ministers by the President. Has the President got time to supervise 66 Ministers?  I am not talking of supervision of Ministers by the Vice President and the Prime Minister, no!  I am talking about the supervision of Ministers by the person whom articles of the Constitution vested in him executive authority.  No wonder things went wrong in Government Ministries like corruption, in the Ministry of Defence where the President is the Minister! You know the problems we have faced with the helicopter purchases. Now, will the President have the capacity to supervise Ministers? 

 Let me tell you, when I was a Minister, I was lucky that as Minister of State for Defence and Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, I had very close access to the President nearly every other day or even twice a day but I can assure you that my Friends, those in charge of – I do not want to mention - had problems in seeing the President and it caused them disillusionment and dissatisfaction. 

Even in the out-going Cabinet, I know of Ministers who complained that they were not getting appointment with the President. Their relationship with other Cabinet Ministers was not the best. When they tried to see the President they did not have that sort of access. I want this House to look, not at the supervision of Ministers for Government policy, but the supervision of Ministers by the President.  

I would like to conclude my presentation by saying this.  I have been looking at the article, which says: “There shall be a Cabinet which shall consist of the President, the Vice President and such number of Ministers” and then in 113 and 114 it goes on to say “the total number of Cabinet Ministers shall not exceed 21 except with the approval of Parliament.” As a student of Law I am just wondering whether we should not have first had a Cabinet of 21 Ministers and 21 “other Ministers”, and then you come to us and say, “I have constituted the Cabinet.  I want you to increase the number of Cabinet from 21 to the number I want for the following exceptional reasons. 

I know that in the last Cabinet about two positions were not filled and I want to tell this House that it was a very dangerous carrot which the President kept on misusing.  It was a very dangerous carrot and I am asking myself whether all these 21 cabinet ministers and 45 Ministers of State are going to be filled immediately by the President.  If not, beware the President may appoint 30 or 35 or even 40 and leave five Ministers of State hanging, dangling and when they see Omara Atubo making noise here they say ‘can we have your C.V? - (Laughter)- we are thinking about you as a substance. 

The Prime Minister would like to see you, or the Vice President would like to talk to you, or the National Political Commissar has a message from the President for you’.  Now, this to me compromises the independence of this House and I think it is a very dangerous thing.  

This Parliament is a special Parliament.  You are not only going to make ordinary Laws but you are also going to be a mini Constituent Assembly.  The Constitutional Review Commission will soon bring its report with proposals for you to amend and therefore, let us use our powers sparingly.  

Let the President go back, appoint those Ministers and come back to us and say I have done this.  Do you see Karamoja is not included?  Do you see Masaka is not included?  Do you see Yumbe is not there? Do you see Otuke is not there?  I am thinking that for these reasons can you increase the number?  But when we are having a blanket approval like this, it is dangerous for this Parliament. 

I beg to move this really not to disappoint the President. It is like somebody comes to you, you know you are a politician and says, “please, can you lend me 10,000 shillings?”  Then you say “sorry, I do not have 10,000 shillings but get this 2,000 shillings” – (Interruption) – just hold on let me wind up. So, I beg to move that we increase the number from 21 to 25.

THE SPEAKER: The position is this, there was a request by His Excellency the President, which I read to you.  Subsequent to that, a motion was moved to operationilise the request.  The request was for 45 other Ministers.  While we are debating this motion moved by Her Excellency the Vice President, hon. Omara Atubo moved an amendment to the motion. As far as he and those who supported the motion of Amendment are concerned, instead of 45, they want an increase of four. That means the principle of increasing is accepted.  

Now, there is a problem of detail here, detail in the sense that one is saying 45 and another is saying four. It seems to me that in these two motions, the principle of asking Parliament to increase has been accepted. So, that being the position - (Interjections)- because there are two motions, I will have to dispose of one first. But from the contributions it seems those who support the motion of Amendment accept the principle and will be going in detail.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, I was the seconder of the motion.
THE SPEAKER: Okay, but you should understand that the motion is supporting the principle. You can make your contribution since you are seconding.

MS. WINNIE BYANYIMA: Mr. Speaker, I would like to seek your clarification. I also seconded the hon. Member for Otuke on his motion to increase by less than 45, but should it fail, I may want to go back to oppose the original motion. So, I am not necessarily supporting the increase in principle.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We shall see how we progress, because I will have to put a vote on the latest motion, and then see what to do with the original motion. If this one goes through, then there will be no case for the original motion. I am waiting for contributions.

MR. LUKYAMUZI KEN (Lubaga South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I will be very brief in my move to second hon. Atubo’s motion.  

First and foremost, the main argument as advanced by the Vice President was that the motion was moved to enable the President meet the demand in regard to supervision. The second reason was to meet national aspirations regarding unity in Uganda. Hon. Omara Atubo’s motion is in the right direction, and it is positive. It only endeavors to persuade the President to summarize those aspirations. 

Parliament here is one way through which the aspect of supervision can be catered for. So, before we expand Cabinet, we should also look at our fate because we are sound supervisors in Uganda. As I talk now, we are not yet sure about our allowances and yet Parliament has been expanded. So, let us first meet this immediate demand. Parliament has been expanded summarily in a situation of abject poverty -(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member for Lubaga South, you have brought in this issue of not being sure about your allowances. I want to assure you that there are allowances that will be given to you. The problem we have now is rather technical, in that, there are certain technical procedures that have to be made like to appoint accounting officers and so forth.   But be sure that your allowances will be paid. Proceed.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Much obliged, Mr. Speaker. Point number two is in regard to how Uganda is politically constituted. We all feel proud about having segments of districts in Uganda. You know very well that from time to time, according to demand, districts can emerge or can be created. But today, from time to time, we have been having these experiences of new districts coming up.  

We should be proud of decentralization, which is very well catered for in this Constitution in Article 176(2)(b). I would like to read. It says: “decentralization shall be a principle applying to all levels of local government and in particular, from higher to lower local government units to ensure peoples’ participation and democratic control in decision making.”   

This means that we should not underrate the district administrations. All those district officers in their respective districts have rights well enshrined in this Constitution. So, the worries of the Vice President regarding political supervision can be catered for under the umbrella of districts. 

There should be no cause for the Vice President to fear that when you appoint Ministers, then you create a new supervision arrangement. You already have an arrangement that is catered for by the Constitution, unless you want to tell us that the decentralization arrangement is not working. But if we are proud of the decentralization arrangement, then we should be proud of what we already have. What is required is to ensure that people in their respective rights, in various districts, know their rights. Some of them do not know what they are supposed to do, and Members of Parliament here can very easily cater for them. 

In summary, we have been generous enough to His Excellency the President. 

We are not underrating his demand. We are only limiting him to certain dimensions, and in so doing we are exercising our constitutional rights. So, with respect to what I have said, I beg to strongly support hon. Omara Atubo.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May I also preface my remarks by congratulating you and your Deputy on being elected to those posts. I also want to congratulate Her Excellency the Vice President and all hon. Members of this important body. I look forward to working in such a way that our relations are harmonious. 

With regard to this issue, the Amendment by hon. Atubo amounts to tokenism. When you just give a token figure, it really amounts to rejecting the resolution or the request.  That is why I cannot be a party to it. I want to give a few reasons as to why we should support the original request.  

Hon. Omara Atubo said that the reasons given must be fundamental, and I have dealt with the issues of national integration. In fact, I do have a piece of work I did on the state of national integration in Uganda, and I am now upgrading it. I want to state that one of the major problems Ugandans have faced has been the absence of national integration. And because of the absence of national integration, we have been killing each other and destroying property. 

It has even been difficult to establish central control over local units; we call that territorial integration. It has been difficult to ensure that different ethnic groups feel that they belong; that is trans-ethnic integration. It has been difficult to bridge this gap between the elite and the masses. That we call social integration and there has been also another dimension of national integration and value integration.  Value integration occurs when, for example, people can enjoy cultural differences and still belong when they have agreed on institutions for resolving conflict.  

So, the point I am making is that the issue of national integration is fundamental and for someone to stand here and say it is not. I would, with humility, ask him to read not only my piece on problems of absence of national integration, but also many others. Now, how do you enhance national integration? Again in that work, I have dealt with inhibitors and facilitators of national integration?  One of the inhibitors of national integration is allocation of scarce resources.  

When a scarce resource is not equitably allocated, different groups are alienated and even some go to the bush. Hon. Atubo was saying to us that the allocation of the post of Ministers was not equitable, which means that he was also acknowledging the importance of allocating scarce resources equitably -(Interruption).

MR. ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, is it in order for the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to misquote me and mislead this House when my remarks were that we preferred tarmacking Lira-Soroti road, Apac-Lira-Kitgum road and Karuma hydro electric power station as real resource allocation and not only the offices of Ministers?  This is what I said. Is he in order to misquote me?  I was talking about actual resource allocation not office allocation.

THE SPEAKER: I think the material the hon. Prime Minister is using to make that particular statement is when you referred to the north and you said you had two Ministers namely; Brig. Moses Ali and Betty Okwir and that was a complaint. 

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Back to the point of allocation of scarce resources, now the issue of being Minister is a scarce resource among other things. It gives visibility to the people concerned and also, Ministers deal with important issues of shaping the destiny of this country, formulation, refinement, and implementation of policy.  Those are critical aspects of being a Minister and, therefore, when you hold this post, you must be very careful because you are at once given a major challenge and an opportunity as well - (Interruption).

MAJ. KAZOORA: Thank you, Rt. hon. Prime Minister for giving way.  Mr. Speaker, in the recent elections, about 13 Ministers were thrown out.  Does this mean that ministries being such an important resource, the electorate there was ignorant about such a wonderful resource or they were not aware? (Laughter)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr. Speaker, I am normally very generous with people wishing to be clarified but I may rigidify.   But since I have very high regard for hon. Kazoora, let me say that the issues there were different because individuals were now campaigning and they were being appraised individually, not in a collective capacity and even collective responsibility under Article 117 did not apply in that context.  But let me proceed because when I am interrupted, the flow of the logic may be lugubrised -(Laughter).
The point I was making is that this is an important issue or commodity. It is important to embrace the diverse corners of Uganda and enjoy a lot of cultural heterogeneity.  There is also ethnic heterogeneity, religious heterogeneity, geographical heterogeneity and many different forms of heterogeneity and the task of any leader is to make these diverse groups belong.  And how do you make them belong through the process of allocation?  If I were to supervise you when you are dealing with the question of national integration, you would have to grapple with the question of allocation of scarce resources.  

So, the President is saying in this request that different groups have to be embraced, different groups have to partake of the scarce resources, so can you use Article 114 flexibly? I was a Member of the Constituent Assembly and we agreed that there should be numbers but we also agreed that we couldn’t decide numbers permanently.  Deciding numbers is contextual. That is to say, when the levels of national integration are increasing, you may decrease the numbers.   But what we are saying at this critical level of our national integration is that we need larger numbers so that we may have cultural and political pollination delivered and embraced.  That is a fundamental reason. 
 
Let me also deal with the question of supervision.  The question of supervision has many elements but let me deal with two.  One is that the supervisor must have political commitment to the manifesto.  You may have the skills but if you do not have political commitment, you are not likely to facilitate the implementation. So, when the President chooses people who have the political commitment to his manifesto, and it is now our manifesto, he ensures that they will have the political commitment to ensure that things are done in such a way that they cohere. That is a very significant element of supervision.  
We are aware that we have public servants and I would not like to give an impression, as a former Minister of Public Service, that our Public Service is not performing but it has been restructured because it underwent many problems. It also requires supervision. 

There is the issue of skills: You know, to re-skilling is an element of supervision. We need to re-skill these people politically but you can also use some crude methods. 

For example, when I went to inspect one school with regard to iron sheets, I used a very crude method. If people say it is gauge 28 and the iron sheets can bend, it is unlikely to be gauge 28. And this is what I did. I got ladders, went up and bent the iron roof. I said it could not be gauge 28 although it had been stamped gauge 28. The person who did the roofing started sweating and when we got experts to verify and it was not gauge 28. That was supervision. I am not trained to determine the gauge, but I can use some framework to suggest that the matter be examined. And when I used it, the matter was examined and that made people very conscious of those who were actually making this country suffer by giving us wrong gauges. 

What I am saying is that, Ministers need not have all those technical skills but if they are given a framework of supervision, they can help this country to perform. So, the question of performance and supervision are very fundamental.  

Let me finally, because I am a man of few words -(Laughter)- let me finally say that hon. Omara Atubo wondered whether the President has time to supervise. His political platoon or system - the whole thing depends on the methods he uses. As you know, he has the vice president who helps him, he has a technocratic premier who also helps him, and he has ministers and ministers of state and he has public servants. When He uses these systems efficaciously, supervision cannot be a problem because supervision does not mean that you personally come daily to inspect. He just creates crossing channels and mechanisms of monitoring what happens - and he has a monitoring system by the way - and that monitoring system enables him to know what is happening. So that is political supervision. 

I wish to request hon. Members to accept the request by His Excellency, the President. 
I, therefore, oppose the Amendment and support the motion by Her Excellency, the Vice President.

THE SPEAKER: As I indicated earlier on, the matter before us is a question of details.One is saying four and the original motion was talking about increasing from 21 to 45. I do not see new arguments about this matter. I think we should pronounce ourselves on these two figures. 

I will start with the four, which is the substance of a motion by hon. Omara Atubo. I now put the question to that motion.
 
(Question put and negatived)

MR.WACHA BEN (Oyam County North, Apac): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to move an Amendment to Her Excellency’s motion to this effect that the number of other Ministers be varied from 21 to 56.

MS WINNIE BYANYIMA: Seconded.

MR.WACHA: Can I speak to it, Mr. Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: But you see the problem is this -(Interruption). Hold on please. This motion arose from a request by His Excellency, the President, who has the responsibility to form a Cabinet, and he has put a ceiling of 45. Now a motion is being brought that it should instead be 56. But justify your motion.

MR.KUTESA: Mr. Speaker, I am rising on a Point of Order with regard to the motion being brought by hon. Ben Wacha.  If my memory serves me right, I think it is Article 93 of the Constitution which says that any matter that has financial implications can only be introduced by a Government Minister. Obviously, an increase from 45 to 56 would have financial implications. Would this motion being brought by a Backbencher in the names of hon. Ben Wacha be competent before this House? And if it is not, will he be in order to move it? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the Executive headed by His Excellency the President, brought a motion restricting the Cabinet to 45. And, of course, constituting a Cabinet has financial implications. Now a Backbencher not having persuaded the Executive to bring such a motion is increasing the number to 56. I am guiding the House on the Constitutional aspect, and Article 93 says: “ Any motion or anything that will cause a charge on the Consolidated fund must be brought by the Executive.”

So definitely, it is obvious that an increase from 45 to 56 will make a charge on the Consolidated fund, and because of Article 93, that motion cannot be sustained.  I now put the question. 

I put the question to the motion that we increase the number to 45.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: With this we come to the end of today’s business. We should have proceeded with constituting our Committees to start dealing with various matters before us but because of what I said earlier that this has not been done, I adjourn the House until Tuesday 10.00 a.m. But perhaps the Appointments Committee may be called anytime.  

I want to repeat the matter raised by honorable Member for Lubaga South. I am equally concerned about your well being here. Since you came, you came from very far and you are incurring expenses. So the administration here is trying to look into ways of finding solutions to this matter, and I hope soon when the technical aspect of constituting accounting officers and so forth and opening accounts in the Bank of Uganda has been finalized, some payments will be made to you honorable Members. Please bear with us.  The House is adjourned until Tuesday at 10.00a.m. 

(The House rose at 1.28 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 17th July, 2001 at 10.00 a.m.)


