Wednesday, 14 July 2004

Parliament met at 2.50 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please note that the order of business on the Order Paper has slightly changed. We will be having two statements from the ministers. Normally these statements are the first before other items come in but because we have a motion, which has been going on - it was intended for three days but we were not able to complete it and we have to complete it today. The mover has an assignment to represent the country and has to travel sometime this evening. I thought that it is better that we dispose of the motion and then we can go on to the statement. That is why the Order Paper appears as it is.  

Before we proceed, I have to start with bad news.  I have just received a letter from hon. Magoola Zirabamuzaale that she lost her mother last night. The burial will be tomorrow 15 July, at 1.00 p.m. in Igombe, Bugweri County, Iganga District.  

I have also received the sad news that hon. Kaddunabbi has lost a brother, Denia Ali Lubega Kaddunabbi, who has been a Principal of Kisaasi College where hon. Sebaggala was a director. The burial will be tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. at Bugoye, Gombe in Butambala.  

I have also been informed that hon. Kizige lost a brother in a motor accident. Because of all this, as our procedure demands, we should observe a minute’s silence.

(The Members stood and observed a minute of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: I have to introduce our special guests. The visitors in the gallery are primary 4 pupils from Real Primary School Kawaala, Lubaga North together with their teachers. You are most welcome. (Applause)

Honourable members, we shall have some inconvenience in carrying out today’s business. I have received the following note from the Clerk: 

“Faulty public address system: 

We have been experiencing an intermittent fault with the public address system; it has failed to function well today. In the meantime, when efforts are being made to rectify the fault, a temporary mobile system has been installed and it will operate like this: 

• There will be one microphone for the Speaker at his table.

• There will be two microphones for the clerk assistants at their table.

• There will be two other microphones at the dispatch boxes for use by the honourable members. Members who are given the Floor shall have to come and speak from the dispatch boxes.  

We kindly urge Members to switch off their microphones after deliberations. 

We do regret the inconveniences caused and measures are being taken to rectify the situation as soon as possible. So please, bear with us.”

2.57
MS SARAH KIYINGI (Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Last week we passed the report of the Select Committee on Security and the Humanitarian Situation in Acholi, or what we can call the Alaso Report. Among the recommendations of that committee was that Government should declare the affected area a disaster area. Considering that the report was passed with no amendments; and considering that that day most of the government ministers were here and they overwhelmingly voted for the report, I wish to find out from Government, when do they intend to declare the Northern region a disaster area? 

Because having seen and heard the report and seen the video, we all felt I believe, including Government that this situation was really very critical and it needed immediate attention. Now it is about two weeks or so and Government has not said anything in as far as that declaration is concerned. So, I wish to know, when does Government intend to make this declaration, to which they seemed to have agreed?  Thank you.

2.59
MR AGGREY AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking guidance from the Chair on the following points.

Number one, from time to time honourable colleagues accompany His Excellency the President to overseas missions or conferences. We never seem to get any reports. Should they file reports through their respective sessional committees or should they file their reports directly to the plenary?

Number two, Mr Speaker, I am seeking your guidance again on a matter of ethics and integrity for hon. Members of Parliament. We received reports last week that some of our colleagues under the age 35 were invited to and entertained at State House. Fortunately, I am above 35 so I did not get any invitation. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, we learnt and they had no confirmation, no denial and no guidance on the matter; that some of the members who appeared before His Excellency the President put personal requests of monetary nature to him. One of them, my sister whom I respect very much, said she is going to have a wedding and could His Excellency the President assist? My colleague, this time from my district where I reside said he was broke and he needs immediate assistance. This may sound a simple matter but it reflects very badly on the integrity of the august House.  

Two; it should not become a habit that when we have the opportunity of visiting State House, we should bring up matters of personal nature, when we are going there on matters pertaining to Parliament. I am not forbidding anybody from visiting State House, and when I get there in future, you are free to come but, please -(Laughter)– I am really worried about this kind of situation because eventually some people might conclude that whoever goes to State House is going there to be influenced by the Head of State most likely on matters pertaining to our transactions in the august House. So, I am seeking your guidance on these two issues. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: But really as I indicated earlier, it should only be for emergency reasons that you make an observation at the beginning of the sitting, not anything like that. But, hon. Aggrey Awori, do you not think Members of Parliament can have private functions or engagements with His Excellency the President? Certainly they can. And is it that you cannot have a private audience with the President in State House? If you can, do you expect the Speaker to also be involved in private engagements of this nature, and to explain? Do you expect the Speaker to put an embargo that “you do not go when you have been invited?” Certainly not! 

And whatever business you transact, what you say there, is it really the interest of the Speaker to know, do you not have privacy? So, I regret I do not think I can be of assistance in that, save to say that Members of Parliament, be those above or below 35, can have private appointments with the President. If there are official appointments, certainly the Speaker will know; and if they had gone on parliamentary business, I would have known. But I think this was not the case.  

As for the reports, this is a good idea and in fact I have indicated to a number of people that when they come, they should table their reports so that if Parliament has interest to discuss or debate, that can be done. That will be followed up, honourable member.  

The other question from the hon. Member for Rakai, Ms Namusoke Kiyingi, I think that is for the Prime Minister to respond to. (Mr Byabagambi rose_). If he wants to respond now he can, then you will come in later, honourable member.

3.04
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, hon. Members of Parliament. As you know, the issue of declaring the North a disaster area was tabled earlier on and Government gave its response. When the matter was repeated, we discussed it in a meeting, which was chaired by His Excellency the President. The following is the reply: 

One, insurgency is on the decline, as I will have occasion to elaborate later on because I will be discussing the State of the Nation Address. 

The second matter is constitutional. Under Article 110, you can declare a state of emergency but not a disaster. So, if you declared a state of disaster you would be giving wrong signals to many of our friends. Under the circumstances, Government declined to declare a state of disaster in the North. I thank you.

3.06
MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI (Ibanda County South, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter I want to raise now is of great concern because it concerns the security of our diplomats and ambassadors, who are representing this country in various countries.

Mr Speaker, today in the New Vision it was mentioned, actually it was the headline, that our ambassador to Belgium, who is the permanent representative to the European Union, was attacked and beaten up by lumpens from the Democratic Republic of Congo. 

This particular diplomat is my voter; he comes from my constituency and my people in Ibanda have telephoned several times to find out his status, whether he is well and the condition he is in. I want an explanation maybe from the government, to tell me what I should tell my constituents in Ibanda South.  

3.07
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am standing on a point of public concern in regard to one item, which Parliament regularly observes namely, question time. We the representatives of people occasionally and regularly speak for the people we represent through question time. That is why every Parliament, I know of worldwide, greatly respects the item named “question time”.  

Last weekend I was terrified, when I was moving from Masaka to Kampala around Lukaya, on seeing two trucks carrying cattle, edible animals, from the rural farms, to Kampala. The animals were miserably treated, suffocated, tortured, and I wondered where we are going in this country -(Laughter)- because without the environmental concerns man and woman cannot live. 

Mr Speaker, the concern I am expressing is, as I witnessed that scuffle which baffled me, it is on record that I have a standing question on animal rights. It was forwarded to the Clerk so many months ago. I am standing to question why that question does not feature anytime I read the Order Paper.

Lastly, my other concern is constitutional. Mr Speaker, I was terrified when the Rt hon. Prime Minister stood up here to make a point and I thought it was a point, only to be disturbed - with reference to Article 110 of the Constitution. The Rt hon. Prime Minister should distinguish between two items, namely a state of emergency by presidential declaration and a declaration by a resolution of Parliament that Northern Uganda is in a disaster area. If a whole Leader of Government Business cannot distinguish between the two, then I am defeated. Thank you very much.

3.10
MR UMAR LULE MAWIYA (Kalungu County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to make a few clarifications on what hon. Aggrey Awori raised on the Floor here. I happened to have been among the people who went to see –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But why do you not really leave it; it was a private matter.

MR MAWIYA: Yes, Mr Speaker, he said that we went to State House and whatever was discussed was personal, yet it is not correct. Surely, it cannot go unchallenged because it is on record and we did not only go for that.  

We went as part of a group, which actually interacted with the President and we discussed issues of a national nature. Mr Speaker, whatever information he got was just a rumour that we discussed personal matters. Actually, my colleague only requested His Excellency the President to attend her wedding. Also, when hon. Mulengani raised the issue of poverty, it was actually to do with the striking poverty countrywide but not a personal issue. So, that is what I wanted to put on record. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

3.12
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In my constituency, there is fire that is burning a bamboo forest and it is so scary that it seems this whole forest may get burnt down. Now that the Minister of Environment is around, may he tell us the mitigation measures the ministry is putting in place to put this fire out, because it is so scary and it may even affect the homesteads. I want to know the mitigation measures that are being put forward.  

THE SPEAKER: Mr Minister, do you have anything to say before we start the other business?

3.13
THE MINISTER OF WATER, LANDS AND ENVIRONMENT (Col Kahinda Otafiire): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have just learnt about the unfortunate incident of the fire in the bamboo forest. And as you know, our resources for dealing with fires are severely curtailed. What we are trying to do is to ask the local authorities to cut fire bands in the burning forest so that whatever crop has not been burnt should not be burnt now, if possible. As you know, we do not have aircrafts for dropping water; we do not have big fire fighting capacity. 

But in the first place, we should educate our people not to start fires because we do not have capacity to put them out. Fire does not start on its own, it is started by the human beings - (Interjections)- why do you not allow me to answer the question before you start passing judgment on whether the fire started on its own or not? So, Mr Speaker, these are the measures we are trying to put in place; to cut fire bands and it is going to depend on the capacity of the local Governments that are in charge of those forest areas, and the National Forest Authority. I thank you.

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS DELLIVERED TO PARLIAMENT ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT ON THE 4 OF JUNE 2004

(Debate continued.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, here I have seven minutes for each contributor but on the list I have got hon. Gagawala Wambuzi. (Dr Kisamba rose_). You want to make a contribution? A question on agriculture? Hold on.

3.15
MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA (Bulamogi County, Kamuli): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to support the motion on the Floor and I wish to start by thanking the President for having given us a brief about the State of the Nation today. I was very much impressed by the summary about the struggle of the NRM and the process, which the country has gone through since 1985. 

However, it is important for us as leaders today, to stop and think where Uganda has come from. Not only 100 years ago but 300 years ago because Uganda has not started today as a region, maybe as a state but we have been existing in this part of the world for thousands of years. Because we have existed for thousands of years, we have been going through a lot of changes. I am very glad that all of you, hon. Members of Parliament today, you have got the occasion not only to celebrate but to participate in forging a nation. Forging a nation did not start with you but it started thousands and thousands of years ago. I am glad today in this Parliament that all Members of Parliament are behaving in a civilised manner. I thank you for that and we thank the NRM Government for having ushered us to this stage. 

However, Uganda was started in a very simple manner. It started maybe with the Arabs but more so the British when they arrived here, they connived with Baganda to be aggressive to the neighbouring tribes. In the process, it was supposed to be one big country called Buganda. However, after the Baganda accompanied the colonial Government to the different borders in this country, eventually the first defilement of the agreement was done by the British against the Baganda because they started to renegade against the original agreement. Since that time we have from time to time had people actually breaking the Constitution. It is our obligation now today as Members of Parliament, since we have come this far, we must start moving in an orderly and organised manner. 

Mr Speaker, the genesis of Uganda as I have just stated, started quite long ago and each government, which has taken over the reins of running the country, has contributed something very positive. The colonial Government contributed. It actually made us speak English and interact with the rest of the world; it ushered in the monetary economy. However, they made some errors and those errors were tamed by all the tribes of Uganda, thanks to you being a black man. And I beg you, hon. Member of Parliament, as a black man, try very much to respect your skin by behaving as an –(Interruption)

MS NAMUSOKE: Mr Speaker, is the honourable member in order to keep referring to hon. Members of Parliament as “men” when he knows very well that there are women in this House?

THE SPEAKER: You are reminded, honourable members, that this is a gender-balanced Parliament.

MR GAGAWALA: Where I got trained, a man was a woman and a woman was a man because I went to a mixed school. So really when I talk about man, in the broader sense I really mean woman because woman is the one who begot all of us. Surely, I did not intend, Mr Speaker, to belittle the women. So, I will now change the subject and use the word “person”.

I was referring to the genesis of Uganda. While I am talking about the genesis of Uganda, we should know where we came from, that each government, which has taken the responsibility to run this area of the world, has actually contributed something positive and also contributed something negative. And we must as Members of Parliament be ready to criticise ourselves for the better of the future generations to come. Therefore, with this, I would like to thank the NRM Government for what it has done. 

I will not go through the history because you have given me only seven minutes. So, let me move faster by saying, yes, the five strategic goals are important but there are some of the goals, which are more important than others. A thing like transforming society into a civilised society starts with security. When we talk about security in this country, it is something we should all discuss at par. You are all equal partners and we should all address it with the seriousness it deserves. We should all actually accept that we are responsible for our own security.  

Mr Speaker, when I talk about security, I am saying that the President of Uganda swore to all Ugandans that this term, which he is now serving, is supposed to hand us a professional army. It is our challenge, each one of us, to find out whether we are on course as far as developing a professional army is concerned; a national, united and professional army. It is a pity if you take 3.5 million Basoga in the country and they do not have senior officers in the higher echelons of the army. I am saying you should have –[Hon Members: “Cowards”]- coward or no coward, it is the responsibility of the government in power to attract all tribes to serve at all levels of a national army.  

Mr Speaker –(Mr Bamwanga rose_) - you want to say something? There is no time. The issue of a national army –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you can see the other problem, if he has to give the information he has to walk to the front and go back.

MR GAGAWALA: I thank you very much, you have seen the problem. (Laughter). So, we are saying the most important institution, which we should really be focusing on forgetting about politics of parties, politics of movements, is developing a national professional army to which we expect all tribes to feel they are part and parcel of. And they should play more or less an equal and responsible role all the time.  

Mr Speaker, the other point, which I want to speak about, was the economy. We are talking about a paradigm shift for the economy of Uganda. I think the only way we can really say that we have started moving, or we have started making the shift, is when our saving ratio has started coming towards 20 percent. The per capita saving ratio of the GDP, if it is 20 percent then you will see the economy actually transforming to the levels of Korea, to the levels of India. But as long as our saving ratio per capita is much lower that even five percent, then we have not yet approached the point where we are going to trigger an avalanche of economic emancipation. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.26
MR PETER OCHIENG (Bukooli County South, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will also be one of those who will speak in support of the motion on the matters of the State of the Nation Address to this Parliament. 

I will go straight to page 5 of this address. It has a table; item No. 5 of this table is fish and its products, giving an earning of US $98.4 million to this country. I happen to come from one of the Lake Victoria regions, being Bugiri and Bukooli South in particular and which has been also mentioned in this particular State of the Nation Address.

My problem is the way that fish and those who deal in fish are being handled in this country. As I speak today, all of us are aware that fish has become really much more precious than we ever thought about before. But what is happening, in some of these areas, leaves a lot to be desired. I live in the border area and what has happened, Mr Speaker, ever since Uganda found out the goods and earnings in fish to this country, has left a lot of suffering to the people of my region.

First of all, there was an operation to enable all the Ugandan fish processed in Uganda. But this really caused a lot of problems to my constituency. What was the reason? For a long period of time fish was basically picked from Uganda and processed in Kenya. This enabled the Kenyans to concentrate and do a lot in the fish market regardless of the issue, which is known to everybody that Kenya has the smallest area of coverage of the lake. These people did a lot to all the status quo. Immediately when we realised the goods of the fish, the people of my area have suffered under the programmes and the subsequent arrangements of the security officers in the water area.  

Today, Mr Speaker, I would like to make it clear that they have not only suffered under this external arrangement, but there is also something very astonishing that the system used in fishing for a very long time has been basically a design of the locals. Among the system are the types of boats that we use. As I speak now, they are breaking boats, which help my people not only in fishing but also to get clean water and to have a number of other things. The reason is that these boats are not necessary because of the Fish and Crocodile Act of 1960, which has just been made known to the people today.

Many people have suffered, Mr Speaker, and I feel by the time I come to this area of concern, it is of great importance that those who are dealing in this very particular area get to know what is happening in this area.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, there is also the element of how these people get a much better response. When we talk about the water, it is a common phenomenon that it is only Kalangala in many cases that is taken. Why do I say so? Each and every item on the water is seen in this aspect because our area has so many islands but we have tried in many cases to see a way of benefiting these people. But you find all programmes, which are geared towards that, leave alone the hardship allowances and the transport system everything has been geared towards only one side of the water body.

Leaving that aside, there is another issue, which I find on page 7: safe water. There is a big problem in the belts of the Lake Victoria shores from Mayuge to Bugiri, Busia and also some parts of Western Kenya. There is a problem of safe water for drinking for the people around this area. It is an area covering around 20 kilometres from the lakeshore. These areas hardly provide water in the ordinary form that we normally know, the borehole system. If we are to do with the borehole, it is either very deep to the extent of going as deep as 400 feet and by the time you reach these waters, basing on the type of the segments around, you might find the water very salty. If it is not very salty then the boreholes cannot be maintained because they involve a number of problems and they keep breaking down every other day.  

As we speak of safe water, Mr Speaker, it is only paramount that before we go in for the normal programmes, which we are carrying out today of water production, these people have to live and it is basically what we are talking about. But the safe water for a living for these people can be really looked into. 

What did the Kenya people do? The Kenyan people for a very long period of time discovered this and they have done a number of –(Interruption) 

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I thank the honourable member for giving way. It is just a matter of information. I want to assure the august House that the ministry is aware of the problem of areas surrounding Lake Victoria and all other water bodies. It is established that once there is a water body, the surrounding area must be so solid so as to protect that water from sipping out. As such it is not easy to drill a borehole and access water. 

We are looking at a number of areas including Bugiri and other areas like Kooki, Mayuge and wherever you find a water body. So, we are coming up with a new policy because our policy up to now has been to provide clean, safe water and that is what we have been trying to do. And now the outcry is that we should provide water for a start even if it is not clean. We are reviewing the policy especially in those hard-hit areas to see whether we can actually go in to provide water and then later on try to purify it. So, that one is being taken care of.

MR OCHIENG: Mr Speaker, allow me to thank the honourable minister. I hope that will be taken into account and very soon. Let me take this opportunity to report to you that we have not received the normal rains of April and if we are to look for water and also look for food, it is going to be a problem for the people of those regions.

Finally, Mr Speaker, I want to talk about transport on the water –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable member, it is time.  

MR OCHIENG: Mr Speaker, I will try to make it very quick indeed. The transport on the water, more especially the water section of my constituency, is becoming very difficult. For a very long time we have been using these ordinary, traditional boats. Take the case of my constituency with about 70 nautical miles of water from Lugala to Dolwe where there are so many people, a whole sub-county, in many cases we have people drowning, we have people failing to – even the Police trying to effect the law of the 24-hour custody for a suspect is becoming a problem. They end up making people stay in their cells for four or seven days just to get easy access to take them near any of the places where they can get justice done.  

There is also this element of the new regulations of the Ministry of Transport, especially the ones carrying a few precautionary elements like the helmet and secondly, having something to do with the mobile phone. The helmet in my area has caused a lot of problems simply because if a helmet is to be put on by every passenger on the boda boda, then how many will put on that very same helmet for the whole day?

And when we talk about the mobile phones, I get a little bit of a problem and I need to be clarified. Mr Speaker, there is a problem of parking in this town and if I am to stop using a mobile phone while either driving or in a car, then I will have to look for a parking space and by the time you look for a parking -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member, we agreed on seven minutes, now it is over ten minutes.

MR OCHIENG: Mr Speaker, I thank you for according me a little bit more time and I say, thank you very much. Allow me to end here and say that something should be done on some of these issues. I had so many other things to talk about but I will end here. I thank you.

3.39
MR HILARY ONEK (Lamwo County, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to begin by appreciating and thanking our colleague, hon. Hyuha, for the motion before us in Parliament, thanking the President for his State of the Nation Address. I have three points, which I want to make. 

One is on the East African Co-operation. The treaty of the East African Community clearly stipulates that the ultimate goal is to unite East African nations as one country. I greatly support this notion and I support the idea. I wish it happens as quickly as the President also wishes, for many reasons. There are a lot of social benefits for our people of East Africa in this union. There will be a bigger population and bigger economies of scale that can be used to develop this part of Africa.  

Secondly, on the political side, at the moment we are yearning for federal in Uganda but these are tiny pieces of land – federal states. We shall have bigger federal states, much more effective than what we are now thinking of. So, a federal state with a meaningful economic basis - take an example of a small region like Western Uganda, in a sense that is Toro and the other bits. If you make it a federal state, it may not be sustainable. Take the case of Northern Uganda with limited production at the moment, and poor agricultural base, it may not have sufficient economic basis to develop whereas the argument is there that we shall – maybe those agitating for federal actually are in the limited Kampala environment; but it is not sufficient. I would wish that we got a bigger East African federation whereby the economy is bigger. (Applause)

I support the President on export-led economy, to build an economy, which has got very strong export capabilities so that the earnings of our country go up. We build up bigger reserves and have more funds for development. I would like to single out one area on page 5, which I thought we could earn a lot from if we could develop the sector. In table 5, No. 1 is electricity. At the moment we are earning US $13.2 million per annum from electricity exports but I know for sure that we have enormous potential. If all the potential were developed, we could export 20 times what we are exporting today to our neighbouring countries. We can export to Rwanda, Tanzania, Kenya and Sudan. Southern Sudan now is more or less getting peace and they will need electricity, which we could export and earn 20 times as much as we are earning at the moment. 

It is more elastic than any of these other components like cotton, tea and so forth. We could generate greater revenue immediately if we could invest meaningfully in electricity. It is sad that the Bujagali project has been bungled! I do not know; there have been incidents of corruption reported, there have been incidences of political wrangles over the project and we have lost it all. Up to now we have not been able to get Bujagali developed. 

The expansion at the Owen Falls Dam has not made much impact on our electricity supply in the country. At the moment we are even facing power load shedding. I believe most of the members here are experiencing load shedding in their homes. That makes me question the Minister of Energy: four years ago when we were producing about 180 megawatts of power, the power demand for this country was 240 megawatts growing at the rate of three percent per annum. Today that would amount to 280 megawatts demand level. After the installation of that equipment at the expanded Owen Falls or Kiira Dam, we have been lied to by the Ministry that there is an increase of 200 megawatts. Add that to 180 megawatts, that should make our total production 380 megawatts - which is a total lie. 

I complained in the House, but because the matter is technical, I asked the Minister of Energy to get his technical team and we sit down and analyse the calculations; up to today nobody has come to discuss the issue with me. I knew that there would still be load shedding because that station would never produce the power because there is no sufficient water to drive the machines and these are facts on the ground. However, we have been hoodwinked, the money has been spent and there is nothing. So here I really do sympathize with the government because they are depending on technocrats who never gave them correct advice.  

I would like to also to talk briefly about somebody who yesterday criticized the vision of Government. Our President’s vision, one thing is that everybody has a vision, the 26 million Ugandans all have visions but most of these visions may only be held in mind but to translate these visions into operational activities to realize values; those are two different things. Amin also had vision but the way he operationalised his vision caused Uganda a lot of problems and we lost a lot in terms of our image. Not everybody who has a vision can implement it rightly, and here I support the President for really having effectively implemented his vision up to date.

Finally, Mr Speaker, I would like -

THE SPEAKER: Order, order, please.

MR ONEK: Finally, I would like to appreciate Government’s effort in battling the Kony insurgency in the Northern region of this country. Yesterday one of most notorious Kony advisers by the name of Major or Capt. Banya, whatever, was captured and another Lt Col Tandiwit and a number of soldiers, and there is big progress in overcoming this menace. We pray that with the local defence forces we have already mobilized to support Government, when facilitated, we hope to end this menace within this year. We hope to get it over with. 

However, even when peace returns to Northern Uganda, the humanitarian situation on the ground is disastrous. The humanitarian situation on the ground is disastrous for our population and I would like the Prime Minister, having a huge dictionary of diverse terminologies like “lugubrious” and so on, to coin any relevant word, if they do not want humanitarian disaster to be used, let them coin a relevant word that describes the situation in the North so that Government at least describes it correctly. The Prime Minister should describe it correctly so that this can be sorted out. Hon. Prime Minister, we must find a way; give us a terminology that can replace humanitarian disaster area so that the problem is addressed because the issue is not the terminology but the problem is on the ground. Our people have suffered for 18 years plus and they are in dire need for humanitarian assistance to eradicate the problem. So, Mr Prime Minister, we hope you will give us the terminology. Thank you very much.

3.50
MR AEL ARK LODOU (Dodoth County, Kotido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. While supporting the motion I have some issues to raise concerning education. UPE is doing well in Karamoja and in my constituency since NRM came to power we have had 49 primary schools, an increase from 18. (Applause) Also, we have had Alternative Basic Education in Karamoja, which is a move in the right direction, but then the increase of students going to primary schools and secondary schools does not match with secondary schools. I have only one secondary school in my constituency –(Interjection)- only one, that is Kaabong senior secondary school, but we have a community secondary school, which the community built in Karenga. 

They have been requesting that Government takes that school over; we have since 2001 been requesting for grant aid but the Ministry of Education has refused to grant aid to Karenga senior secondary school. I think something should be done. But now Dodoth County has a population of 379,000 people and out of that we have nine sub-counties. In the nine sub-counties we have only two secondary schools; I think something must be done through the Minister of Education.

On clean and safe water coverage, we have been talking about dams; the dams in Karamoja do not exist. The contractors that were meant to build the dams did poor and shoddy work and up to now only about three dams are operational, the rest are not operational. That is in the counties of Matheniko, Bokora, Pian and Jie. There is no water in these dams; we are talking about clean water coverage. We have towns in Karamoja but there is nothing, which has been done about town water supply. Moroto Municipal Council has no water; Kaabong has no water. I request that the Minister of Water does something for small water projects for Kaabong Town Council. 

Poverty; in the President’s speech we heard about poverty but there are some areas in my constituency where people have not seen even a single cent -(Interjection)- yes, they have not seen what they call money, the Peruso for instance have not seen coins. So, poverty is biting in its order. We have done something with the local people; we have established a village bank called Kaabong village bank but to boost this bank we need micro finance from Government.

Security: disarmament has been a problem in Karamoja and more so in my county, which borders Sudan and Kenya. The efforts by Government in disarmament were waylaid by transfer of the LDUs to Kitgum, Gulu and Pader to serve there, leaving their home unattended to. I wish that the revival for disarmament takes off otherwise people are dying. In 2001 the soldiers murdered my LC III Chairman for Koputh sub-county. This matter was brought to the Minister of Defence but up to now nothing has been done to compensate these people. 

Security roads: we had expected security roads in Karamoja to be opened. But to-date none of the roads has been maintained especially from Kaabong, to Kapedo, to Karenga, to Orong. This is a route where rebels pass from the Sudan side. I hope something will be done about it.

Lastly, the President made some pledges to Karamoja. In one of those pledges he promised ten children per county to be awarded scholarships. Up to now nothing has been done. The President needs to do something about it. Also, there was a promise by the President to upgrade Kaabong sub-district to district status. This is a long, outstanding pledge for which my people say that we should request the government to do something about.  

Since independence Karamoja has not got electricity but our alternative is geo-thermal electricity from Kidepo. If the ministry can do something about it, we shall be very grateful. Thank you.

3.56
MR JACK SABIITI (Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also add my voice to those who have already thanked His Excellency the President for his State of the Nation Address. I thank him for adhering to the demands of Article 101, which demands that he should present or deliver an address to this Parliament. I pray that he continues to respect and adhere to the demands of our Constitution, particularly I pray that he adheres to Article 105(2), which gives him 2006 as his last year as the President of this great republic. 

I further pray, Mr Speaker, that he remembers Schedule 4 of our Constitution, which schedule bound him to swear to protect and defend the Constitution.  

When he retires in 2006, Mr Speaker –(Laughter)– we have many lessons to learn from him. I am one of those who appreciate the work that His Excellency the President has done in the last ten years and indeed the other years before we promulgated the Constitution. We appreciate his devotion and his will to make sure that this country moves on well by trying to put law and order in place and the achievements in the economic sector. But let me just talk very briefly about the economy, and that is on page 3 –(Interruption)

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am sorry to interrupt my brother, hon. Sabiiti but the point of order I want to rise is, is hon. Cecelia Ogwal in order to use a phone in the Chamber? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Since I have no way of verifying that fact, I decline to make a ruling on the point of order. Proceed.

MR SABIITI: Before I was interrupted, Mr Speaker, I had requested you to allow me to make a few observations, and particularly to address myself to the issue of this country’s economy. If you look at pages 3, 4 and 5, the President did dwell on markets and the added value that we should get from the products that we produce here. You cannot mould a country’s economy by being obsessed by just an individual idea. We should try and use our experienced people, the Ugandan people, the economists and those who have had access to facts and figures and use them to propel our economy. But if one is obsessed with an idea, for example, I remember when NRM had taken over power some people were obsessed with just using the old system of trade and that is barter trade. In the end, because a few leaders were much obsessed, it failed and I could say we benefited nothing. If anything we lost millions of money in barter trade, and facts are available.  

There is another idea, which I think would be a good idea: opening markets –(Interjection) – Mr Speaker, could you save me from hon. Baguma Isoke?

THE SPEAKER: You are very much protected.

MR SABIITI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I agree with the President that we must have markets, we must try and sell our products in those big markets like America and Britain and other countries. But the way we are handling this matter of trade in my opinion, we are not going to gain, the same way we did not gain when we embarked on barter trade. We have not properly handled this particular - (Interruption)

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Speaker, is the honourable member in order to continuously assert that this country did not benefit from the barter trade arrangement when we know very well that the road from Mityana to Mubende is named Bijanjaalo road out of that arrangement. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Well, if what you say is correct then the problem is that he did not have that information. Now he has it. 

MR SABIITI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yes, we may have gained something but if you put on balance what we gained and what we lost, actually what we lost was more than what we gained. 

I want to address myself to this AGOA issue that has tried to dominate our economy to the point where we now think AGOA is the answer to our economy. AGOA is a good idea if well handled. But, Mr Speaker, it appears the way we have started handling this matter, we were not prepared. We did not look for the right people to handle this matter. We did not get the right technical people to advise Government on how to handle this matter. We thought that we could do better by just collecting a number of people and when we start trade. In my opinion, it was not the right procedure.  

I want to concentrate on one company, that is Tri Star, and of course I will touch on others also. This company, Mr Speaker, as you may be aware the way it came here, the way the policy makers entertained this company, the way the interested parties colluded with this particular company, I think this was very unfair to Ugandans. This company never came with a single cent to this country to invest and yet AGOA calls for investment in this country. If you come from out you come with money to invest. But this company came in with no single cent and when it came in here the Ugandan taxpayers’ money was extended to this particular company. 

Mr Speaker, this money as you are aware, came from the Consolidated Fund and it was given in form of a loan and as you know funds from the Consolidated Fund have a procedure for withdrawal. There is a procedure that must be followed and it was never followed. But Government continued at first to extend the US $3 million, it went to US $6.2 million and I have been made to understand that actually this financial year another US $3 million is going to be extended to this company. Now, US $6 million; if this money had been given to a Ugandan, we have Ugandans here who have been busy making garments at Classic Uniforms. For example, if such people had been given this money say US $6 million and you bring Kananathan to come and train this woman, we would pay him interest, we would have still gained more because a Ugandan would have had access to this money and we would have exported as he is exporting. But what he is doing is to use Ugandan taxpayer’s money, he goes to the Middle East, he buys textiles, he brings them here and he makes garments and then he sells them. 

When he sells them he is not paying tax, we are paying for his transport, the transportation of all these goods, and yet the profits are his. Therefore, as a country what we are only gaining from this company is training our women how to weave, which should have been done by a Ugandan if that Ugandan had been given that opportunity. I, therefore, feel that the way we are handling the AGOA case, we have mishandled it and it is not only in the AGOA sector. 

We have lost billions of money, Mr Speaker. If you look at the Uganda Commercial Bank, the total loss was Shs 332.8 billion! The details are available in the Privatisation Unit. If you go to Nytil we lost US $14.1 million, go to Nile Hotel, we lost US $19.2 million, Tri Star I have talked about US $6.2 million. If you look at the purchases of the junk helicopters, we lost US $6.8 million. When we talk of trade we talk of transforming the economy of this country, all this money if it were in the right hands, this money would have generated a lot of profit. This money would have actually helped to fight poverty to make sure that things move properly.  

However, Mr Speaker, I request that since this government has done a good job and some good work, in areas like this where they have totally messed up, they should learn that there are technical people, there are institutions that should be used to help run a government. It is not an individual alone. However well equipped you are mentally, you cannot run a country alone without using institutions, because institutions are the best areas that you can use as a government to run a country.  

So I note that much as we have gained in certain areas, we have lost in others. I request that the future Governments that come in, please be prepared not to think that you alone has a vision and no other person has a vision. We want these governments to know that there are institutions, there is the Public Service; let the Public Service be used to the maximum because they are the technical people who are there to do the job. I expect my President, within the two years left, to try his best to make use of these institutions. The Public Service, the well-trained people, put them to their best use you would see things moving properly. 

But if you are obsessed with doing everything in every institution yourself, this country will never move. With this, Mr Speaker, I thank you for having given me the opportunity to talk about these issues. And certainly I support the motion. Thank you very much.

4.13
MR FRANCIS MUKAMA (Kigulu County North, Iganga): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support the motion to thank His Excellency the President for the State of the Nation Address. I do represent rural people in Kigulu County North and my concern today is about production, which should help these people to earn a reasonable living.  

When you look at the address on pages 1 and 2, His Excellency the President does indicate the reasons why they went to the bush. One of them on page 2 talks of transforming the Ugandan and African societies from pre-industrial to modern societies. That is a key reason why they went to the bush. When I look at the people whom I represent, I find that they still have a problem. They have not been yet transformed to that level, which the President is talking about. 

However, I still wish to thank the President; when he went a week ago or so to Addis Ababa he was talking about commercial farming. So, in short I am going to dwell on agricultural production. That is what I am interested in at the moment, Mr Speaker.  

As you know, about 90 percent of our people depend on agriculture and they do so by using the traditional hoe. The hoe, which was brought here before I was even born, that is the means of production used by our people to produce agricultural goods. When the President talks of going to commercialised farming - when you are still producing with a hoe, I do not know how quickly we can use it and reach that point. 

What is wrong with a hoe? It cannot give you the advantage of getting bigger acreage of production.

MR NYANZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the Floor and I thank the honourable member for giving way. The information I want to give to the member and the House is that however much you modernize, whether you like it or not we still have to use a hoe. Personally, I am a farmer, I am using hoes only and I am supplying food to six boarding schools.  

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA: I wish to thank the honourable member for giving way. Modernizing or commercialising agriculture does not necessarily mean in terms of scale. It means you are going to run farming as a business, in which case you have to invest and you have to be efficient in order to increase productivity and profitability. So, even those who are using the hoes, as long as they go by recommended practices, use proper inputs, go for the best breed, planting materials and indeed minimize post-harvest losses and then they add value to whatever they are producing, they will still make money.

MR MUKAMA: Mr Speaker, I wish to thank both honourable members for the information they have given. But however much you talk of your modern way of development, I find that it is very difficult for my people to graduate and even compete with those who use tractors as the basic means of agricultural production.  

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I wish to thank hon. Francis Mukama for giving way. The information that I would like to share with you is that the minister has a lot of challenges lying ahead of him in his new office in Addis Ababa because that is where he is going to probably conceptualise more of these issues. However, the reality is that you cannot invest what you do not have. The peasants do not have all the money that is required to put into meaningful investment. So, he has got to go to Addis Ababa and see how he can conceptualise and make the peasants in Uganda and in Africa in general produce better. Thank you.

MR MUKAMA: I thank you for that information. Mr Speaker, I have taken the information that the minister has brought, but I am still concerned. I will give you the statistics of tractors used in this country. At the moment it is only two percent of our people who use tractors, eight percent use animal traction, and 90 percent use hoes. So, I think what I am trying to appeal to Government about is to have a policy to come back to modernity. If you are talking about modernization, do not think about the modernization hon. Kisamba Mugerwa is thinking about. 

Let us give people means to produce, get the tractors, distribute them among the people. For example in my constituency, in four sub-counties we do not have even a single tractor because we are very poor, we cannot buy a tractor. So, I think what I am asking the government and His Excellency the President to do is to get a policy and get tractors to be given to the people so that they can produce more –(Interruption)

MR KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: Thank you very much, for giving way so that I give you this information. From your own statistics you say two percent of the people of Uganda are the ones with tractors. I can tell you that in most developed countries in Europe, two percent of the population is the one working on the land. So, if it is by percentage you would be actually producing like Europe, but because of the stage of development at which we are that is why we are not able. So, it is not a question of tractors but it is a question of how we deploy ourselves and utilize the land.

MR MUKAMA: I thank you, but you know very well that in European that two percent you are talking about was developed by the governments through societies but here what are we organizing for our people? I am concerned about our people. 

Mr Speaker, I also urge the government and the Prime Minister is here, my former lecturer at Makerere, I am urging the government to institute a loan scheme for mechanization. People should get access to money to buy tractors. Without that we cannot move. I am telling you, without it we cannot move. I moved around in these European countries Denmark, Britain, America they are using these machines but we come here and deceive our people that a hoe is enough, a hoe is enough, I am sorry we are not doing a good job for our people. I have got a small farm and I’ve got to hire a tractor but it is too expensive. So, give us a way of getting access to mechanization.

Last but not least, Mr Speaker, mode of production, and irrigation. We cannot think about irrigation. We have waters all over our country but we do not have any scheme at all for irrigation. Let me tell you, my home is about 30 kilometers away from the River Nile or from Lake Victoria. I did open up land, 30 acres, and did the first ploughing at end of June; I cannot even plant because we have been having a drought.  

About the statement, which we are going to get from the Minister of Agriculture, bullet 3 talks about –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Why do you anticipate –(Interruption)

MR MUKAMA: Yes, it is the issue, which I am raising –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you wait for the statement to be made? (Laughter).

MR MUKAMA: Most obliged. I will raise it later if you allow me. I cannot plant; it is so dry – okay, I will also raise it later, but there is no message given to farmers about what to do especially for those who had prepared their gardens already.

I want to congratulate hon. Kisamba Mugerwa and my colleague hon. Wadri did talk about it. I want to congratulate you for attaining this very wonderful international job –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: What has happened?

MR MUKAMA: He has got a job in Addis Ababa if you do not know; it was in the papers and if it is correct, I want to congratulate him and urge him on. In Lusoga we say when we get a good opportunity like that “osika oiza waimwe.” So, I want to appeal to hon. Kisamba Mugerwa, when he is settled there to keep on throwing back to Uganda so that we can also benefit from him. I thank the President for training us – honourable members these international jobs, I recall we had a Minister of Agriculture, hon. Sekitoleko, she also got a big job in FAO; hon. Rwendeire got one in UNIDO, now Dr Kisamba Mugerwa is also going away. So, I congratulate the President and I congratulate hon. Dr Kisamba Mugerwa. I thank you for the opportunity, but I will come back to discuss his statement.

THE SPEAKER: It seems many more members wanted to contribute yesterday. I recorded those who were here and I said we are ending this debate today. I understand the ministers also want to make brief replies to matters raised. Therefore, I appeal to you, when you take the Floor, be really brief so that others can really – we shall have another debate on the budget. 

4.20
PROF. EPHRAIM KAMUNTU (Sheema County South, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will oblige to your remarks and be brief. Firstly I observe that Article 3(1) of the Constitution provides that the President shall at the beginning of each Session of Parliament deliver to Parliament an Address of the State of the Nation and the President has done that year in, year out. So, we really must thank him for at least fulfilling his constitutional obligation. But the address of the nation must have a purpose and this is my point of emphasis. What is the purpose of the address to this nation? 

I believe it is to give the people of Uganda, who are sovereign in governance of this country, the heartbeat of the economy; the heartbeat of the nation, the substantiation of what has been done, and the substantiation of what remains to be done.  

The State of the Nation Address should also give a direction of where the nation is moving. It must give what the government intends to accomplish, it must give the tasks ahead. The Address of the Nation must also give the difficulties of the government and what challenges Government must overcome on the road to prosperity. To me there can be no better or no authoritative statement than the Address of the Nation and why, because the state of the nation derives authenticity from the direct thinking of the President.  

The President who is the Head of the State is the Commander-in-Chief and in fact the Constitution says he is the fountain of honour. Therefore, his thinking is very authentic and the address provides that authoritative account of the actual performance and indeed the continuity of assessing from year to year. So, it also provides us with an opportunity to assess successes, to assess failures, and to assess the challenges he is facing. So, if I use this framework I would want to look at the address of the President. I have two copies, this year’s Address to the Nation and last year’s Address to the Nation. 

If I analyse this framework, I have put up three areas of interest. One is the economic area, the economic achievement of the government. I think there should be no doubt that since 1987 Uganda has achieved an impressive record of performance in the economic field. There can be no doubt -(Applause)- and if I look at the inflation, to control inflation in single digits consecutively over a decade, for those who have managed economies it requires a heavy demand on discipline of officers and we must commend them, especially when you maintain inflation in a resource-constrained environment. (Applause) Inflation is terrible because it is like a robber. It robs those who are saving and it robs the nation’s capacity to invest. Therefore, when it is controlled those who have done it should be commended and we should really commend them.  

However, the challenges are really formidable because despite the considerable achievement we have seen, the problem of maintaining that stability and growth, the challenge of translating that growth to benefit everybody in the country, the challenge of maintaining even that rate of growth is becoming increasingly difficult. First, if you look at the absolute numbers of people who are poor - not percentages because you can have percentages reducing but the absolute numbers of people being poor increasing. And in fact this is the case. Poverty has reduced by percentage from 56 percent to 35 percent, went up to 38 percent, but when we look at the number of people who are poor, there are now more than nine million people, previously they were about eight million. Therefore, you need to address simultaneously the question of population growth, and at the same time increased growth. This is a challenge, which we must face as a nation.

Secondly, there is a question of equity. Mr Speaker, when you look at poverty reduction and the benefit of growth, it has not been equitably shared. You have a problem - if you look for instance at the human welfare using human development index, in areas across the country, the region in the north and east, poverty has increased. If you look at the development index, which should measure the well being of the population, the index is worrisome and indeed we are breaking our own records. But when you compare us with the rest of the countries, Uganda is one of the poorest countries in the world. We are breaking our own records but compared to others we are ranked very low.

Mr Speaker, I really want to address this question of transformation and productivity. This is a fundamental issue since it is the cornerstone of the President’s vision. I want to put it to the Minister of Agriculture that agricultural productivity and transformation, which technically would mean raising output per unit of land without going through expansion of the land used, which would only be achieved through increased knowledge, increased use of technology, which would also entail moving away from the hand hoe–(Interjection)- you need to graduate. This is a big challenge, which must be addressed, because the hand hoe does not add to increased knowledge and does not add to increased application of technology. 

We need to address this because agricultural transformation is the key in realizing the President’s vision. Therefore, when we look at this problem compounded with a rapid growth in population, you have a problem and you must confront it.

Politically - I am sitting down, Mr Speaker. On the political dimension, the President in the last year’s speech made a statement, which I should read, “The issue of politics of Uganda was finally decided in 1995 when we evolved the democratically agreed Constitution, how the country is to be run by the different state pillars, and how the Constitution can be amended if necessary.” 

In this Address of the Nation I think most people were waiting for the President to pronounce himself on an unsettled question relating to Article 105(2). Maybe the President should pronounce himself on this issue and the debate is settled. Otherwise, it is a quest. This is the most important question being raised almost in every press, in every corner: “what is the President’s position on this issue? What does the President want on this issue? And as a State of the Nation Address, I think it would be very nice if the President came on record.

Finally, Mr Speaker, the issue of security has been persistent –(Interjections)- if you can protect me from the hecklers.  

THE SPEAKER: Order, please.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, the President in last year’s State of the Nation Address of course mentioned the issue of security. In this year’s address the question of security is also mentioned. So, the fundamental question, which we have not yet answered is, what are the underlying causes for this persistent insecurity, which has been elusive year in and year out? We thought Operation Iron Fist would have finished it but it did not. Year in, year out we have numbers of people we have killed and arrested; year in and out, we have this humanitarian report, which we recently debated but the question of having peace in the entire country has remained an unsettled question. And as we address the nation this issue must be really handled. It is persistent and it remains a concern, and it must be finally addressed. 

Mr Speaker, the role of advisers to the President; you know in Africa we sometimes joke that Presidents never come late, they are delayed; Presidents never make mistakes, they have bad advisers. We would want to urge that the President has done an excellent job as an executive in mobilizing investment and resources. But when investments are mobilized and it comes to the translation of what is mobilized into operational framework and law, we find the advisers really wanting. We find them wanting and it has caused us a lot of trouble even on the Floor of the House, that the legal check and analysis of putting what is mobilized by the President - surely I do not expect the President to become a draftsman in law. I expect that to be done by an adviser.  

Similarly, in last year’s address to the nation, there was food security for the whole country but surely before the President delivers his address; there must be somebody who must cross check the editing. Even in this one when he was addressing us, I was there and could see the President trying to compute ratios and percentages. That should be the work of a research assistant to the President. That translates into even advice from big statements like the recent court ruling. All the government needed to do was disagree with the judgment and appeal against it, which would save the country the difficulty of wondering whether the Judiciary is under attack? Yes, judges can make mistakes, but when they make mistakes, they should be protected for the mistakes to be corrected. I believe this is again the role of advisers.  

Mr Speaker, I thank you very much, indeed for allowing me to thank the President for the precise statement in his Address to the Nation. Thank you very much. (Applause).

THE SPEAKER: Before we get to the honourable farmer from Busujju, I want to announce that we have other visitors in the gallery. These are pupils from Namuyenje Church of Uganda Primary School, Mukono District, and the school staff. You are welcome. (Applause).

4.36
MR VINCENT NYANZI (Busujju County, Mubende): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the floor. As I have been referred to as a farmer, I am going to debate as a farmer.  

I also rise to support the motion moved by my sister hon. Dorothy Hyuha and supported by my brother Nyombi Thembo from Mubende. Let me also join the rest who have already deliberated on this topic and thank the President for his precise State of the Nation Address to Parliament. But before I proceed with my contribution, I want to talk about two issues.

Since this debate started I have been listening very attentively to different contributors on the Floor and I have observed that some of us think that it is only the President who has to direct us on what to do. But as far as I know, Parliament is another arm of Government, which is supposed to work hand in hand with the executive to make sure that the government moves smoothly. But whenever we debate here, some of us go ahead criticising and condemning the President. Why don’t we at least work with him to improve the running of the country? Because as Members of Parliament we are part of the government. (Applause)

I have listened to hon. Kamuntu; in fact his worry is also my worry because this year’s State of the Nation Address to Parliament was very brief and it touched very few areas, which has not always been the case. I asked myself: is there anything wrong with State House; is there anything wrong with the presidential advisers, what happened this year? When I was still a minister, I remember very well that before the President’s Address to Parliament, all ministries used to get instructions from State House to give in input before they drafted the State of the Nation Address, which did not happen this time. 

Going by the State of the Nation Addresses of the past years, this has been unique. There are very many issues, which in fact are expected to be in the president’s address, for instance the rampant corruption. The President would not have kept quiet about the corruption, which is prevailing in the country. You have just heard  -(Interruption)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank my colleague for giving way. I want to make it abundantly clear that every year we ask ministries to make their input in what is read in the address by His Excellency the President. So let nobody make any mistake about it. And also when you complained that His Excellency was not giving a legislative programme concerning what he did in the past and what he did not do, I met him and I informed him of your complaint and in addition I wrote to him and I am glad to point out that he complied. I thank you.

MR NYANZI: I thank the Rt hon. Prime Minister for that information but I would like to say that a lot was left out. I have got to give you an example. Sometime back the President instructed the district to fire some CAOs. I want to inform Parliament that as I talk now, all these CAOs are still in the districts working. One of them is the CAO for Mubende.

THE SPEAKER: No, you see, honourable member, if the President instructs the districts to fire the CAOs, are there no procedures that must be followed to fire somebody? Do you think the district will sit tomorrow and say, “You are fired”? There are procedures. This should go on record; there are procedures to follow. You may say, “Well, there are doing badly”, but take the necessary procedure to fire them. I would imagine that is the procedure.

MR NYANZI: I thank the Rt hon. Speaker for that information. Yesterday we heard what hon. Miria Matembe said about Uganda Revenue Authority; we did not hear anything about that in the papers. We have been seeing matters on corruption, and in fact according to what we hear from the public, it appears as if there is no political will on the side of Government to fight corruption. That is true because we have the institutions like the IGG, the Auditor-General, but these institutions do not bite. The other time, I think it was just last month, you heard the wrangles between the IGG and the Attorney-General’s chambers.  

The President talked about fighting for security of persons and their property and then the taming of state agencies to respect the rights of citizens. I think, Mr Speaker, we need to give credit where it is deserved. I am above 50 years; I have lived in all regimes. I know what happened during Obote I, during Mutesa’s time, Obote II, Amin, then this regime. I remember very well when army men used to drive their Land Rovers to certain shops, grab whatever was in the shops and then go away without paying even a single coin. But during this time, I have never seen any army man grabbing items from shops. So, I thank the President for this. 

In fact we used to fear army men, but now who fears Col. Kahinda Otafiire here? (Laughter). Security agents used to kidnap Ugandans. I want to tell you now that in the whole of Mubende District, since President Museveni came, nobody has ever disappeared.

The President also talked about market access. It is really amazing how we are blaming the President about the AGOA business. Instead of supporting him, we are only condemning him. AGOA has not only assisted Tri Star. Yesterday I pointed out one of our exporters in Mityana, Enoch Kato. He has already started exporting soluble coffee to America and it is through AGOA. There are very many others. In fact when I was still a Minister in Charge of Industry, there were some ladies I used to move with to go on exhibitions. Some of these businesswomen are doing business with America through AGOA. So, the only thing I would ask the President is that, instead of helping only Tri Star, let the government come in to assist even other Ugandans.  

The President also talked about adding value to our products. India is one of the governments in fact, which has succeeded in small-scale industries. How did it succeed? India has put up a ministry in charge of small-scale industries and it has come out vigorously to assist whoever is willing to put up an industry. Here in Uganda everybody who produces is willing to add value, but how? We do not have money; we are only begging the government to come in and assist the producers because we know that by adding value that is the only way of getting more money and also giving jobs to other people. 

India has also attempted to protect its investors. If somebody is producing something in India, nobody from outside can export such a commodity to India. But here Uganda is a dumping ground. If you produce something, other products of the same nature are allowed to come in the country to compete with you. If we do not protect our investors, nobody is going to come to invest here in the country because of our poor incentives to the investors. Unless we come in to assist our investors and protect industries, we are not going to prosper.

THE SPEAKER: It is time, please.

MR NYANZI: Allow me about two more minutes, Mr Speaker. The President talked about the Northern war. I think the only solution to the Northern war is all of us taking up arms to fight Kony; it is the only solution. My appeal to the Members of Parliament from Northern Uganda - according to what I know and what I have heard from my fellow Members of Parliament from the North – since I talk to many, Kony’s commanders talk to some of them. Even when I was in the Sixth Parliament, it is on record that even Aggrey Awori told us that he rings Kony and communicates with him. So, tell Kony that he has been fighting for many years, he cannot capture this Government. Let him give up because Museveni fought for five years and took over Government. 

This Kony has been fighting for 17 years and he cannot capture even a single region. Tell him that he cannot succeed. Mr Speaker, I had about three points but I will talk about them later. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think we have to balance up gender. Hon. Member for Workers, then hon. Mugambe, because we have him on the list, then hon. Alex Onzima, and then the Member for Bunya. But I think we have to wind up, because hon. Dorothy Hyuha has to travel in two hours’ time.

4.49
MRS TEOPISTA SSENTONGO (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I stand to support the motion and to thank His Excellency and the government for the tireless effort being put in place to make sure that our economy grows.

However, I want to make some few comments on the address that was made by His Excellency. Like the previous speaker said, there are several areas that have not been touched by His Excellency in his address and one of them is on the health sector.

Recently Mulago Hospital, which is our National Referral Hospital, has been having a problem of faults in the X-ray machine such that many patients who are taken there on causality basis have to go out and get services from commercial X-ray machines. I think there is a need for the Ministry of Health to monitor the functioning of the hospital, especially where it is really very paramount like the emergency cases where patients have to be treated urgently.

Secondly, I want to thank His Excellency for the efforts that he has put into mobilizing investors to this country. I know very well that these investors are really booming our economy in terms of creating employment. But I want to remind him that whenever he calls these people here, they should uphold the existing labour laws. Much as they are obsolete they must follow them because wherever they come from, these people have labour laws that they follow. They should also uphold the international labour standards, which are the guidelines for all countries that happen to be members to this organization.

Thirdly, I want also to uphold the tireless efforts that His Excellency has made to make Uganda a glorious country like it was in the 1960s. But Uganda should ensure to keep this by making payment towards its obligations to the membership of the various organisations like the East African Community and the International Labour Organization. When you travel sometimes you get embarrassed that Uganda is always in arrears/debts of payments towards its membership to such organizations. So, it is high time that we considered that membership and the fulfillment of our obligations.

Another point I want to talk about is the export-led economy. We have the Bureau of Standards in place. If we are to get what we want out of the export-led economy, let us utilize our Bureau of Standards to scrutinize all the exports. I know there is privatisation but there must be some kind of intervention by the Bureau of Standards to make sure that whatever is being exported is of standard and quality. Otherwise, this cry of getting poor quality products from Uganda is bringing down our economy, which is not good.

On that note I want to thank my sister, hon. Hyuha, for moving the motion and also to thank the President for his very brilliant speech to this nation. Thank you.

4.59
MR JOSEPH MUGAMBE (Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the motion moved by hon. Hyuha and supported by hon. Nyombi Thembo. I join my colleagues to thank His Excellency the President for his visionary State of the Nation Address. I would like to make a few observations as to why I thank His Excellency the President for the statement.

I will start on page 3 of the statement. The President mentions that in East Africa we are gratified that the Customs Union has now been realized. It is true, however, the ratification for the Customs Union has not been brought to Parliament here. I would like to urge the Minister concerned to work on that a bit fast. There are issues to be ratified, hon. Hyuha, and we have a deadline.

On the same page the President says that he wants the people of Uganda to have a stronger voice, well bargaining for our legitimate interests. It is very important that we have bargaining power. Unfortunately, when you look at the budget, among the non-funded priorities, negotiations are one of them. The Ministry of Finance thought it might be not necessary to have that activity.  

However, I suggest that we need to train negotiators, at least five every year, maybe from both the government and the private sector. Parliament may note that the inter-institutional trade committee is neither a legal body, nor is it well funded.  

The President rightly points out that we should have export-led growth. True, without exports we may not grow. But without industries we may not export, as you may have witnessed in other countries. So, I urge the President to come up with a comprehensive programme for industrialisation and we should support him as Parliament, because without industrialisation we cannot export properly.  

You may have realized that the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry has gone out to throw spanners where industries are concerned because we know we need a particle of crystallization.  

On page 4, the President introduces the innovation fund to be administered through the Science Council and the Ministry of Finance. We actually need a comprehensive programme to address the issue of science and technology. Honourable members, you may realize that science is being addressed piecemeal. There is a Department of Technology in the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry, the National Council of Science and Technology is under the Ministry of Finance. 

Of course, you will realize that the Uganda Communications Commission is under the Ministry of Transport and Telecommunications. Issues like ICT may not be well addressed yet without technology we may not be able to advance. In this economy people who have got high technology can make more money than those with low technology. Those with high technology can even make more money when they are asleep, for example, MTN. Those who are using high technology make more money than some of our friends like Mulwana, who have also been working very hard but could be making less money.  

Where we might need clarification is on page 5, where it was said that today there is US $929 million worth of exports. What is interesting is that coffee earnings are a mere US $107 million. I do not know how this comes about. We need some bit of clarification on that.

There is encouraging news on page 6 that there is industrial growth. It is very important but what we may realize is that once there is a Customs Union, some of these industries that are low performing, if not well guided, may have to collapse. And the problem is there has not been an up to-date analysis of the impact some of these treaties we sign may bring about. 

I will mention a little about education on page 9. There is no doubt the UPE policy has been a success. I do not know why they refer to it as UPE; UPE is Universal Primary Education and it means that all the children between six and 12 years are in school; we have not attained that as yet. But there is a policy and we are doing very well. However, I have analysed about 60 countries’ primary education systems and primary education by the way - primary can be from between three years and eight years. Some primary education systems stop on primary 3, others on primary 8, primary 7, primary 5, and primary 6. But the longer the primary cycle, the more difficult it is to attain UPE. Those with a shorter cycle can easily attain UPE. For that matter, I think Government should look into making UPE a shorter cycle, say five years. 

There is also a mix-up of primary education and basic education. Basic education means the first ten years of education and it would be easier if there were five years of primary education and five years of secondary education. You cannot receive universal secondary education when you have failed to get universal primary education. 

Universal Secondary Education - I do not know what that one refers to. Does it refer to senior one to senior 4, or senior one to senior 6? Under the present circumstances, that would mean that all the children under 13 and 18 years would be in school, which is quite difficult. And the idea of having big schools here may not work. 

Countries like Colombia, Guatemala have what they call the new school. They have got small schools with a few teachers teaching small schools in all areas so that these young children do not have to walk long distances. But these big numbers here may not efficiently learn, they are very expensive and they are not practicable.  

Mr Speaker, I have seen this idea of big schools, there is a policy of one secondary school per sub-county. In my constituency, for example, I have got six sub-counties. There are schools, like in one Sub-county, Nagojje, there is a school, Namagunga. But for sure there are not very many children from that sub-county who go to that school, yet you have it on record that Nagojje has a Government secondary school. 

There are also other schools like Kasawo, Naggalama, which have secondary schools, but there are also sub-counties without a single secondary school, and some of these secondary schools definitely do not belong to the area.

Mr Speaker, there is another problem under this system, UPE grants. Last year most people received only eight instalments, whereas in the initial plan they were supposed to receive nine instalments. Funny enough, these instalments are inconsistent in volume and time. So, unless those issues are addressed, we shall find it a problem achieving universal primary education. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

5.10
MR WILLIAM KIWAGAMA (Bunya County West, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank my colleague from Bunya East for giving way. All of us are from Bunya, the whole of Bunya used to be my constituency but then I gave up East and South to my children. (Laughter)

I stand here to support the motion moved by hon. Hyuha and supported by hon. Nyombi Thembo. I had a lot to say but I will summarise by first of all talking about the excellent vision, which President Museveni has. We have talked about vision and some members are quarrelling that somebody is monopolising vision. No, I agree with the argument that everybody has got a vision, but it depends on what type of vision. (Laughter)

There are visions, which have driven this country into turmoil, where at one time a Ugandan was very ashamed to call himself a Ugandan because of somebody’s vision. But the visions we are talking about, the visions worked out by President Museveni, right from the time he went to the bush, his vision was to restore the sovereignty of the people of Uganda and he did it very efficiently. He has implemented it. He has embarked on the task of transforming Uganda from a primitive society to a modern society and he is doing very well on that. 

All these efforts to advocate for political union for East Africa - the Customs Union is an effort to fulfill his vision, and I do not have to remind you; he is doing it very well.  

He talks about adding value. Indeed, we can produce 200 bales of cotton and get much less for it, even where we produce 50. So, the importance of adding value before we export is very important; and isn’t that a quality vision? 

The export drive; I am a farmer of sugarcane in Mayuge. Recently we had a discussion on how important Kakira Sugar Works was to us and we found that without it we would not cultivate sugarcane. This sugarcane is sustaining and helping the people of Bunya and Jinja to develop and it is because we have a market for our sugarcane. So, as local as that, a market is so important.  

As I have very little time, I want to talk a bit about Mayuge, to point out that there are certain things the government ignores to implement, which harm the people. Mayuge is a young district, hardly three years old, but long before that it was a county but had problems, which have been inherited by the district administration. I want to cite the problem of the forest reserve. From the 1980s this problem has been there and each Government, which comes tackles it haphazardly and leaves it unresolved. As I speak, there are people in prison, because they are encroaching on the forest reserve. But the only problem we have in Mayuge about forest reserve is the failure of Government to demarcate the boundaries of these forests so that people know where to settle and where not to encroach. Even during this Movement Government, the last 18 years, the problem has been on and off. Government officials have been instructed to handle it. They have not handled it up to now and the problem persists. 

As if that were not enough, the majority of the district administration staff at the moment, are in prison for unclear accusations. The Chief Administrative Officer (CAO), the Speaker - about 15 people were arrested and imprisoned, including office messengers. And this is going on and on as if Government is not aware, causing instability in the district, because it is Government agents who come and arrest them. 

Well, the reasons are not clear because these people have not been taken to court to be charged. But prior to that, the chairman – soon they will arrest me as well. (Laughter) The district chairman has been in prison for the last 18 months and people have not been told what to do because he has been away for a long time. Should we have a by-election? People have no instructions, so they are at a loss as to what to do. At the moment -(Interruption)

MRS MUKWAYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and honourable colleague. I was just wondering whether if we were not for responding to this national address, it would not be prudent to inform the Electoral Commission and the Ministry of Local Government that there is a vacancy? The colleague should have come to me. If it is prosecution matters, then go to the Director of Public Prosecutions. So, what have the Members of Parliament in that area done to approach Government offices?  

MR KIWAGAMA: Mr Speaker, we have not been sitting. We have been to the Local Government Minister who in his wisdom does not see much of a problem in the district. Because there is an acting chairperson, and the council is in place. (Laughter) When the CAO is not there, there is somebody to fall into the position automatically. These are his answers.  

At the moment, the Busoga Parliamentary Group is trying to handle the problem and they are talking to people in the area to see how to go about the problem. We have been working around the clock to try and see how this problem is settled. We even wrote letters to the Solicitor-General to give us the way forward but their answers are very unsatisfactory.  

My point here is that Government should take action to see to it that the problem of people in the forest reserve is settled and that forest reserve boundaries are demarcated and we leave the forest reserve to be managed by the government, and the rest of the people are settled in their places, a place they claim is theirs. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.22
MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA (Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to add my voice to those of colleagues who have contributed to the President’s address to the nation.  

From page 3 the President talks about Uganda having taken on the Customs Union, that this union or treaty was ratified. This is okay but as long as there is this Customs Union, we are likely to have low revenue. So, in order to supplement this, I suggest that since we have several lakes in the country that have landing sites, it is now up to the Minister of Agriculture. And the Minister of Agriculture, hon. Kisamba Mugerwa, should tell us before he goes where he is supposed to go – because in the year 2001 we actually approved a loan to construct over 30 landing sites but up to now we have not had an answer from him. If these landing sites were put in place we could get a lot of revenue in order to supplement this customs revenue that is likely to reduce. 

The President also talked about export-led growth and here he emphasized that because we have entered AGOA, Uganda has several opportunities to tap the foreign market. But when you look at the AGOA arrangement, especially under the export promoting zones, these people have their own standards. They do not allow trade unions or workers to form trade unions and they only operate for few years, five years, and they quit. So, as we take on these opportunities I think Ugandans should be cautious that there are several dictates that the AGOA gives to Ugandans. As we campaign for them, they are in here to make profits and eventually it is you to choose whether to take on AGOA or not. 

The President talked about value addition to our exports. This is a very good idea, but until we make aggressive and consistent rural electrification, we shall have little to add to the value to our exports. So, I appeal to the Minister of Energy that the issue of rural electrification should be handled cautiously, consistently and aggressively; that is how we can actually move. But where you have that this financial year we have moved one percent and we are now at three percent, I think we have a long way to go to add value to our exports.  

I would like to also appreciate that the President has again brought back the science innovation award to give scientists to innovate and ensure that we have our property rights. I think most of the items like Aloe Vera were created in Africa but the whites came up and grabbed them. Then they claimed that they had taken on to this. So, this is very good. We are going to encourage the Africans to have property rights over innovations made in Uganda and in Africa. I would like to uphold that.  

The President said that earnings from non-coffee exports add to US $520 million and he was talking of expanding that. My suggestion would be that as we look at this, we have a lot of unemployed people in Uganda. This is why I would call upon the government to legalize exportation of manpower. We have nurses and other people looking for jobs, the so-called kyeyos. The only impediment here is that as these people go and have opportunities to get abroad, the fees charged for visas are so high. You pay Shs 200,000, Shs 160,000 and so on and eventually even if you have not been given a visa, the money is not refunded. So, it is my appeal that if you apply for a visa and pay the money but you do not get the visa, you should just put in another application until you get a visa. I do not think Shs 200,000 is worth paying and not getting a visa. Is that really commensurate with what services had been offered? So, I would like the Minister of Foreign Affairs to come in, otherwise Ugandans are being fleeced of their money. They are crying of poverty but the foreigners are also exploiting us in one way or another. 

The President talked about infrastructure development and in as far as this one is concerned, he talks of rural water and safe water; the national average stands at 58 percent. But I would like to add my voice to hon. Kiwagama’s as regards our region. What is clear is that Mayuge is the least served area in the whole of this country. We stand at 23 percent, far below the national level of 58 or 60 percent. That is why we are calling upon Government that as long as we have had central intervention, say, Northern Uganda – I know there is no way in either Mayuge and Busoga, but why don’t we also have a central intervention to have this water problem solved? 

As I talk now at the sub-county, 76 percent of the school-going children suffer from Bilharzia due to drinking dirty water. So, the Prime Minister’s Office and the Ministry of Water should come to our rescue and let us have a central Government intervention. 

Lastly, the President mooted an idea of having universal secondary education. This is a very good idea and I commend him for this. It is really long overdue. The only problem is that I have not seen it in the Ministry of Education’s policy statement of this financial year. So, when it comes we shall really embrace it. But as we look at universal secondary education, let us critically look at Universal Primary Education. It has done well, yes, but the problem of dropouts, we expected to have had 700,000 candidates in 2003, but to our amazement we only had 400,000. This means there is a lot of hot air being given by the heads of these institutions. So, let the supervisory or the inspectorate be very serious on that. And, as we construct several classrooms, why don’t we do it like in the developed countries?  

We have several private primary schools, you go to primary 1, primary 5, and there are only 20 children. Why do we not give part of this capitation to these structures, which are already constructed, and we have our average 55 and 45 percent looking at the ratio? I would like to appeal to the ministry and Government to think seriously about this. We do not have private students; we only have private institutions. So, for us to reduce that number of, say 200 per classroom in Government schools, the Ministry of Education in future should look at giving capitation to pupils who are in private schools. This will solve the problem of congestion in class. Mr Speaker, I thank you very much.

5.30
MR ALEX ONZIMA (Maracha County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am going to talk about the relationship between the executive arm of Government and the religious leaders in this country as far as the administration of this country is concerned. We all know that our national motto is “For God and My Country”. We also know that that of the United States of America is “In God we Trust”. 

Of course most of us believe that the authority we hold on this earth comes from God. Therefore, I want to raise the issue, which has become a common practice in this country that the religious leaders in this country should keep out of politics, and this cannot happen. In the first place all the religious leaders we have in this country, they are themselves voters in this country. We also know that institutions like the Uganda Joint Christian Council participates in monitoring elections in this country. Now what is this talk by the executive arm of Government that the religious leaders in this country should keep out of politics? Mr Speaker, the religious leaders in this country look after us when we are still alive spiritually, they also look after us even after death. So, the powers of these religious leaders transcend from our earthly life to our post-earthly life. We also know we have had high profile marriages in this country -(Interruption)

MR NYANZI: I thank the Rt hon. Speaker for giving me this chance. We know very well that here in the House we have Rev. Kefa Ssempangi, we have Rev. Bakaluba Mukasa and even the executive knows –(Interjection)- even Rev. Kabushenga. Is hon. Onzima in order to say that the executive does not need religious people in politics?

THE SPEAKER: Well, hon. Onzima, can you substantiate your statement in view of the fact that in this House there are Reverends?

MR ONZIMA: Mr Speaker, I do not think there is any person in this House who is too young to know what position the present Government has taken on certain pronouncements that were made by the religious leaders in this country as far as we move towards the 2006 political atmosphere. The religious leaders have come out openly and more so the Bishops on –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, I think the point was really in view of the fact that there are Reverends and Canons in the House. Is it true to say that the government does not want religious leaders to get involved in politics? Does it mean that they should go away?

MR ONZIMA: That is not what I am referring to, Mr Speaker. I am referring to statements made by the executive arm of Government especially when religious institutions make certain important pronouncements. It has been clear that they should not get involved in the political affairs of this country. This is public knowledge.

MRS MUKWAYA: I thank you colleague. Mr Speaker, is my colleague in order to selectively quote the executive? The Executive –(Interjection)- yes, because he is saying that we have said that we do not want religious leaders to participate. We have said that religious leaders should not divide people –(Interjection)- yes, definitely, because if you are a Bishop and you have people in your congregation who support various political views, for you, you should mobilize them towards God, you should not divide them. So, is the colleague in order to selectively quote us that we have stopped religious leaders to participate in positive politics and not divisive politics?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Onzima, in view of the statement by the minister, they are saying no divisive politics, are you still maintaining your statement?

MR ONZIMA: I still stand by my position that by my own understanding, I think let me make it more explicit - my own understanding is that the position of Government is that religious leaders should not poke their noses into the political affairs of this country.

THE SPEAKER: So, the problem is one of interpretation. 

MR ONZIMA: Therefore, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MRS MUKWAYA: There is no vendetta, because that is not an issue in the Presidential statement. Yes, it is not there. So, if you bring something that is not in somebody’s statement and he continues to state that the executive, and we are here, we cannot accept our honourable colleague to put words in our mouths. Yes, he cannot continue to say - therefore, Mr Speaker, is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when it comes to the debate of the presidential address, this is a general debate and, therefore, anything connected with the government can be debated. As you heard, hon. Nyanzi said that the statement was too brief because it left out a number of issues. This meant that in his view it should have covered a wider field. When such a motion is brought here because it is a motion to appreciate, somebody can say I do not appreciate it, by showing the deficiencies. So, these general statements you can accept them. They may not really be substantial but you may not stop somebody simply because it was not mentioned in the statement. 

But when it comes to a point where somebody cannot substantiate and he maintains it, then I can ask him to substantiate. But you can go on to another point. (Laughter)

MR ONZIMA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank you very much for that ruling. I appreciate it and in fact that is the gist of my debate this evening, and I have to raise it to the last point. 

As I was saying, God as we know is above everything and the ambassadors of God that we can see on this earth are our religious leaders. They have a mandate to guide us spiritually and otherwise. They have a mandate, like if I may remind this House of the Iraq war; the Iraq war was propelled by the governments of the United States of America and the United Kingdom to remove Saddam Hussein. The decision to remove Saddam Hussein was not a religious act; it was a political act. Despite the fact that Bush and Blair are Protestants, they took the trouble to go and talk to the Pope, who is not a political leader anyway, and the Pope advised them against the invasion of Iraq. 

Saddam Hussein on his part, being a Moslem, sent Tariq Aziz to go to talk to the Pope on his behalf about the then impending war of the invasion of Iraq. You see, I do not understand this talk in this country that the religious leaders should not poke their noses in the political affairs and in the political management of our country. After all, all they do is to guide the government, the President and his Cabinet that, “We feel things should be done this way, we feel on this aspect of our political life we should move in this direction”. It is just a guide; it is not an order. So, it is all upon the President and his ministers to think over it and take a decision. If they deem the advice is proper, they follow that line, which is advocated by the religious leaders. 

In my view, therefore, Government should show respect for our religious leaders. In many cases when religious leaders do something that is in favour of Government, they keep quiet; yes. Like I am told, before this Government came to power, the late Cardinal Nsubuga actually gave them a lot of assistance. I do not know whatever assistance he gave, but it is on record. It was not only spiritually, it was more than spiritual; they kept quiet -(Laughter)- now, once they are in power -(Interruption)

MRS MUKWAYA: I want to inform my colleague that Government and the President have consistently acknowledged, it is on record, so it is not fair to Government and the President for you to say that we kept quiet on the assistance, whatever assistance we got. In our language, and the late Cardinal was also of the same tribe, when you give with the right hand, the left hand should not know. Yes, even in the Bible I understand, but even in the Koran. So, we have not kept quiet about the assistance that the late Cardinal gave us.

THE SPEAKER: But it is time, really –(Interruption)

MR ONZIMA: Mr Speaker, I thank my sister. In fact what she has said has even strengthened my point because on the other hand, if the religious leaders make a statement, which does not favour or does not rhyme with the position of the government, that is when Government comes out with full force to say “you must not do this.” So my appeal to you as Government, the President and you ministers here, is that the religious leaders are human beings like you, like me. They may do something that does not favour your position or rhyme with your position.  But if you so think that what they have articulated does not rhyme well with you, please use diplomacy.  The President can summon these religious leaders and talk to them quietly; you can use other avenues. But to let these other subordinates write anything that is abusive, that does not show any respect for our religious leaders and that might be the wrath of the government. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.47
MR WILBERFORCE KASAMBA (Kakuuto County, Rakai): Mr Speaker, I would like also to join my colleagues to support the motion and to thank His Excellency the President for the mood he was in when he was submitting to us the State of Nation Address. The mood the President was in was jovial and friendly, and we commend the well-articulated State of the Nation Address.  
I would like to recognize the great strides this country has achieved for the last 17 years ever since the Movement system of Government came in place. There has been a lot of social, political and economic transformation. In view of that I would like to highlight some of the issues from the President’s speech. 

He gives the genesis of the revolution and he states that one of the first issues is to give total sovereignty to the people of Uganda to govern their own affairs. I very much concur with this issue as a very cardinal one, which the government has addressed. Peoples’ rights have been reinstated, freedom of association, the right to life, and the right to food and security. But one very important concern is that rights must be followed by peoples’ responsibilities in as far as securing food security, securing children to stay in education - if there is a right to education – security for people to speak responsibly in public, mass media and even in closed sessions; this responsibility still needs to be followed up. I think as we go into pluralism, we need to set minimum standards if we are to maintain rights. Rights must be backed up by responsibilities, which must be full and people must be made compliant to ensure that there is sanity in this country.  

I would like to emphasize that the time for excitement is coming to an end and we must ensure that as we are running out of time, we are now in the transition period. We must make sure that we set standards, if we have been playing alone as the Movement System of Government and now we open up to other political players and we do not have strict, set regulations and rules of the game, I am assuring you that we are going to witness more violence and more abuse of people’s rights.  

On the issue of export-led growth, which the President well elaborated, we all support the government initiative to improve on our levels of export and Government has done quite well in this direction.  

However, there is a need for analysing the functionality of the different players in this struggle to improve on the export-led growth. You find that the Minister of Agriculture, Minister of Trade and Industry, Minister of Finance, all of them at times are colliding. Trade is lacking resources, Agriculture is lacking resources; two percent of the GDP is what goes to agriculture. So, if we are to go to export-led growth, we need to have a functional linkage, which is productive, to the Ministry of Trade and Industry. And we must ensure that these ministries are well coordinated and that they do their responsibilities to ensure that if you are to fight against poverty through production, trade and marketing and value addition, they must be strongly supported to ensure that they do their job well - instead of them standing on the fence. 

Currently you find that His Excellency the President is championing AGOA. You find that so many resources, for example the industrial fund is in the President’s Office. So, I feel we need to functionalise our ministries to ensure that they are resource backed and they have the challenge to face as far as export-led growth is concerned.

When we talk of the Asian Tigers, they have made giant strides in a short time, in 30 years as he mentions. Thailand in 1962 was in the same levels like Uganda in as far as the welfare was concerned in those days. But they have made giant strides because of strict, strong regulations, guidance and intervention by the central Government into the various sectors. They have made marshal plans.  When you make a marshal plan, it must be backed by martial law; there must be strict observance of quality assurance and standards. But here we have left it to be a private-led or a liberalized economy where it is private sector-led. In infancy, even if it is a child, you cannot leave a child who cannot feed itself to say that it will feed on its own. So, the government must come in to draw up a master plan for this country and make interventions to ensure that the young private sector, which is still weak, gains the spirit of driving this country.  

When His Excellency mentions the returns earned out of the nkuba kyeyo, as my colleague from Bunya mentioned, we need to invest in exporting labour in the short run, like my brother Dr Kisamba Mugerwa is going to kukuba kyeyo in Ethiopia. So, we should make a deliberate effort to export labour. That’s what these Asian countries have done. They have exported labour, they have gained innovative technology and ideas and they have sent back resources to ensure that their home countries are better off. In most cases when you look at Uganda, most of the small industries that are coming up are being backed by those people who are in the diaspora and they are sending resources back home to ensure that they put up small juice processing plants to ensure that back home they are able to have a soft landing. Government must come out vigorously to ensure that the policy of nkuba kyeyo in the short run is deliberately taken.

Allow me to talk about education. I would like to conclude by saying that we cherish UPE but UPE must be compulsory. That is why I say Government has put in a lot of resources, it has sunk in billions of shillings but we have left it upon the parents and the teachers to say that the child may stay in school or may not stay in school. It must become compulsory and I intend at a later stage to move a motion, if agreed, to turn UPE into a compulsory education system. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, we cannot continue with this debate. As I told, you we are closing it today, as the mover has to travel out of the country. Therefore, I think before she winds up the debate I understand the ministers have a few points to address, which points have been raised in respect of this debate. Please make brief responses, if any, on matters raised. You will have an opportunity to defend your policy statements in the committees and later in the House when we are in the Committee of Supply or when we are debating the motion. So, who starts?

6.02
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Dr Kisamba Mugerwa): Thank you very much. I wish to thank those who have made interventions on this important motion specifically regarding the sector of Agriculture. A number of things have been raised and I only wish to comment on four areas - but I will marshal them to two. 

The issues included markets and value addition, provision of water for production in particularly dry areas, access to credit and in what form, whether in kind or money. Then there was the issue of the size of my ministry, which is related to pests and disease control.

Mr Speaker, it is always very difficult to internalize a conceptual framework, but once it is internalized it can be easily implemented. All we are looking for is eradicating poverty, ensuring food and nutrition security, and in so doing we have to increase productivity. But if you are increasing productivity it cannot be sustainable unless there is profitability and in that case the leading principle is to have access to the market. When you have the market, if you want to achieve good prices, you must also add value and then quality control and what have you. 

The Plan for Modernization of Agriculture actually reflects all that has been said here like, the last member to speak said that all these must be co-ordinated and linked. It talks of generating technologies, which is research; it talks of guiding farmers, which is the National Agriculture Advisory Services; it talks of using soil and natural resources sustainably; it talks of agricultural education and it talks of infrastructure, which includes communication, roads, rural electrification and so on. 

Finally, it dwells on agro-processing and marketing. All this is a very good conceptual framework. We can only modernize agriculture when all these components are functioning. It is true it is a market-led economy but we are operating in a weak environment; it is mainly the private sector. It is challenging to get a loan for agriculture and industrial development. Rural finance, which we have, the interest rates are very high and the gestation periods are very short. Government, of course, has budgetary constraints; it cannot make all the interventions at once.  

Having given support to research extension, now the challenge, which we are facing – and challenges are part of life – the challenge we are facing is regulatory. It is regulatory in ensuring that our goods are of a high standard, that they can be accepted because the markets are there; even the markets, which are there, we cannot fulfill them. We can talk that we have jackfruits, but if one were to order that, “Please, deliver two containers of jackfruits every other day”, you would not find them and the quality would be bad. So, we have to ensure quality.

We also have to ensure that pests and diseases are controlled. This will help us to capture the available markets and even capture more markets. But when it is only in this financial year - and I thank the Minister of Finance - that my ministry has an item regarding disease control, otherwise they were taking disease control as an emergency measure and they were keeping this money in the Ministry of Finance. Having access to these funds was very cumbersome and our response to diseases became a problem.

To be specific, we have been challenged and this will come up in my statement. There is a challenge of ensuring that we support the private sector and farmers to ensure that they have access to irrigation systems because here in Uganda we cannot absorb a drought even if it is for three weeks. In this case even those schemes we have cannot be rehabilitated - Ndohwe Irrigation Scheme, Mubuku Irrigation Scheme, all these need to be renovated and handed over to the private sector or communities to manage them. 

Regarding the size of my ministry, it is not such an issue to me. The Civil Service Reform done about ten years ago meant just to cut down the costs and also reduce the personnel, but it had to be followed with functional analysis and rationalization of different mandates given. It is only my ministry, which has gone through that functional analysis to know the mandate, to know the functions and the size required. But these workers are to be driven by the Ministry of Public Service, and it has to be accepted by the Ministry of Finance.  

The delay of three years to accept a functional analysis is creating problems because now we have organs, which have not been rationalized. Then when this boils down you find that it has coincided with pests and diseases being rampant. Everybody says, “No, it is the ministry, which is so big, and therefore they cannot control pests and diseases”. 

As for diseases, our borders are very porous. When Tanzania the other day expelled the people of Rwandese origin, Rwanda refused anybody in with cattle, but Uganda accepted them. Then when there was a problem in Congo, the refugees came with cattle; all these are disease problems. We are now decentralizing but there are also disadvantages. When a veterinary doctor says there must be a quarantine somewhere then the Chairman LC III chairman can say, “Please, the market will be next Wednesday, wait”. Then we have to enforce regulations, especially the movement of livestock.

The funds must be also available in order to make a quick response whenever there is an outbreak. But most importantly, wildlife in this country is a source of diseases and we do not have fences on these zoos, national parks and sanctuaries. Therefore, livestock is grazing hand in hand with the wild animals. All these are not about the size of the ministry. Whoever will come will find that it is not the size of the ministry, but will have to address these issues. So, my submission is that we need to do rationalisation of which factors can ensure that all the components of PMA work. 

Hon. Prof. Kamuntu said the technology must be adopted. Yes, technology is there because NARO has worked, the extension is there. But then how does the farmer have access to this technology? He needs credit in order to adopt it. How does he get water to his farm? There must be a strong intervention to have a big channel to bring water nearer so that the farmers –(Interjection)– of course by Government. I can eat something as big as my head, but I cannot eat it at once; if you give me time, I can eat all the food. So, I would like to submit that now that we are zoning the country, we need all these components to work.

In the Sixth Parliament, if you read the Hansard, Members of Parliament were saying we should scrap UPE, scrap this and that, “UPE is going to make our children a problem”. The same has applied to PMA but I am comfortable to hear now people saying UPE is doing very well. Please, I appeal to you to support PMA. We can do this and that because the conceptual framework is correct. I thank you very much.

6.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE, PRIMARY EDUCATION (Mrs Geraldine Bitamazire): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Let me add my voice to the movers and supporters of this motion and to thank Members of Parliament for the very constructive ideas they have brought regarding the running of some of the programmes.  

Mr Speaker, the question, which has been repeated several times, is Universal Secondary Education. Members want to know how far we have gone on making that a reality. On page 9 of the address booklet, His Excellency is clearly stating that he still has that dream. He goes on to analyze the required resources to show the country the magnitude of the challenge for implementing or introducing Universal Secondary Education. But then he ends by calling for more consultation and planning. He says in the last sentence that it should be considered.  

So the point I am making, Mr Speaker, is that, it is not easy at the moment to come by the facilities we require to start universal secondary education as the President says on page 9. However, one Member of Parliament asked to know how far Government has gone and I am happy to say the following: 

One, in order to help some needy children Government has gone on with the sub-county sponsorship scheme. We started this in the last financial year with sponsoring only two needy but very bright children. This year we have doubled the number to four children. As I speak now we have sponsored over 3,500 needy children at secondary level, and the sponsorship is to continue up to O’ Level, and if the students want to join other institutions at that level or continue to senior six if they can. So this is a 1,000 miles’ journey, which has started with one step forward; we are at that level. But then we are encouraging the private sector too, to invest in sponsorship of the post-primary children in post-primary institutions. 

I would say that the Members of the House should patiently continue analyzing these issues and the resources required so that when universal secondary education becomes a reality we are on the ground and we can make it a successful adventure.

Other preparations include of course expansion of facilities, seed schools being constructed in some areas and grant aiding some of the schools or community schools to expand the accessibility at that level while working out the resources for universal secondary education as the President says.  

The second point, which came out, is that there should be at least one first class secondary school per district. That is a very wonderful idea and the Ministry of Education is working at what we call centres of excellence. Many of us will remember that in the past we used to have very good schools, Ombachi, Koboko and Nabumali and many others, but over the years they have deteriorated. So, the ministry is working out a scheme where this can be done again. There should be at least one well-equipped and facilitated school in each region to assist to bring the quality of students needed to go for university education.  

The university quota was raised but I think it has already been stated in this House that Cabinet is also considering discussing and consulting on that matter. What will be the best, the quota system or shall we find out other alternative ways of sponsoring students from areas, which have not yet had good subscription to the university education? It requires systematic planning and we are working on it together with Cabinet. Whatever position is taken by the government will be brought back to the Floor of the House.

Another member raised a question of examination fees by UNEB, that it is becoming too expensive. I would like to inform this House that running and managing examinations is becoming very expensive. One; the natural inflation is at work but secondly transport and invigilation of these exams is becoming very costly. Of late there were some malpractices cropping up in the system, which were threatening the credibility of the education system in this country, and UNEB has to fight these malpractices through employing more people. So, the packaging, the printing, transport, supervision, everything has gone up by a factor simply because we want to keep the credibility of the education system so that our certificates continue being acknowledged internationally and, of course, nationally.  

Mal-practices are being curbed to a certain degree but the examinations board is continuing to make sure that if they later on find that malpractices have gone down, then the costs will be reviewed accordingly; but right now that has caused the expense.  

Then there is always an issue brought forward about Government taxing private schools. The Ministry of Education does not collect revenue and I want to inform the members that we do not even have any detailed idea of what tax is paid, who is collecting it, why is it collected, we do not collect revenue -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think the point is that these private schools are being taxed apparently by the Ministry of Finance yet these schools fall under the Ministry of Education. So when they are querying this issue, assuming it has merits, it is the Ministry of Education to take it up with the Ministry of Finance so that their voice is channeled through the Ministry of Education because you are the parent ministry.

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: I thank my colleague for giving way. I thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true that sometimes private schools are taxed. But members should know that private schools are set up like any other business. Tax can only be on profits. If any business is making a profit, then the profit is subject to tax. If any school is not making a profit, then the tax does not apply -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: They are going to ask you, Mr Minister, do the government schools pay tax?

MR RUKUTANA: But Government schools are not profit making! 

THE SPEAKER: I think we shall follow this issue up in the committees.  

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Minister, for your interjection. Mr Speaker, we shall find out the details on this matter and pick it up with the Ministries of Finance and that of Local Government. Otherwise, right now we do not have much detail on that problem.

The last point was about the UPE programme in Kalangala District. Unfortunately, I had just gone out for other official duties but we are implementing UPE in Kalangala District through what is known as multi-grade teaching. I understand, Mr. Speaker, you instructed the Social Services Committee to make some investigations on this programme and probably report in detail at a later stage. 

At this moment what I would like to say is that multi-grade teaching is where you have two pupils in primary 5, one pupil in primary 6, and three pupils in primary 7. Instead of having a teacher for each one or two pupils in a class, you put two or three classes in one room and have a teacher to help each group separately. Kalangala has only 16 primary schools with a very small number of pupils. So, we cannot put a teacher for each two or three pupils. The idea is to have them with one teacher managing the programme. But they do the regular primary education programme, sit the examinations and they are following the curriculum like Nakasero, Shimoni or any other primary school. The problem in that area is that the pupils are very few per class and yet we want to make them access education, and they do very well. So, it is a regular programme except that we cannot waste manpower and have one teacher per pupil; we are not yet at that rate. But we are compiling a paper, which the Social Services Committee will consider.  

Mr Speaker, there is always a question about grant aiding community schools at secondary school level. I want to inform the House that we have got 427 sub-counties without Government secondary schools. So, when your sub-county does not have a Government secondary school, please we are working systematically and at the end of the day we shall fulfill that obligation of a public secondary school in each and every sub-county.  

Hon. Kasamba has proposed that we should make UPE compulsory. That is a wonderful idea and the Constitution states it but we have to get more than 60 percent facilities in place. Right now many of our children are sitting under trees, we are recruiting teachers to man them; we are putting up facilities. So, if we make it compulsory, every parent and every pupil should have a school next to him, but right now the distribution, the location and the facilities do not allow. How do you prosecute a parent whose kid has to walk 20 miles a day to go to school? Like in the pastoral regions of Uganda, the cattle corridor, there are no schools yet. So, we are working out a system whereby the facilities will be available and then when we come to prosecute these parents, they will have no excuse. But right now we still have a problem and we are working hard to put up these facilities.  

So, Mr Speaker, the last one is extending UPE grants to private schools. This was the system for about four years. UPE grants were being released to private and community schools but then the facility was so much abused that it was not worth it. Children who were being paid for were paying more money than probably would be the case, and in some cases head teachers were not declaring this money from Government -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Please, let us take no more details about this. This will come later because –(Interruption)

MRS BITAMAZIRE: So, this existed for three years when UPE started but it was a facility much abused and right now we are working on it to see how best it can be implemented without losing a lot of money. I think those were the main issues raised but of course during the discussion of the policy statement we shall continue clarifying and explaining the Ministry of Education and Sports’ policy and programmes. I thank you. (Applause).

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

6.19
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/MINISTER OF DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Lt Gen. Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, mine is very brief. I am here to answer questions about the two refugee settlements in Kyaka I and II, and Kyenjojo district. In order for members to understand, especially my colleague, hon. Kiwanda, I need to go back to history just to bring him up to date on why we have refugees in Uganda.  

First of all, Uganda is signatory to the Geneva Convention and as a member we are duty bound that when citizens of any neighbouring countries, who have a problem in their country cross into Uganda, we should look after them. Where they stay is then called a refugee camp.  

In 1955 to 1959, the first civil war in Sudan erupted and in 1959 the Tutsi monarchy in Rwanda was overthrown. In 1964 there was a Congolese civil war in East of Congo. So within ten years, that is from 1955 to 1964, there were problems surrounding Uganda and that forced so many people into Uganda as refugees seeking asylum. The Government of that time was faced with the problems of looking after these people and they talked to the Kings of Ankole and Toro and they were given land, and that land was compensated for somehow. In fact the refugees at that time were settled in Orukinga, Nakivale, Kahunge, Rwamwanja, Kyaka I and Kyankwale. The Congolese and Sudanese were settled in Agago County in Kitgum District, now Pader. 

The central Government at that time had to look after these people in all these areas. But in 1984 the government decided to relocate refugees from Agago to Ibuga in Kasese and Kyaka I in Kabarole for Sudanese and Congolese refugees respectively for security reasons. In 1980 the UPC Government then identified Rwandese refugees who were staying both in refugee camps and outside spontaneously. They were identified as a security threat and they were rounded up and that is when Kyaka II was created and they were put there and up to now. Some of them are still there and up to now we are not going to release Kyaka II because we shall need it and this Kyaka II was cut off from Katonga Game Reserve.

Justification for Kyaka I and Kyaka II: in 1994 the government decided that Ibuga refugees be degazetted. But up to now we have not done so because we do not have resources to do it. Kyaka II still has refugees coming from Congo even as I speak now there are refugees coming from Congo through Bundibugyo and we are taking them to Kyaka II. 

In conclusion, Sir, we are aware that some local politicians and even the national politicians are encroaching wilfully on game reserves. They are wilfully encroaching and even fraudulently getting titles from these refugee camps. As a Government we are also in the process of wilfully trying to evict them and we shall prosecute them very soon. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

6.26
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to add my voice to the mover and the seconder of the motion and the colleagues who have made contributions to this debate. There were three issues, which were raised touching my ministry: 

The first one was that the Ministry of Justice and Constitution Affairs lacks an Attorney-General. I have to report, Mr Speaker, that the Prime Minister had already informed this House that the President is aware that we lost the former Attorney-General, and he will replace him at an appropriate time.  

The second issue was the need for enforcing the patent rights for research work. An example was given that there is a developer in Soroti who develops sorghum. I want to inform this House that the Patent Rights Bill is among the many Bills that are lined up for amendment, and once we are through with the heavy work that I have put before the committee, I will bring the Bill here. I would, however, advise this researcher to approach the Registrar General because under the Alipo arrangement there are some facilities for such people to patent their efforts.  

The last issue, Mr Speaker, was about the Khadis courts and the demand that the Bill should be brought before the House before the Domestic Relations Bill. I have to inform hon. Nsambu, who moved this House on this matter, that he is aware that the Law Reform Commission produced a draft of the Bill but the Mufti and other scholars had wanted to do some further research on this Bill. As soon as we are through, the Bill will be before the House. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

6.28
THE MINISTER OF WATER, LANDS AND ENVIRONMENT (Col Kahinda Otafiire): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is going to be a brief intervention in regard to water to the districts of Bugiri and Mayuge. I know as you also know, there is demand for water all over the country for production, for consumption, for other purposes such as irrigation et cetera. Unfortunately, before I took over the department of supplying water, I must admit that Bugiri and Mayuge were kind of left out. 

I am happy to inform you that we have already sent - and I want to inform the people of Mayuge and Bugiri that we have already sent officials and engineers from the Department of Water Development to go and see how we can alleviate the problem of drinking water particularly for Mayuge and Bugiri. Like the Minister of State for Water has said, we have a peculiar problem for residences near the lakes basins. Unfortunately, I do not know what happens when the lakes are formed but when you drill around the lake basin it is very difficult to access ground water. So, we are making a double effort to make sure that we serve the people of Mayuge and Bugiri even your area, hon. Mukama, all these areas around the lake and some parts of Rakai. So, they should not be unnecessarily anxious. We are considering them within this financial year, resources allowing.   

6.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE, ENERGY (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Onek raised the hydrological factor in regard to power generation at Kiira Power Station and alluded to the fact that the load shedding, which we are currently faced with, is as a result of there being no water at the Kiira Power Station. 

First of all, I would like to point out that this is not the first time that hon. Hillary Onek is raising this matter. He had raised it before and we had arranged for him to meet with technical people in our ministry so that they can benefit from his technical expertise in as far as the subject is concerned. But he has been engaged with a number of pursuits and he has not been in position to interact with our people. I am sure when he has time we shall be in position to arrange that interaction.  

Nevertheless, I want to point out that the expansion of Kiira Power Station has not yet been completed. So far three turbines have been installed, which are currently generating 120 megawatts. Two more turbines are yet to be installed, which will generate 80 megawatts, which we shall put in the system. As at the moment we cannot attribute the fact that the 200 megawatts, which are supposed to be generated by Kiira Power Station are not being generated because there is not sufficient water that is flowing through the turbines. Until such a time that all the turbines have been installed, only then shall we be in position to say that there is not enough water flowing through the system.  

Mr Speaker, the problem regarding the load shedding, which we are currently experiencing, can essentially be attributed to two factors. So far there is limited generation capacity and this can be cured partly by installing the two turbines that I have already referred to. But also this can be cured by increased generation as a result of developing more hydropower sites, which are in the country, which we are working on. We shall be in position to explain further when we come to discussing the policy statement of the ministry.

The additional factor in regard to the load shedding, which we are currently experiencing, is the fact that we have stepped up power connections in the country. In 2001 we had coverage of one percent. As I speak now, in the rural areas we have been able to step up coverage to three percent. In the urban and peri-urban areas, we have stepped up coverage from five percent in 2001 to nine percent to-date. The solution to the problem we are currently experiencing can only be found in ensuring that as we step up coverage and extension of electricity to the various consumers in the country, we simultaneously increase power supply through increased generation.  

As I pointed out, when we come here to discuss our policy statement, we shall be in position to provide more information particularly in regard to what we are doing to ensure that this power is available for ensuring value addition for agricultural, fisheries and mineral products as has been demanded by hon. Kubeketerya. I thank you.

6.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE, INDUSTRY AND TECHNOLOGY (Ms Jenipher Namuyangu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank hon. Hyuha for moving the motion and hon. Nyombi for seconding it. I thank all the colleagues who have made contributions.  

I have a few reactions to make in regard to the Industry Department. One, there has been a general remark that the President is only supporting Tri-Star. I want to inform colleagues that the President has been supporting a number of companies. Some of the companies are by Ugandans, for example, the honey-processing factory in Arua, which was started by Maria Odida. The President had to contribute towards the machinery, and we also have these industries like Mukwano and Kakira Sugar Works, all these have been assisted in one way or another. So, it is not true that it is only Tri-Star, which has been assisted. 

Even former Nytil, which is apparently called Southern Range now, has been facilitated to ensure that at least we have most of these factories functional. And I want to encourage you as members that you should encourage your constituents to start industries and we shall be able to assist them. (Interjections)- yes, I am serious on this because we are mobilising resources to come up with what we call the industrialisation fund and this will be allocated by a committee chaired by His Excellency the President. We shall be assisting those who are serious with adding value or processing industries.  

So, when you go back, even you, you can start these factories and definitely we shall assist. I want to remind you that as a policy, we have requested districts to come up with what we call industrial parks to allocate land so that when we get investors we can be able to send them to your respective districts. 

I also want to remind members that the industries are raw material driven and market driven. We can only establish a factory in a particular place when we are sure of the raw materials there. For example, we are going to have a coffee processing factory in Tororo because we know there is Arabica coffee in Sebei. We are going to establish a banana-processing factory in Mbarara because we know we have a lot of bananas in Mbarara, in Bushenyi. Definitely, the raw materials that you have will enable us to decide which factory to set up in your place.

Back to Tri-Star, when Tri-Star was started the main intention was for us to get access to the AGOA market, which we have done. I want to tell members that it is not only Tri-Star, which has accessed the AGOA market, we even have our local people who are dealing in handcrafts and they are accessing that market. Even Southern Range has already exported some materials to the United States. So, this Tri-Star has helped us to access even bigger markets like Wal-Mart. 

All I want to say is that when we started we had one line, now there are two lines employing over 2,000 girls and Tri-Star now has a programme to set up a spin-milling machine, which will enable us process our cotton here up to the final fabric. Therefore, Tri-Star will no longer import the garments from the third country, to AGOA. Even we are developing the capacity of Southern Range to ensure that the quality of the fabric produced is acceptable in the AGOA market. So, I want to assure members that by supporting Tri-Star it was not a mistake. We want to make sure that we sell a lot of our products in that market, and I also want to invite you to visit Tri-Star. The other day when we were there most of the members were impressed. Others even told me that, “You people, why have you not been bringing us here?” because they could not believe what they saw. So, let us support the President in his endeavours to develop this country.

Lastly, I want to inform the members from eastern Uganda - many of them have said they are marginalized but I want to remind them that even the biggest producing sugar factory, Kakira Sugar Works, which is producing 140,000 tonnes a year, is located in Eastern Uganda. We have a cement factory there; the textile factories I am talking about are in Eastern Uganda. Out of the 18 fish factories, the majority are in the east. Really, let us give credit where it is due and if you take an opportunity to visit any of these industries, the testimony is that it is President Museveni who has convinced most of these people to come back and invest here. Therefore, we should support him.

I also want to assure my sister, Teopista Ssentongo, that whatever we are exporting, the National Bureau of Standards or Chemiphar labs do analyse it, give it certificates if it conforms to the standards, before they are allowed to export. This also happens for the imports and even the products that are locally consumed. We have limited capacity to do everything because of the resource envelope but we are doing our best. I want to assure you that on standards, we do not compromise. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. I think –(Mr Rukutana rose_)- what is it now?

6.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Well, Mr Speaker, I will be very brief. I join my colleagues in thanking the chairperson and honourable members for their observations, and for your scrutiny of the Address on the State of the Nation. It is true a number of issues were raised on the performance of the economy, on the poverty levels, on the distribution of growth and all that, but since we still have time to debate the budget speech, to debate the preliminary revenue estimates and our ministerial policy statement, we shall address most of those issues later. But there are just three, which I want to briefly touch on now:  

The first one is the taxing of private schools. I have already said that private schools are treated like any other business and if we think they are making profits, we tax the profits. It is up to you as Members of Parliament to guide us if you feel they should not be taxed then we shall examine your recommendation.  

The second concern was the feeling that agriculture is greatly under-funded. Honourable members, like any other sector, the agricultural sector still requires additional funding from Government. That is a reality. The good news, however, was that the funding of the agricultural sector over the last four years has been increasing. This is ongoing and will continue to increase over the coming years. To give just an example of how it has been growing, in the year 2003/04, the provision for agriculture was Shs 99 billion, 2004/05 we have put Shs 116 billion, the projection for 2005/06 is Shs 130 billion, 2006/07 Shs 136 billion. 

It is also important to note that agriculture is quite crosscutting, it is multifaceted, and it cuts across so many other sectors and other ministries. For example, when we talk of water for production in the Ministry of Lands and Environment, there is an agriculture aspect to that water. When you talk of agro-processing and marketing in the Ministry of Trade and Industry, there is an aspect of funding for agriculture; when you are talking of roads, you are talking of market access for agriculture. So, when we combine all that we find that really the percentage that is allocated to agriculture is not necessarily only the amount that you see under the Ministry of Agriculture.

Lastly, was how we promote the indigenous people in the private sector and I want to say that the role of the government in promoting the private sector is through the provision of a conducive environment for its smooth operation. It is against this background that the government has secured a loan from the World Bank for the private sector competitiveness. That loan is about US $170 billion and it will be accessed this financial year to remove bottlenecks to the private sector and to make it competitive. 

When we have gone through implementing the reforms we have in the private sector, and removing the bottlenecks, it is our hope that by this and by the early interventions my colleagues have alluded to, we shall make the private sector competitive. And as my colleague stated, we do not discriminate. We treat all private investors, whether they are foreign or local, as equal and we accord them equal treatment basing on the magnitude of the investment. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable Minister.

6.46
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I thank you for the comments you have made, I thank His Excellency the President for his State of the Nation Address and I support the motion moved by hon. Hyuha. The scope of the State of the Nation Address, some people were saying is too small, for example, Prof. Latigo said there is no policy. But of course we have established policies. It was not necessary to repeat them in this State of the Nation Address and he cannot include everything. The document would be too long and it would take at least two days to read.  

His Excellency had to concentrate on strategic issues, including reduction of etymological and material poverty and other problems -(Laughter)- And of course you know that in our policy statement there are many issues, which should not appear in the State of the Nation Address and the budget speech. So, the President concentrated on a few strategic areas including security. Let me deal with the issue of security. 

I am delighted to inform you that insurgency is declining because of many reasons. First of all, and I pay tribute to His Excellency the President, he has been camping in the North himself and he has his pulse on what is happening. Indeed, even some Cabinet meetings have taken place in those areas. So, we have also had our pulse on what is happening and he is co-ordinating military operations from there.

The following issues have assisted us in reducing insurgency:  UPDF pressure on LRA; that pressure is now obvious because yesterday we captured Kenneth Banya as you heard and he is third in the command of the LRA. (Applause). There is also mobilisation and sensitisation of communities by political leaders and hon. Members of Parliament, that has been excellent; the use of radio by reporters, those who have surrendered have appealed to former colleagues to come out and they are coming out. (Applause). So, that is a very important approach, the work –[An. hon. member: “Prayers”]- of course prayers as you have rightly said. The Almighty, the Creator, we always pray for these people. 

I want to also point out that we must pay tribute to the UPDF because they have worked together with militias to protect camps, although occasionally there have been a few problems here and there. And they are improving our security network to ensure that camps are not infiltrated. 

There was also a quest for equitable distribution of political and other scarce resources. For example, it was mentioned that certain areas do not have full senior ministers and so on and so forth. The position of Government is that it tries to balance but wherever a person is appointed to serve this country, he or she should not be zeroed down in terms of his or her ethnic, religious or geographic origin. As a technocratic Prime Minister of this country I serve all of you equally, and I know my colleagues do the same. So, the issues to consider are competence and fairness; that to me should be the primary issue, although we try to balance.  

A point was made that when His Excellency the President responded to strikes by health workers and those at Makerere University, he was ignoring those who do not strike, including the UPDF. May I say that we have now recommended an independent salaries and remuneration board, which should deal with emoluments for all arms of the state? I think that is a better approach - an independent body to handle this matter - and we shall give you the details. 

There is -(Interjection)- well, you see, I am aware of Article 85 of the Constitution, but we may have to amend it; the case in subject to Article 93 of the Constitution.

There are also parliamentary issues. Many of you were displeased in the past because His Excellency the President did not mention what you had done and what you intend to do. But I am now delighted, I want to pay tribute to His Excellency the President because first of all he thanked the Speaker and of course the Deputy Speaker and the hon. Members of Parliament, for working closely with the executive. I want to thank you. From time to time we have disagreements but we resolve our problems amicably, especially out of sight of the microphones. I always monitor your political mood and we try to work with my colleagues here to harmonize, as he has put it.

As Leader of Government Business in Parliament, I want to pledge that I will continue working closely with His Excellency the President, the Ministers and hon. Members of Parliament to promote peace, order, development and good governance. I thank you, and I support the motion.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

6.55
MRS DOROTHY HYUHA (Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to use this opportunity to thank the honourable members for the overwhelming support to this motion, which I moved.  I am glad for that support, because virtually nobody opposed the motion.  

I want to use this opportunity, Mr Speaker, to thank the executive for the response they have made to many issues raised during this important motion. I specifically thank the Prime Minister for mobilizing and also co-ordinating for this response.  

Many issues raised by the honourable members, as you guided us yesterday, are embedded within the Budget Speech and also the various ministerial policy statements we have received. I only want to encourage members to make a follow-up with the respective ministries in the committees. If you took time to read this Budget Speech and the various policy statements we have received, many of these issues are actually there. 

For example, the Kiboga-Hoima road and the various on-going road projects, Shs 7 billion has been indicated in the Budget Speech for that. 

The colleagues who raised issues on the shortfalls of teachers, there is a wage bill of Shs 9.9 billion, which is going to be utilized to that effect. 

For issues raised about science and technology, Shs 400 million was included in this Budget Speech, and so on and forth. So I encourage members that if you took time to read these documents, many of those issues, which you have raised, could be actually answered. But I only want to encourage you to make a follow-up in the committees and the respective ministries. 

I want to use this opportunity to thank my colleague, hon. Nyombi Thembo, who seconded my motion and beefed up many areas.

In conclusion, I request all of us that we all have a stake in our economy, all of us have a stake in this Government and all of us should unite to support His Excellency the President to achieve this vision. Honourable members, thank you very much. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: On behalf of Parliament, I want to thank hon. Dorothy Hyuha for the work done, plus your seconder, hon. Nyombi Thembo, and all of you hon. Members of Parliament for the ideas you have brought forward. I hope the executive and Parliament will consider them in the way forward so that we improve our way of doing things and the lives of our people. 

I do not intend to put the question today, I will put it tomorrow and we shall send the mover a message as to the results on the motion. So, with this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.58 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 15 July 2004 at 2.30 p.m.)

6.46
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I thank you for the comments you have made, I thank His Excellency the President for his State of the Nation Address and I support the motion moved by hon. Hyuha. The scope of the State of the Nation Address, some people were saying is too small, for example, Prof. Latigo said there is no policy. But of course we have established policies. It was not necessary to repeat them in this State of the Nation Address and he cannot include everything. The document would be too long and it would take at least two days to read.  

His Excellency had to concentrate on strategic issues, including reduction of etymological and material poverty and other problems -(Laughter)- And of course you know that in our policy statement there are many issues, which should not appear in the State of the Nation Address and the budget speech. So, the President concentrated on a few strategic areas including security. Let me deal with the issue of security. 

I am delighted to inform you that insurgency is declining because of many reasons. First of all, and I pay tribute to His Excellency the President, he has been camping in the North himself and he has his pulse on what is happening. Indeed, even some Cabinet meetings have taken place in those areas. So, we have also had our pulse on what is happening and he is co-ordinating military operations from there.

The following issues have assisted us in reducing insurgency:  UPDF pressure on LRA; that pressure is now obvious because yesterday we captured Kenneth Banya as you heard and he is third in the command of the LRA. (Applause). There is also mobilisation and sensitisation of communities by political leaders and hon. Members of Parliament, that has been excellent; the use of radio by reporters, those who have surrendered have appealed to former colleagues to come out and they are coming out. (Applause). So, that is a very important approach, the work –[An. hon. member: “Prayers”]- of course prayers as you have rightly said. The Almighty, the Creator, we always pray for these people. 

I want to also point out that we must pay tribute to the UPDF because they have worked together with militias to protect camps, although occasionally there have been a few problems here and there. And they are improving our security network to ensure that camps are not infiltrated. 

There was also a quest for equitable distribution of political and other scarce resources. For example, it was mentioned that certain areas do not have full senior ministers and so on and so forth. The position of Government is that it tries to balance but wherever a person is appointed to serve this country, he or she should not be zeroed down in terms of his or her ethnic, religious or geographic origin. As a technocratic Prime Minister of this country I serve all of you equally, and I know my colleagues do the same. So, the issues to consider are competence and fairness; that to me should be the primary issue, although we try to balance.  

A point was made that when His Excellency the President responded to strikes by health workers and those at Makerere University, he was ignoring those who do not strike, including the UPDF. May I say that we have now recommended an independent salaries and remuneration board, which should deal with emoluments for all arms of the state? I think that is a better approach - an independent body to handle this matter - and we shall give you the details. 

There is -(Interjection)- well, you see, I am aware of Article 85 of the Constitution, but we may have to amend it; the case in subject to Article 93 of the Constitution.

There are also parliamentary issues. Many of you were displeased in the past because His Excellency the President did not mention what you had done and what you intend to do. But I am now delighted, I want to pay tribute to His Excellency the President because first of all he thanked the Speaker and of course the Deputy Speaker and the hon. Members of Parliament, for working closely with the executive. I want to thank you. From time to time we have disagreements but we resolve our problems amicably, especially not over  the microphones. I always monitor your political mood and we try to work with my colleagues here to harmonize, as he has put it.

As Leader of Government Business in Parliament, I want to pledge that I will continue working closely with His Excellency the President, the Ministers and hon. Members of Parliament to promote peace, order, development and good governance. I thank you, and I support the motion.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

6.55
MRS DOROTHY HYUHA (Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to use this opportunity to thank the honourable members for the overwhelming support to this motion, which I moved.  I am glad for that support, because virtually nobody opposed the motion.  

I want to use this opportunity, Mr Speaker, to thank the executive for the response they have made to many issues raised during this important motion. I specifically thank the Prime Minister for mobilizing and also co-ordinating for this response.  

Many issues raised by the honourable members, as you guided us yesterday, are embedded within the Budget Speech and also the various ministerial policy statements we have received. I only want to encourage members to make a follow-up with the respective ministries in the committees. If you took time to read this Budget Speech and the various policy statements we have received, many of these issues are actually there. 

For example, the Kiboga-Hoima road and the various on-going road projects, Shs 7 billion has been indicated in the Budget Speech for that. 

The colleagues who raised issues on the shortfalls of teachers, there is a wage bill of Shs 9.9 billion, which is going to be utilized to that effect. 

For issues raised about science and technology, Shs 400 million was included in this Budget Speech, and so on and forth. So I encourage members that if you took time to read these documents, many of those issues, which you have raised, could be actually answered. But I only want to encourage you to make a follow-up in the committees and the respective ministries. 

I want to use this opportunity to thank my colleague, hon. Nyombi Thembo, who seconded my motion and beefed up many areas.

In conclusion, I request all of us that we all have a stake in our economy, all of us have a stake in this Government and all of us should unite to support His Excellency the President to achieve this vision. Honourable members, thank you very much. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: On behalf of Parliament, I want to thank hon. Dorothy Hyuha for the work done, plus your seconder, hon. Nyombi Thembo, and all of you hon. Members of Parliament for the ideas you have brought forward. I hope the executive and Parliament will consider them in the way forward so that we improve our way of doing things and the lives of our people. 

I do not intend to put the question today, I will put it tomorrow and we shall send the mover a message as to the results on the motion. So, with this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.58 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 15 July 2004 at 2.30 p.m.)

