Tuesday, 13 July 2004

Parliament met at 2.57 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: There is no communication; let us just proceed.

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS DELIVERED TO PARLIAMENT ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT ON 4 JUNE 2004

(Debate continued.)

2.59
DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (Bugangaizi County, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to add my voice to those who have made their contributions to this debate and thanked the President for his address to the nation. One of the issues, which the President raised, was that of livestock and its contribution to the economy. His wish was that we embark seriously on export of livestock.  

Mr Speaker, one time when I was raising concerns about the rapid spread of Foot and Mouth Disease, I informed Parliament that some countries in Africa, notably Botswana, were getting a lot of money from export of livestock and that Uganda has got a lot of comparative advantage. If we put our house in order, we would actually export and get much money from livestock and livestock products.  

However, Mr Speaker, much as we want to export livestock, we have got some inhibitions. For example, if we are to access European markets, we must have certification to show that our meat is good and free from certain diseases. In order to get certification from OIE, for example, we must have certain basics in place like having a certain veterinary command structure, which is acceptable to them.  

Last session, the Sessional Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries brought a report to this august House and among the recommendations, which we think should be taken seriously by Government, is the split of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries so that we recreate the Ministry of Animal Industry and Fisheries. That way, we shall recreate and establish the command structure that is agreeable to OIE.  

If we leave the ministry as it is today, then we shall completely lose the command structure, which is acceptable to OIE. That means we shall never get certification and, therefore, we can never export livestock. So, my wish is that people who are responsible should guide and help the President so that if we are to export, certain things are put in place. Therefore, in his re-organization of the ministries of his Government, he should re-establish the Ministry of Animal Industry and Fisheries so that we proceed and get to where he wants to go.

As we put emphasis on livestock production, it is true that homes where livestock is an enterprise and taken seriously, poverty is relatively less than in homes where they are heavily reliant on crops. With our unpredictable weather where one doesn’t know whether rain may come or not, the crops fail and poverty becomes prevalent. I have not seen any serious programme that is going to address this unpredictable weather because we have not put much emphasis on irrigation. 

We have been saying we shall create an enabling environment for people to irrigate their fields, yet irrigation is infrastructure. In countries where irrigation has been taken seriously, Government has come in very seriously and established infrastructure, taken certain things to the farmers who have began growing crops and other things. But I have never understood this enabling environment unless I am explained to. How can you create an enabling environment to create irrigation infrastructure? Even the infrastructure, which was established like Mubuku Irrigation Scheme requires some money for rehabilitation so that it is used; Government has not put in the money. 

So, what are we doing? The weather is not friendly, Government is not putting in money so that even the irrigation schemes, which are present, are rehabilitated and fully utilized. I do not know how we shall then modernize. No wonder the Plan for Modernization of Agriculture as we were told is a framework, but if we continue with the framework then we may never modernize. We shall keep modernizing in words, but not in action.  

Mr Speaker, the President did emphasize that scientists in this country must have their salaries increased. I want to be told whether the scientists have been taken care of this financial year so that they do not fly away, so that they have even more morale and they stay and maybe we attract other scientists, who are outside, to come and join us.  

I want to be told when we shall enact a law that will provide for the traditional institutions. Mr Speaker, traditional institutions were established, they are recognized in the Constitution, but there is no enabling law to provide how they are going to be sustained. The whole thing has been left to areas where these institutions exist. Only occasionally, when maybe a vehicle of a King somewhere seems to be old, the Government throws around a car. I think that is not sustainable. It looks as if it depends on whether the President’s mood or the Prime Minister’s wish that a King somewhere gets a car and yet these are institutions, which are established by the Constitution -(Interruption)

MR NYANZI: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. I remember very well when I was still a Minister of State in Gender –(Interjections)- of course, you know very well the President instructed me to start on a paper of how he should assist cultural leaders. I instructed my technocrats in the ministry and I think they are still consulting according to - if at all you have anybody representing the Ministry of Gender they can inform us how far they have gone. But it is about three years back but they have already got consultants on this matter.

DR KASIRIVU: I thank hon. Nyanzi for the information. Well, maybe things are in the pipeline but the pipeline is too long! Because, Mr Speaker, we have got kingdoms and there are people who think there are certain kingdoms, which are given preferential treatment than others, and I think that is not correct. They are all kingdoms and –(Interruption)

MR SAM BITANGARO: Thank you very much for giving way, honourable member. I would like to inform the member that since hon. Nyanzi instructed his technocrats, we have prepared a paper. It is coming to Cabinet and we are waiting to bring it to Parliament for argument. Thank you.

DR NKUUHE: The clarification I would like to seek is, why should we waste resources on consultancies when we have Presidential Advisors on culture?

DR KASIRIVU: Well, that one will be answered by the relevant minister. 

Lastly, Mr Speaker, some time back there were press reports that the Commissioner-General for URA has either retired or the contract had ended. However, in her speech, she said - I cannot quote verbatim but it was to the effect that during her work one of the things that she really regrets was that some highly placed people made tax collection difficult, because they were tax evaders. 

In today’s paper, the Minister of State for General Duties just said she must go. When you combine the two: the Minister of State saying she must go and her revelation that some highly placed people were evading taxes, I wonder whether her going is related to her work of trying to make sure that people who are highly placed do not evade taxes. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to make this clarification. It is true that at her farewell party the former Commissioner-General, URA, alleged that some high-ranking Government officials interfered with tax collection and that possibly it had something to do with her not having her contract renewed. I want to clarify that that is totally untrue. The lady was employed on contract basis, the contract was not terminated, it ran all its life, which was three years, and it expired.

MRS MATEMBE: Mr Speaker, in fact it is on record and the hon. Minister of State knows that during this lady’s term of office tax collection increased by 50 percent or something. Therefore, when they are assessing the reasons for renewing contracts or promoting people they look at what they have done. And the truth is that in the battle against corruption, people who fight corruption suffer. It is true that some of the officers who are very highly trusted and favoured and come from where they come from –(Laughter)- you know, this lady followed them up. 

She has a very good record of what problems they were causing, the losses they caused, to the extent that the people who had not paid that tax, when the other people were arrested those very ones the payers of the tax came and made right the tax evasions. So, how can she be wrong when she says, “I did so well, and I was interested in continuing to do so well”? And the Government knows that she did so well but at the same time say, “No, go home, and we look for somebody else”. She is right to say that probably those people, who are untouchable and whom she touched, caused her problems.

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: I thank hon. Matembe for her information but I wish to categorically state that there is nobody, to my knowledge, who interfered with revenue collection. I am challenging hon. Matembe to give further and better particulars of any official who was responsible for interference with collection of the taxes –(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank the Minister for giving way. Mr Minister, would you clarify to us whether the former Commissioner-General was required to put in an application for her extension of work? We want to know why you terminated her contract when she had performed very well. 

And, Mr Minister, the way you are talking, it is as if we are living in heaven. But you know very well that all these regimes, we have seen Commissioner-Generals since 1991 starting with the Ghanaian, came Rwakakooko, there is nobody who had ever hit this target – nobody. How come the person who hit that target has been unilaterally sacked?

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you. The information I would like to give the honourable member is that hitting a target has so many factors involved. If she had hit the target we would not have a deficit in tax collection. We have got, within the last budget, when you read the budget background, a deficit. How did it come up if she hit the target? There are so many factors - the fluctuation of the dollar this year for example. So, I do not think that is true, hitting a target –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, did the Commissioner-General indicate that she wanted a renewal of her contract?

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, while there may have been some improvement in revenue collection during the tenure of the former Commissioner-General, that improvement cannot solely be attributed to her. There are a number of other factors. That is point number one.

Point No. 2, the levels that we expected were never attained. 

Thirdly, this lady was an expatriate. There are other considerations to make.

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable members, why don’t you spare this lady? You are now making her a subject of your debate but you do not know whether she wanted to renew her contract or not. Yet now one is attacking her then the other - really why do you not spare her this agony, please! 

I think hon. Nsubuga Nsambu was the person on the Floor when we adjourned last time. I do not know whether you want to make your contribution now, because I had kept the record. If you are not ready, then we can get –(Interruption)

3.23
MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU (Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have a few comments to make in support of the President’s speech. One of the things, which I thought was left out, was that I wanted to thank him for having accepted to increase the salaries of some units. But the precedent he has created has set some other people to cry out that “we who cannot be allowed to strike, what will be our remedy?” These include, police officers, prison warders and LDUs -(Interjection)- No, for the UPDF I have no approach. (Laughter). So, I am asked to come and deliver their thinking and their desire to have their salaries also improved.

Secondly, I have several barracks in my area. Nsambya barracks is not in a good sanitary condition. The paths in it are impassable too and sometimes water fails to run. They have their old well, which is permanent, and they say the person concerned should have taken trouble to assist them and get it repaired.  

As for accommodation in Katwe barracks, the situation is not yet improved because there are some married couples who live in the same uniports with spinsters and people of that nature. They are asking for assistance so that when somebody goes on night duty, he will have a settled mind; he will concentrate on his duty rather than thinking of what is going on back in the uniport.  

The contributors to NSSF are also complaining that the Act should be revised. NSSF waits until one is 50 years; that is when you will be thought of to receive your contribution of savings. They say these days people are being sacked from their duties and they would like to see at least that payment is started say at the age of 20 years. For that reason, they say that under the present situation of poverty, they feel the old law is inapplicable.  

The other thing, which is worrying the citizens of Uganda, is the collection of graduated tax. They say collection is really barbaric. They do not see any reason why guns should be used to hunt defaulters because some people who are killed hardly get about Shs 10,000 a month. And when they meet those people who are collecting taxes, they get worried and start running away. Unfortunately the mistake, which I have found is that the LDUs who are used in this exercise are usually expelled police officers or UPDF officers who are very bad characters. They think they will be useful but their bad character continues even when they have been saved to be given another job. This requires the Ministry of Local Government to find a way of how these armed people can be recruited while they still demand that graduated tax must go.

This is something I found in my constituency. Normally when there is a big case like the one we have just heard of, it is a civil matter in principle. It would help us Members of Parliament if an extracted order is given to the members so that we speak accurately and advise the public rather than interpreting the law in a manner, which every person thinks is reasonable, while we are misleading the public. 

The other thing is that I was a member of this House when the Constitution was being made and we agreed that Moslems would be given what they call the Khadhi’s Court. It is now 17 years; the ministry has not been able to get money to establish Khadhi’s courts. They say that the Sheiks we have do not know the procedure in Uganda and yet we have the Law Development Centre where these people could be trained. Some of these people hold Masters of Sciences in their religion, others are doctors; I do not think it would take so a long time for them to understand the civil procedure we have here.

Secondly, in the new Bill that is coming, they say that people will be free to choose what court to go to, either secular court or Khadhi’s court. This, the Moslems say, is a method intended to weaken their side because to take their cases to a secular court, to a man who does not know Islamic Law, is very unfair. They also think that to introduce such a Bill before the Khadhi’s court was inaugurated will be unfair because that may mean that it will never be set up. I believe them because even in the old law this question of establishing a court to deal with the affairs of Moslems was included but it was overlooked throughout the period the colonial Government was here and it is still being neglected.  

In the circumstances, Mr Speaker, I pray that to save the Bill, the question of creating the Khadhi’s courts should come first before the Bill is brought to Parliament and passed. The ministry says that it has no money but when you consider about ten or nine people to be trained at the Law Development Centre, I do not think that will impoverish the state. This is a matter, which I pray as a Member of Parliament who is also affected, that this money should be availed by the Ministry of Justice and we create some peace in the minds of our people.  

Actually, they quoted to me another incident; that when the commission, which was elected to investigate the atrocities of the past regimes reached the stage of reporting on the matters, which took place in Mbarara, and it collapsed. The money disappeared, stationery disappeared and the report up to this day has never come out. They think that the commission feared to hear the atrocities, which were committed; it could probably have affected some members of the UPDF. 

In those circumstances –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nsambu, permit me to inform you, because you have mentioned something important. I am not supposed to contribute to the debate but I was part and parcel of the commission, which investigated those atrocities you are talking about. We did actually investigate the massacre of Moslems in that area and we went even to the extent of going to the State House and the President gave a statement in respect of this matter. I know some people were arrested by the Police and charged. The proceedings could have collapsed but I want to defend the commission that there was no fear in handling that matter, and I will give you a volume of the report we made.

MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU: Thank you very much. But I am sorry to say that a number of Members of Parliament here, when I inquired, have ever seen a copy of it, maybe they would also assist me where to get it from. (Laughter). 

With that, I thank you very much for having listened to me.

3.30
DR FRANK NABWISO (Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing me to make some contributions to the motion on the Floor. I will start with what I found very interesting in the President’s speech. That is on page 11, where the President says that he is happy that Parliament is working happily with the Executive and that all branches of Government must support and not work against each other. That is an extremely important point and it made me feel happy because in his address to the Fourth Africa Governance Forum on 1st September the year 2000, the President among other things made the following statement: “When all is said and done, it is the organic link between the legislator and constituency that enhances good governance.”  

Mr Speaker, it is very important that Government today does not depart from this advice, bring laws, which will undermine the institution of Parliament. At this juncture I would request all Members of Parliament to scrutinize closely the Bill, which has just come to Parliament where we want to change the Constitution and make sure that we do not allow any undermining of the role of Parliament.

I now turn to issues where the President was not precise or not clear. I know that is to the traditions of African Parliament to really over praise African leaders, and that is where we go wrong. That is why we keep on saying - (Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My honourable colleague, in passing, has mentioned that there is a Bill to amend the Constitution. I am not aware of any Bill, which has been tabled in this House to amend any part of the Constitution, unless you are referring to something I saw in the pigeonhole? That is not a Bill before this House; it has never been tabled, so I do not know anything about it, it is just literature.

DR NABWISO: I think when the Minister of Justice comes and tells us what has been put in the pigeonhole we shall understand what we are talking about. 

Let me address myself to the issue of why FRONASA and the NRM were started. According to the President, FRONASA and NRM were started purposely to banish all forms of dictatorship and marginalisation of people in Uganda. These were very good intentions and these are the intentions that persuaded me to join the Movement in 1981 and to contribute to the struggle. But the question is, and where the President has not been precise and clear, how far have we walked on that road? Have we abolished dictatorship, have we stopped beating up people with different political views from ours? 

Mr Speaker, I requested the Minister of Internal Affairs to come and give a ministerial statement here on what law is being used to beat up political opponents who attend innocent seminars, these pressure groups, and what law is being used; up to now the Minister has not come.

THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank hon. Nabwiso for giving way. I want to inform hon. Nabwiso that the Police does not beat up innocent people assembled, according to the law, to debate issues. However, the Police takes charge when some citizens do things that are contrary to the law. 

We are in the process of reviewing the Constitution and looking at the legal framework in the country. If there are areas where there is need to amend the law in order to take into account the views that are being expressed by hon. Nabwiso, then this legislature can look at those laws and legal framework. Thank you.

MR GAGAWALA: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform Dr Nabwiso, who has some connection with Bulamogi, that three times the Police have resisted unleashing violence on the people of Bulamogi because some leaders have tried to misguide the Police to come and harass even me, the Member of Parliament for Bulamogi. So, I think we must be very careful in attacking the Police. It is in fact some political actors who have got intrigue locked up in them, who are actually maligning the Police to the extent that I have had to go to the Minister of Internal Affairs to ask him whether my people committed any crime. 

He told me, “No, we have had some people from some of your regions who have actually raised false alarms and tried to cause the Police to harass the people of Bulamogi”. I beg to inform you, Dr Nabwiso.

DR NABWISO: Hon. Gagawala Wambuzi is lucky that he has been protected by the Police. As far as I am concerned I have known people, peasants even in Kagoma, who have been dragged to Police by VCCU, and kept in Police barracks at Jinja. I brought that information to the Minister of Internal Affairs, and I know that these people were beaten up. So, we can continue.

Mr Speaker, the question of marginalisation of Ugandans is a very serious issue. According to the Constitution of Uganda, one of the things that the Government is supposed to promote is regional development. But today, even peasants have been asking me this question, and I have brought it up here. Why is it that, for example, six districts in South Western Uganda of Kabale, Kanungu, Rukungiri, Ntungamo, Mbarara and Bushenyi have seven ministers in the Cabinet and there is only one minister in Cabinet from 21 districts of Northern region and Eastern Uganda; and that is, hon. Ali Kivejinja Kirunda? I think this question must be addressed. Let us not believe that Uganda is going to be dealt with by just a few people, we must build nationalism in this country. I am not lobbying for a political job; I came here to represent the peasants of Kagoma County.  

Mr Speaker, at the end of my speech I would like to request for your permission to lay on the Table one document, which I found in my pigeonhole recently. I do not believe the contents in it but I think that Government should investigate it. This is a document, which alleges that some people met in Mbarara District in 1992 and planned to rule this country for 50 years. (Laughter). This document, I really want to appeal to Government -(Interruption)

MRS MATEMBE: Mr Speaker and honourable members, I come from Mbarara and I might be a culprit in case things are not substantiated here. The honourable member is saying he has come across a document in his pigeonhole where people met in Mbarara in 1992, and by then I was one of the distinguished leaders of Mbarara and I have never attended a meeting where we decided to rule this country forever. Therefore, he –(Interjections)- for 50 years. Therefore, is he in order to mention just that without substantiating? He should perhaps read to us the names of those people so that some of us can be cleared, because we may be a subject of anguish from this nation. Is he in order not to substantiate?

THE SPEAKER: Well, in the first place the document has not been brought here. Secondly, why don’t we say things that unite us rather than those things that will tend to divide us? Because if it is a document, was it signed? Why don’t we do things that unite us rather than those that are going to divide us?

DR NABWISO: Mr Speaker, I was personally annoyed to find this document in my pigeonhole. All that I am asking is that Government should investigate this matter because I want us to make sure that we build the unity. Fortunately, hon. Matembe does not appear on this list. (Laughter).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nabwiso, I pray that you take some time to scrutinize it and see whether it is necessary to table that. Do not say, do things or encourage things that will tend to divide us.

MR MWANDHA: If hon. Nabwiso takes your advice and does not lay it on the Table, everybody from Mbarara is implicated. The best thing is actually to lay the document on the Table so that some people can be cleared.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, what would happen if somebody started drafting names and names? Is it really necessary that you have to put it on the Table?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, I thank you very much for your guidance. The manner in which hon. Nabwiso has tended to raise these matters smells of an implication which is sectarian, which causes a bad feeling, disaffection, hatred and that is why I am concerned. A meeting in Mbarara can be attended by anybody from anywhere. Therefore, to make a statement in the House at the level at which hon. Nabwiso operates is not a simple matter, which can be just dismissed lightly. That document must be substantiated because it is causing, as I have mentioned, hatred. The document, which is not signed, which is dated to be brought in this House, you need guidance. For instance Dr Nabwiso, is there somebody in that document, in this House? Name the members who are on that document; let us know them.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, why doesn’t hon. Nabwiso take time to see whether it is authentic, because you can cause damage for nothing in case the thing is not authentic. Are they minutes of a meeting you know –(Interruption)

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I remember in 1992 the process of collecting views from the people of Uganda within the country and in the diaspora was on-going by the Odoki Commission. May I be clarified maybe this is one of the meeting’s submissions? (Laughter)

I am seeking clarification because even in my constituency the adherents of the Movement wrote that they wished the Movement to rule forever, others for 50 years, others for 10 years. So it should not really surprise us.

MR PATRICK MWONDHA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not see why hon. Nabwiso’s statement is causing anxiety. He has made a very humble request to Government to investigate. We have a whole Ministry of Internal Affairs, we have the Police Department; I am sure it is within their powers to dig out this document, find out its authenticity and let the country know. There is nothing to be excited about.

THE SPEAKER: Honorable Nabwiso, do you want the Minister of Internal Affairs to investigate so that you pass it on to him now?

DR NABWISO: Yes, Mr Speaker. I will be very grateful if the Minister can investigate this, because I do not want to move with documents, which I know are undermining our Government.

DR OKULO EPAK: I am concerned about hon. Nabwiso’s statement that he has found a document, whose contents are very disturbing, in his pigeonhole. Mr Speaker, instead of you taking the line you are taking, we should be concerned about how documents of that type begin to reach our pigeonholes. How do they get into our pigeonholes? I think that is the first question, which is worrying a person like myself. Some other day I may find a letter bomb in my pigeonhole.  

The other thing, Mr Speaker, I am surprised by hon. Kamuntu’s statement of whether the document was signed. It would look like the hon. Kamuntu knows this document. How does he know it is not signed? (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I am concerned and very sympathetic to hon. Nabwiso. In his very humble submission that a document containing material of far reaching implications to this country found its way to his pigeonhole and he wants to lay it on the Table so that it can be investigated –(Interruption)

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, I want to state here and now that I have not seen the document. I only put it to Dr Nabwiso whether it is signed, and whether it is authentic. I only put it to Nabwiso whether the statements that he is making would not cause disaffection, and in fact would not even bring ethnic feelings? (Laughter) I want to be on record. Is it in order, therefore, for hon. Okulo Epak to imply that I am a signatory to a document, which I have not even seen? 

THE SPEAKER: He made a wrong interpretation of what you said but the record has been corrected. So, hon. Nabwiso, I suggest that since you want it to be investigated, put it on the Table and then I pass it on to the Minister of Internal Affairs. But you are not compelled to do so if you think really -(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to inform my honourable colleague as he lays the document on the Table -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Let the Minister of Internal Affairs take it, investigate and then report back.   

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform my honourable colleague that the document he has laid on the Table, in essence, is a complaint. You are saying that the national cake is not being fairly dished out and that certain people have an intention of eating the same proportion for the next so many years, according to what you have told us.  

However, speaking in my other capacity as a Member of the Appointments Committee and without disclosing the details nor the proceedings of the committee, this same issue of distribution of ministerial posts regionally was raised with His Excellency the President many times. I recall on one occasion hon. Henry Kyemba and hon. Chebrot even had graphs to show how we have been eating public offices and how jobs have been distributed unevenly on ethnic basis. Some of us expressed concern and as a matter of fact I was a spokesperson. 

I put to His Excellency the President that, “We are unable to confirm the Cabinet the way you have presented it to us because we see serious flaws in the distribution of jobs considering the fact that we all qualify for public office and especially at ministerial level.”  
Two, he had given us the guidelines that he used to appoint people to public office especially at ministerial level, namely: region, competence, religion and commitment to the Movement, and gender. He outlined all these and I said, “Your Excellency, having outlined your yardstick, let us put it now against your appointments list.” Definitely, there was a problem and then he eventually said, “Those of you who feel have not received your fair share, you wait for Ambassadorial jobs and RDCs”. 

So, hon. Nabwiso, if you feel that the six districts of Southwestern Uganda have taken all the jobs, for us in the east we have to wait for RDCs and other similar jobs.  

DR NABWISO: Mr Speaker, I want to wind up my contribution by saying something about peace and security in this country.  

Our country has been independent for forty-two years. During the Obote regime from 1966 to 1971, Buganda was under emergency regulations. Therefore, the country was more or less at war with each other. From 1971 to 1979, we know the problems we went through during Amin’s time; a number of us had to run into exile. 

But from 1978 when we went to war with Tanzania up to now, it is twenty-six years; this country has not been peaceful and secure in all its corners. I do not know what steps to take but if we do not find ways and means of resolving conflict and internal strife in Uganda, we shall not develop. A lot of money, which we get, is used on security and not promotion of economic development. That is one of the explanations why Uganda is now one of the poorest seven countries in the whole world. I know that some people think that Uganda is rich – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You said seventh?

DR NABWISO: Yes, among the seven poorest countries, which include Ethiopia, Mali, Burundi, Somalia and so on. I know some people think that Uganda is rich but our people are poor. To compound the problem, this country has seen corruption escalate everyday through all the Government channels, through the district councils right down to the grassroots. If we do not address these problems, let nobody blame anybody else. 

Mr Speaker, that is why the President should have come out with a precise and clear exposition of Government policy. And, let us stop this game of over-praising African leaders.  

4.01
MR OMODI OKOT (Kole County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The President in his address said so many things but at this time I will pick one or two only. 

The first one is the war, which NRA fought with UNLA in Luweero. He put forward five reasons for this, one of which was to fight for African rights, and to fight against colonialism and the like. The record tells us that Uganda got her independence in 1962 and since that time we have got rid of colonialism. Indeed, I do not understand what the President meant when he talked of fighting colonialism at that time, 1980.

What is much more amazing, Mr Speaker, is that the war that was fought in Luweero resulted into the killing of so many people; quite a lot of property was destroyed and indeed it gave us a name which put our country on the black list of Africa because so many people died as a result of this war. One would, therefore, say, why was Uganda forced to fight a war that did not concern it because we were already independent? For that matter, if there was a need to fight any war about the African rights, the focus would have been OAU at that time or African Union today. Why did we fight this war, why did we lose so many people in this war? That is a question, which I would have asked the President to address. 

In his explanation the President talks about the crisis between Obote and Kabaka Mutesa II. In his explanation the President says the whole matter would have been solved if Mutesa II and Obote had referred their problems to the election that was to take place some years later. Does the President believe that the crisis between Obote and Kabaka Mutesa II was over elections only? I do not believe so. 

Mr Speaker, when Uganda got her independence, it was put upon the Constitution of this country that after some years there would be a referendum to determine the position of the so-called lost counties. That referendum if I am correct, was conducted in 1964 and the verdict was, Buyaga and Bugangaizi were transferred to Bunyoro - I think. At the signing of the results of the referendum, it was unfortunate that Kabaka Mutesa II did not accept to sign the verdict of the referendum.  Because he said signing the verdict would mean selling away part of Buganda. That had nothing to do with elections. That had nothing to do with whatever election the President was referring to. 

I believe up to today the issue, which was a problem between Obote and Kabaka Mutesa II, is still around with us. The question I am asking is, why is it not possible for Government today to come to an agreement with Mengo over the issue of federo and yet this was the same issue at that time? For the President to simplify the matter and say, “If Obote and Mutesa II had referred their differences to elections” is just to be unfaithful. If we are not faithful about issues here, Mr Speaker, we are not moving. If we are not faithful about matters that cost life, if we are not faithful about matters that destroy the economy of this country, we are not moving forward.

Mr Speaker, the President also talked about seven things, one of which I want to make reference to, is the issue of population. He was talking about the Indians and Chinese. I think here the President wanted to present the issue of having a leader who has a vision about population, a vision about the economy. We have this kind of argument in this country that we base arguments on things that so and so are doing. “This is good because he has done this and, therefore, he must be that”. Well and good but for the question of leadership, it is not enough to argue on one or two things we have seen. You need more than what you have not been able to see. You need more than what you expect to see. 

The issue of vision is not a monopoly of one person. Even Amin had a vision when he declared economic war. His intention was to give the African-Ugandan control over the economy of this country and indeed, he did; that is a vision. It did not need any other person from school but Amin had done it. So, the issue of vision is not the monopoly of only one person. 

Even during Obote time when Babiiha came with the programme of introducing method and propagation of veterinary services, that met some opposition right from the start but at the end of it all, it promoted the economy in the veterinary service to the extent that soon Uganda had the most popular veterinary service and propagation of veterinary skills. We had meatpackers doing very well; we had dairy services doing very well; that was a vision. So, Mr Speaker, Members of Parliament, vision is not a monopoly of any one person and it must be shared. 

I do not believe in a vision, which you are going to monopolise and think it is only you and you alone who can manage it. There are over 20 million people in this country. You cannot expect all the 20 million, except you and you alone - so, it is high time we got our leaders to understand that when we talk about the issues of development for this country, all of us are concerned. 

So, the President has a challenge today to put a much more convincing argument forward if he wants the third term. And indeed quarters have shown that he is very much concerned and he is interested in the third term. He has got to advance a much more convincing reason than having vision because everyone of us has a vision and vision will improve the economy; will improve the politics; will improve all about this country.

The President spoke about elections - that they have introduced elections, which have now made leaders in this country this and that. Yes, but what kind of elections, which you go to when you already know the result; the elections you go to when you already know such an organisation has won? Well, it may be possible that one section of the Ugandan community has been given the big advantage, that is, the Movement. Indeed, in the whole of this country we do not have only Movement throughout. There are other political shades that need to be given the challenge to give leadership to this country. 

Moreover, the elections the President is excited about are not all that good. There has been violence in these elections. You witnessed, Mr Speaker, that you put in place a select committee whose work was to probe and determine the extent of violence in the last elections. The monitory group, an organisation in this country had this to say about the election - it is found in Democracy Group Monitoring, page 3, an article, which I am sure we have been able to access because it was laid on the Table here. It says: “In all this sequence of events, Democracy Group is very much cognizant of the unsavoury events like the culture of violence, which started creeping into the democratic process as early as 1996, both in the presidential and parliamentary elections. The other anti-democratic situations, which registered a ladder of escalation in violence, culminated in increased harassment and beatings, not to mention the many human rights abuses in the 2001 elections.”

Mr Speaker, we are talking of violence. Unfortunately, this violence would have been with other lower people, but it includes even the President. In the report of the select committee there are areas where the President himself who had sworn oath to keep this country in respect, participating in campaigning against certain principle candidates, campaigning against opposition candidates, deploring our Police, the Army, the prison to beat, to cane and even kill supporters of opposition candidates. Is that the kind of election you are going to be proud of? I do not think so. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.17
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (Persons with Disabilities, Northern): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity also to contribute towards the debate. I would like actually to thank the President for his elaborate speech on the Address on the State of the Nation.  

Mr Speaker, he talked of very many issues but I would like to emphasize the five goals he talked about. According to the speech he says that FRONASA and NRM came to fight to ensure that we secure five goals, and he later emphasised that these are the strategic goals for the National Resistance Movement. These goals, if I can recite them for you once more are: national sovereignty, security, transformation of African society and Uganda from pre-industrial to modern society; and to fight colonialism. I would like to emphasise three.  

The President did not elaborate much on the colonialism and enslavement of Africans, including Uganda. I would like to say truly that we became de-colonized directly, that is when the colonialists directly ruled us, politically, economically and socially. Today colonialism is indirect and that is what we call neo-colonialism. It is worse than direct colonialism because at least with direct colonialism, you can negotiate, you can see where the problem is.

Where is this indirect colonialism? Mr Speaker, we are colonised economically. The developed nations, through the monetary economy, all the money is controlled by the World Bank and International Monetary Fund and these bodies are the ones to decide who should get money. First, they give priority to their developed countries; you find that all of them are rich, then they think of other developing countries as to where to go. “Let us give it to India, let us give it to Japan through their market”. 

Mr Speaker, these multi-national companies have come here to Africa to milk us. The little resources we have are all taken back and kept in the developed countries. We do not have access to the money, which is required for development.
 
Another form of enslavement is this false generosity. After collecting money from us through mining, through several ways, they will just give you a bit of it through grants and loans, with all strings attached. You may be happy but in the end you will find that you are repaying heavily. We are burdened with this debt. Surely, if the developed countries know that we cannot pay back the debt, how could they continuously give us that money? That is one way of enslaving us so that we cannot come out of this poverty.

Mr Speaker, the second point is on transformation of our society from pre-industrial society to modern society. His Excellency has been talking about this modernisation right from the time he came to power up to today. I have not seen the modernisation! We are still as poor as we are, people are poorer than before. What is preventing us from implementing all this? We were all excited when the modernisation of agriculture was introduced. We thought we would now have commercial farming; people would be having a lot of food; people would be selling and we should be having access but today many groups do not know what modernisation of agriculture is.

We have introduced NAADS; nobody knows where this NAADS is working. We only see these workers driving their Pajeros and with their fat stomachs because they get a lot of money from there with good pay, but the rest of people are not getting anything. That means something is wrong with our way of doing things, and if we continue in that way we shall never change our position from pre-industrial to modernity. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to talk about production. I would like to inform you that in the past, in the 1960s and 1970s, persons with disabilities were very productive. Their skills were identified and they were working in sheltered workshops where they were producing a lot of products, which were exported and also bought within. For example, in Mbale there used to be a sheltered workshop where disabled persons were producing tents, umbrellas, and shoes - many items that people buy. If you go to Masaka, they used to print clothes and make various garments, which were also sewed and sent abroad. Just near Kireka here, they used to make good furniture. But what has happened today? One is taken home and is given only one sewing machine. In the village what kind of garments do you make? You just spend your time mending clothes and then you become poorer. 

So, I am calling upon Government to support the productive activities of persons with disabilities so that they can come back and they can also produce for export like any other company. 

On security, when we were debating the report of the select committee I –(Interruption)

MRS SEKABIRA: Thank you very much, hon. Baba Diri, for giving way. Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to appreciate the concerns raised by hon. Baba Diri on the productivity of persons with disabilities. As much as there was such concentrated productivity during that time between the 1960s and 1970s, it is also important for us to note that right now, the productivity of people with disabilities has been sort of centralised in such a way that they now contribute to their communities in one way or another in decision making and in their own businesses. 

As much as they used to produce in a concentrated form, if you try to find how much each of them was earning and benefiting for himself or herself, you find that much of it did not go to their own benefit though they used to produce that way. And the approach that people with disabilities themselves appreciate globally has been empowerment, integration or inclusion. There is still a feeling by people with disabilities and in fact the need for them to be rehabilitated within their communities so that they are productive. As we continue to look at the ongoing programmes, the issue is of looking at what they have benefited from the different programmes that are ongoing. You may find that those who were doing then the umbrella making are now carrying out their small businesses or participating in the modernisation of agriculture. I thought I would give this information, thank you.

MRS BABA DIRI: But what I am trying to emphasise is that not all persons with disabilities can benefit from individual training. If there are some who can organise themselves and work together to produce, why not support them so that we have mass production, which can be exported? I am talking of large production not just individual production. You may not benefit from it much because one person alone cannot attract a big market. That is what I am trying to emphasise. 

However, I do appreciate the committee’s recommendation that we must also mobilise our people with disabilities to produce in a big way.  

Mr Speaker, regarding security as I was saying, I mentioned clearly in my last debate that the problem with security is now beyond what our Government can do because somebody somewhere is behind this war. My statement has been verified when these ex-rebels who last surrendered mentioned very clearly that they receive support from the Sudan Government. This same Sudan Government is the one trying to pretend to sign a protocol with us and say “Please, look for Kony here but do not go there”. If this red line they talk about is not removed, this war of the North will continue. So, I would like to call upon Government to talk clearly and openly to the Sudan Government so that this war can come to an end. We are tired of being in the camps, we are tired of being fed by the World Food Programme, and we are tired of being kept as prisoners! 

Regarding extra judicial killings, I am very happy that this Government surely has been so good that people were not killed. You are free to shout, like our Members of Parliament here, they can even talk in the face of the President, criticise him but he will not do anything. However, we must not forget that it may not be true with all Governments, for some when you are in power nobody will say anything. It is after you have left that the truth will come out. So, time will judge. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.30
PROF. MORRIS OGENGA LATIGO (Agago County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the President for his State of the Nation Address and I would like also to thank the mover and the seconder of the motion. 

But I have a fundamental problem with the motion itself although I have specific issues that I will address as contained in the President’s Address because the motion says that Parliament should record their thanks “for the clear and precise exposition of Government policy….” Now, that particular statement, Mr Speaker, I have a big problem with it and the Rt hon. Prime Minister knows this. When I am given a thesis written by a student, I look at the topic, I read the thesis and the university normally requires that you make a final evaluation, whether the thesis passes as it is or passes with modification, or it is rejected.

When I look at this motion “clear and precise exposition” I ask myself, was I in that conference centre when the President was speaking? Last year I made my position very clear and I expressed my deep appreciation of how the President made last year’s State of the Nation Address. I personally, honestly, cannot say the same thing for this year’s State of the Nation Address. The President is normally very conversant with figures, several times he got lost, I do not see how that could be a “clear and precise exposition.”  

Secondly, I have looked at this very closely and I have yet to find out which is Government policy in this exposition. State of the Nation Address, yes, exposition of Government policy, I do not know now and that is why I said, Mr Speaker, that I have a big problem supporting this motion as it is. If I were giving my recommendation, I would say that I support it but with this motion modified to reflect the truth of the matter.  

When you look at this statement, I have one big worry because many times I have heard for example the Queen’s address to the Commonwealth, I have heard various heads of state address their nations and the frequent expression you get is, “My Government shall do this”. I have looked and looked in this and I can quote a number of examples to illustrate my problem:

On the federation of East Africa, page 3, paragraph 1, the President says: “My wish is that this political federation be realised sooner rather than later. I am ready to do everything possible to expedite this process….”

On AGOA and export-led growth, the President on page 3, paragraph 2, says: “I want the USA to come out on the current status of AGOA.” 

On value addition, page 4, paragraph 2, the President says: “This is why I will, by all means possible, ensure that Ugandan companies involved in converting our cotton into fabric and garments … will get all the support they need.” Then he continues that: “I am now concentrating on coffee, cotton, bananas and honey. I want all of you to support me in this revolution”. 

On the same page 4, paragraph 3, on scientific progress the President says: “I am assisting them to patent their innovations through the Harare Office.”  

When I read all this I said, “This President is in big trouble because where is his Government in all this effort?” Where is the Minister of Health, where is the Minister of Education, where is the Prime Minister in this State of the Nation Address? I get very worried because we hear stories where the President works the whole day, he works up to 4.00 a.m. And if the State of the Nation Address is this, then we have very serious reasons to suggest that something should be done so that the big burden that the President is carrying is shared for the benefit of this country. That is my biggest worry, Mr Speaker. In this speech it is the President. The ministers are not there and I hope that sometime later they will tell us where they have been. Even to suggest that the President must help a scientist like me to patent a product that I have generated from my research in Harare, this is absolutely incredible! That is my biggest concern.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, on page 4, the third paragraph from the bottom says: “Our Government has set up an innovation fund to be administered through the Science Council, under the Ministry of Finance.” That is number one. 

Secondly, I want to refer you to Article 99 (1) of our Constitution: “The Executive authority of Uganda is vested in the President and shall be exercised in accordance with this Constitution and the laws of Uganda.” So, what I would like to suggest here is that when sometimes the President says “I” he is really speaking on behalf of Government. And there are occasions when it is very urgent when he may have to make a decision on behalf of Government and he explains to us and if we disagree with him, he makes concessions; he makes variations. That is number two.

Number three; there are problems with speechwriters. He is extremely busy! There are people who are professionally hired to write these speeches. So, as a technocratic premier, my role would be to ensure that the speechwriters avoid some of these small mistakes. I thank you.

MR KIWALABYE: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform my honourable colleague and maybe the Rt hon. Prime Minister that in a similar address to the nation, His Excellency the President said or even lamented that even his ministers do not share his vision. So, could this not be a consequence of that? (Laughter)

PROF. OGENGA: I thank very much, Rt hon. Prime Minister, for pointing out the one incidence where the President says “our Government” and I would like to inform you that this innovation fund was generated in your office and I was part of the team that worked on it. So, I have no problem with the fund itself. I just have problems with the President doing the things that I know others could do easily, to leave him to do other bigger things.

And I entirely agree with my brother here, these speechwriters also read the mind of the people they write for. And if they write like this, I must believe that they are reflecting his state of mind. Therefore, I insist that more should be done by his ministers to help him carry the national burden, the “lubengo”. 

There are two specific items because the more detailed things - I will hopefully contribute when we are dealing with the budget speech - but there are two specific things: One, I have seen it run through the trail of statements written about our economy and this is on page 8. This is about the fact that now the percentage contribution of agriculture, it is said here that: “The rise of the industrial and service jobs is one of the indicators that the economy is transitioning from an agricultural one, producing just raw materials in a neo-colonial setting, to an industrial one guided by the rationality of the law of comparative advantages.” 

I know this statement originates from the Ministry of Finance and their conceptualisation of transformation is that you can kill one sector and when the percentage of the other sector improves, then there is transformation. Because anybody who knows the basic economy of Uganda will tell you that our economy must be founded on agricultural transformation. We have incredible potential. If we put money in agriculture what is going to happen is that the GDP share of agriculture will rise and then the money we make from agriculture when we reinvest it in industry, then effectively the economy will transform. 

What has been happening now is that you give agriculture two percent of the budget. In the 60s agriculture got between 21 to 26 percent of the national budget. You give agriculture two percent of the budget of which the budget turnout is between 70 and 85 percent. That means you are effectively giving less than two percent and because you have neglected agriculture, that is why you hear this cry that PMA is not working. It is not there, because PMA will not work without money.

So, in the process, you have put money in industries - we have heard of the factory in Jinja, you put in US $14 million – for Kananathan, you put in ten? If you put US $10 million in cotton then cotton output will jump from the 10,000 bales to 200,000 bales and the share of agriculture will edge up. But eventually, when you make money from cotton and you start spinning the cotton and making garments, then the actual share of cotton will decline because the product of that spinning and making the clothes is much more valuable. I think the President should be guided. It is a good desire that we must transform but in our place they say that you do not climb a tree by the branches; you must start from the stem below and climb up. So, that is one aspect that is very important. 

The other aspect is secondary education. This being the State of the Nation Address, I was disappointed that the political opportunity for the President to announce the funding of secondary education for people in displaced camps was not seized. It remained for the Vice-President in a rejoinder to say that Government will fund it. I think if it were in the President’s speech, it would have sent a great signal that the President cares. If it comes through somebody else -(Interruption)

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Thank you very much, my colleague for giving way and I thank the Speaker. Well, if the President in his address did not mention it, I take the opportunity at least to say that the Government has put aside Shs 1.3 billion to sponsor those students at secondary level, who are in the camps, and cheques have been written ready for this. I thank you.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to seek clarification from the honourable minister. She has said that Shs 1.3 billion has been set aside and I would love to know how long this Shs 1.3 billion runs. Because what I know, it is in form of a supplementary provision. How many children will this money cater for and for how many years?

MRS BITAMAZIRE: I thank the honourable member for asking for further clarification. This Shs 1.3 billion is for two terms. This term, which is ending in a month’s time and then the final term in the year and from there on the money is mainstreamed so that it can be released to meet that need if the war still continues. So, there is money that is going to benefit these people. I remember last time I told you that this money is to benefit 23,000 plus students in post primary institutions. It is supposed to be sustainable as long as the need is continuing. I think that is what I wanted to clarify, and I take the opportunity to say that Government cares.

PROF. OGENGA: I thank the honourable minister for her intervention, but she needed not to worry. My problem is that I am debating the President’s State of the Nation Address, and when those crucial things that matter to my constituency are not put here, anybody who gets a copy of this says, “But what is wrong with this Government”? It becomes unfortunate. 

I do not know whether this is part of the problem because I think the credit for this should have been given to the President because he expressed concern and, therefore, it should have been in this speech. Let me now take the opportunity to thank the President, Mr Speaker, because I cannot thank him through his statement, for that concern for our people. But next time crucial things like this should be in the President’s speech.

Lastly on a light note, Mr Speaker, on page 12, the second paragraph the President says: “I appeal to this august House to work quickly on the following Bills, so that our political transition, security, peace, and marital bliss, can be enhanced.” I think the last element is in reference to Bill No.3, which is Domestic Relations Bill. I just want to end by taking note of the romantic tone that the President has been able to express some of these things in, given that only yesterday I was watching on television and when the President was talking about the use of condoms he said: “These condoms in some cases cause inconveniences” and the Africans here would understand. I thank you very much.

4.53
MR DANIEL KIDEGA (Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion as moved by hon. Hyuha and seconded by hon. Nyombi Thembo. I would like to start by saluting the great vision of the President on the economic transformation of this country as stated in various fora, where he has talked to Ugandans. On a very light note also, I would like to implore that of course in Parliament and in various parts of this country there are great economists, great thinkers, like Prof. Latigo has just been dealing in-depth with the issues of agro-economics. 

I think it is only important that we realise that the process of governance of this country is the responsibility of all. They should also find an input, the entry point into how they can contribute towards what the Government is trying to do. It is also important that members of the frontbench or Cabinet take it in good faith when insights or expositions are given by the backbenchers to improve what we are facing. 

But more precisely, Mr Speaker, I would like to address myself to page 10 of the Address. There is a chart, which is presented here, which numerates very clearly, first giving the number of terrorists killed as 781 and it goes on to clearly put out the achievements as termed in this State of the Nation Address. At this point I would like to really, from the bottom of my heart, thank the men, women and officers of the UPDF, and also people in the Ministry of Defence, not necessarily the ministers, who have been working with the UPDF to make sure they do what they have done. 

Mr Speaker, it is a very clear fact to everybody in this country that the LRA method of recruitment is through abduction. With the few exceptions of those who originally started the struggle, the majority of LRA fighters are abducted children. These brothers, sisters and children of ours who have died have never received decent burials. Some of them were killed by the rebels themselves; some of them died in cross fires. At one time in life, when the guns eventually fall silent, we shall have to give these people a decent burial. We might even be forced to build monuments in memory of this war that has raged through our land.  But I see we run a risk, as people from that part of the country, being taken as people burying or erecting monuments in respect of terrorists. This House, I think in 2001, passed the Anti-Terrorism Act. The President now and again always mentions that there must be categorisation of the misled and the misleaders. I would like to plead, for purposes of history and record, that these children, who have been abducted, not be called terrorists. 

It also gives me a perturbing situation. We have read in the press that the Carter Centre, and I think of recent Prof. Okumu, trying to link the LRA to Government for talks. It will help me a lot to appreciate the situation to know if LRA is gazetted internationally as a terrorist group, or it is a terrorist group here only. Is there any history in this world where powerful organisations like Carter Centre have engaged terrorists for talks? Is Government of Uganda engaging one Prof. Okumu to link them to discuss with terrorists? These are very open questions that could really help us to appreciate the situation. So, I think it is important that we categorise who is called a terrorist and maybe leave out these children, who have been abducted and taken forcefully.

Mr Speaker, one great scientist, Albert Einstein, who formed the basic foundation of physical science upon which nuclear weapons and so many discoveries have taken place, one time made an observation and I quote his observation: “The significant problems we face cannot be solved at the same level of thinking we were when we created them.” This great scientist was implying that at the time a situation has occurred, for us to rectify it we must elevate our thinking to a different dimension, learn to forgive, learn to do many things. I want to put this very categorically clear that it has been known in this country that most leaders, who come from the part of this country where the war is raging, have been looked at with a lot of suspicion.It is true that we cannot divorce ourselves from the history of what has happened in this country; some of this leadership could have done something. But I think it is important that we elevate our thinking and change. We need a shift of paradigm from the way at which we look at leadership from the North and from elsewhere. Unless we do this and learn how to forgive each other, there is going to be war continuously in this country. Definitely, the guns will fall silent but can Government address strategic reasons why there are supporters and sympathizers of the LRA? 

The rebellion in the North has gone through a long series of metamorphosis. The NRA did a lot of killing against the then UPDA and the Lt Col. Ochora returned home but another rebellion came up. All these guns, which are being enumerated here, who is supplying them? What is the strategic interest of the people who are giving these guns to the LRA? We know that just killing the terrorists and finishing them off is a quick fix method of work, which may not produce long lasting results. I implore Government to look at the strategic interests of the people who are supporting the LRA and the people who are sympathizing with them. I thank you so much, Mr Speaker. 

5.00
MR DANIAL KIWALABYE (Kiboga County East, Kiboga): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. I wish to take this opportunity to thank His Excellency the President for fulfilling his constitutional obligation, and my colleague Hyuha from Tororo for moving this motion.

Mr Speaker, His Excellency the President reminded all of us of the vision of the Movement; that is transformation of our society from a pre-industrial to an industrial society. He also told us of the new strategy; that is export-led growth, which is going to assist in the achievement of this great objective of transforming our society.

Mr Speaker, when we are looking at this transformation of our society, through export growth or export led-growth, the emphasis is put on agriculture. We are going to establish industries to process agricultural produce and add value to our export. I think that is very important but the role, which is going to be played in order to achieve this objective, cannot be over emphasized.  

Transport not only helps us to move goods and our people timely from one place to another, say from the farm gates to the manufacturing industries and also from manufacturing industries to the market. It also ensures quality standards demanded by the international markets. I am happy, therefore, to note that the road system coverage has increased between the year – I think 1986 to last financial year - it has tripled from 2,000 kilometers to 6,000 kilometers. 

In the year 2002 this Government started upgrading the Busunju–Kiboga-Hoima road and the people I represent are very much elated. Unfortunately, Mr Speaker, hardly had the works started than they stalled for so many months. Our people got disappointed. I remember the people of Hoima tried to show their dissatisfaction by staging a walk, just a walk –(Interruption)

MR ANDRUALE AWUZU: Thank you for giving way. It is true. The statements you have made about the road are quite true. There were many contracts given at the same time for roads here in Uganda, including those for Arua–Nebbi-Pakwach and for Busunju-Kiboga-Hoima. Fortunately the first contracts have been completed and unfortunately, the other contracts that you are talking about have not been completed. That is not a fault of Government because all the monies were available for all the four contracts. What happened is that the contractor was originally based in Britain, Sterling International. As soon as they got the contract they formed another company, which was supposed to do this road.  

According to some of us who deal in contract business, the World Bank refused to pay monies to this new company, which was formed. They said the contract was signed with the original company and they could not pay to this new company until negotiations were made and that made the contract delay for more than one year.  

So, the problems have been solved and the work is now going on. We know definitely that the work will be completed. But the most important thing to note is that it was not the fault of the Government; it was a fault of the contractor. The people of Hoima were misdirected to demonstrate against the Government because it was not the Government, which was in the wrong. Thank you very much.

DR KASIRIVU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want a clarification from the Minister. The way he has given us information; it looks as if it was just a company wanting to change its name. Why not to tell us that actually the company ran bankrupt? It had a problem and some re-arrangement had to be done. If it had just a mere change of name, if Government had somehow halted the contract with the company, the company would have taken the Government to court. In this case when it is the fault of the company, which has caused that one-year delay, what is Government’s action towards this company?  

MR ANANG-ODUR: Mr Speaker, I am a little bit perturbed in the context of our record as a nation and as a country. An international company won a contract here in Uganda and all parties are aware that this is an international company. In the middle of the job they got to change their name; they now want to register as a local company? This is my understanding of what the Minister is talking about. What on earth prompted a British company or a British-based company, which has won a contract here, to come and do it without any other condition that it must register here first? If it were theirs it should have been cleared in the first instance. Should that company come here and register locally? And that becomes a problem for the execution of the contract?

Could it be one of those main things, which happened here that in fact the company, which bid indeed, was not even British-based but was like the Westmont situation? Really, it beats my understanding and logic, Mr Minister – (Interruption)

MR AWUZU: Thank you for those clarifications. I can tell you that this company was not a briefcase sort of company. It was an international company, which had contracts even in Tanzania and in many places in Africa. It is accepted that they did run bankrupt. This happened after they had won the contract here in Uganda, and what they did was to try and save the situation in Uganda by forming this local company to continue with the job. So, in fact they did it in good faith. They thought that by forming this company they would fulfill the contract, and as long as they were in a position to fulfill the contract, Uganda Government had nothing to lose. So, we accepted, but the World Bank could not pay money to this new company because it had not signed the contract with this new company. It was concerned with the original company.  

THE SPEAKER: But why don’t we leave this to the Committee on Works because it requires a lot of details? What I see as a problem is what we call assignment of contract. You contract, then after contracting you assign and then somebody who contracted you says, “No, I am not approving unless you have gotten my approval”. This is what must have happened. I believe this particular subject can be exhausted – this issue of Hoima. So, the Committee on Works should follow it up and see what really happened.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, I am the Vice-Chairperson to the Committee of Works, Housing and Communications. We have been deliberating on this Busunju road and in our timetable we have fixed – in about two weeks from now we are going to visit that road and the whole topic is with us. It is better if the members can be patient and we bring our report on Busunju road and it be debated fully on this Floor.  

MR KIWALABYE: I thank all those who have contributed and I am grateful for the information the Minister has given. In fact this is what I was going to suggest, that the Committee on Works and the Ministry should go and look at the work, which is being done, because even if that huddle had been jumped, still the speed at which this construction is taking place is that of a snail. So, people are just worried.

And when they also go there they would also look at the exercise of compensation because the compensation of the people who lost or whose property was damaged leaves a lot to be desired. It is not transparent at all. My people are even made to sign payment vouchers for the amounts they do not know. These payment vouchers are blank and yet the records are meant to be public so that everybody would know how much he is entitled to. 

Complaints are not handled, properties are under-valued; even the property that was damaged – peoples’ houses were damaged by flying stones during the stone blasting by the contractor. These complaints are there and nobody is handling them. So, maybe when the committee goes there they will also be interested in considering all those things.

In this vision of transformation through export-led growth, the role, which is played by the railway system in a landlocked country like Uganda, is also very important. But in his address, His Excellency the President did not mention about the railway system. If there is anything neglected in this country, it is our railway system, and yet we need it for bulky transportation.  

MR ANDRUALE AWUZU: Thank you for giving way. Thank you, Mr Speaker. I need to correct this statement immediately, that the railways are neglected. In this country the railways are not neglected at all. In fact we are taking very good care of the railways. It is true that the Kampala-Kasese line and the Tororo northern line were closed, but you must have heard over the weekend the Minister has opened the line up to Soroti. 

I am sure you are aware that we are trying to concession the railways and we are doing that because we are very much interested in the performance of the railways. We know how important it is for the development of the economy of this country. We know that a private entrepreneur will put in more money and will be able to run the railways much better. Therefore, to say that the railways are neglected I think is the opposite of what we are actually doing now. We are so much interested in railways and we are trying to get it to run properly. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is something, which I really see should be handled in detail by the Committee on Works, be it railways or roads. As the vice-chairperson has said about this Hoima road, you go give more details and complaints to them on this too. Railways fall in the portfolio of that particular committee.

PROF. OGENGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Just for the record, I would like to give information on railways because the Minister said we are taking very good care of it. We know that much of the railway line in the north has been vandalized. There were cases where military people arrested people with railway – what do you call them? [Hon. Members: “Sleepers.”] Yes, which were brought and sold to these steel works. If this is taking good care, Mr minister, then we are in big trouble. 

I must appreciate that at least over the weekend the line from Tororo to Soroti was re-opened, but honestly we should also accept that it was neglected. But now we are doing something about it.  

MR KIWALABYE: Mr Speaker, my concern was not –(Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was intrigued by your advice, which I thought was very good, that the relevant Committee on Works would follow up a few of those issues raised and bring them here. In the same vein I am thinking that after the delivery of the State of the Nation Address, the relevant committees could take up the relevant components to their respective committees. They then would discuss them and come here and we debate something that is already researched and responded upon by the relevant ministries. We would be making better headway. I do not know, I thought that I would still get your advice further on that.

THE SPEAKER: I think that is a good idea because even the policy statements should be geared to what the President stated in the State of the Nation Address. The reason why we get the budget after the State of Nation Address is that the budget should be reflecting what is contained in the policy statement, that is, the State of Nation Address. Therefore, the committees should also be interested in picking areas that are in the state of Nation Address. They should discuss with the relevant ministries when they meet to discuss the Budget. 

So, I entirely agree with you that the chairpersons of committees should also be interested in areas in the State of Nation Address, to analyse and get further details. I agree with you. We shall look into this and see how we can implement it.

PROF. OGENGA: Mr Speaker, I wish to add on what hon. Ruhindi said. We run into difficulties if I am making my contribution and the Minister stands up to clarify, and in the process he or she generates further interest. It becomes so difficult for members to restrain themselves and say that we wait. I would like to suggest as an addition to this that we should all restrain ourselves, or limit ourselves to those small things and then at the end of this debate the ministers could substantially respond to some of the key issues and then you give us the opportunity to exchange.

MR AWUZU: Thank you for your ruling on this, Mr Speaker. But as I have said, it is true all these questions, which have been raised by the member on the Floor, are actually contained in the policy statement. We shall try to deal with them when our budget is being debated here. But when a member makes a statement, which we believe is misleading the House, we cannot wait for our policy statement because that one has to be cleared immediately. That is why for example I stood up to say that - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: The member is concerned about misleading - it was not deliberate but I think let us leave this issue really.

MR ETONU: I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the Floor. I would not like us to go without correcting this record. When we were accompanying the Minister of Transport, hon. Nasasira, on Saturday from Kumi to Soroti, and when the railway line was being re-activated, it was discovered – the information I want to give is about vandalizing the railway line in the north. I am saying it was found easy to repair the line from Tororo to Soroti because the sleepers were intact. The Chairman of the Board, Paul Etiang, said by December they hope if all goes well the line to Pakwach will also be functioning. The chairman must have carried out a survey and found the line easy to repair. So, to say that the line was vandalized should not go unchallenged; we must put the correct record right.

MR KIWALABYE: Mr Speaker, the railway vandalized or not vandalized, the line closed or opened, it was not my concern. My concern was that in the past this means of transport was neglected. 

The other thing is, are there plans to extend the railway coverage in this country? This is reflected in his speech. If we are going to achieve our vision then we need to also extend the railway coverage in the country because this is colonial -(Interruption)   

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kiwalabye, this is exactly what we have said. You are currently receiving policy statements dealing with the sector ministries, including the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications. This is why the President could not put all these details in his State of Nation Address. It is the policy statement that you are now to scrutinize if you are interested in railways or roads. You deal with the chairperson of the committee. You may go to the committee and grill whoever comes from the ministry about this particular matter. But the President’s speech definitely could not have contained these details.

MR KIWALABYE: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I leave that matter. The Committee on Transport will look at how the Government will intervene strategically in the air transport and water transport as well. 

In April I was in Egypt and I saw for myself how the Egyptians have exploited water transport to their advantage. In fact the endowment we have here of the water bodies can be exploited. Water transport can even be an attraction to tourists and can help our tourism industry. So, the Works Committee will also –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have said that details of a particular subject should be handled when you are dealing with the policy statements. You can help the ministry to initiate water transport. Otherwise, we are not moving.  

MR BYABAGAMBI: May I tell the honourable member holding the Floor that the Committee of Works sits everyday with the exception of Friday and Monday. We meet at 10 O’clock. He may come to Committee Room 013 to articulate these issues.

MR KIWALABYE: Then maybe, Mr Speaker, the procedure should be changed. These committees should first consider the State of the Nation Address and then bring here the reports. But if we are to debate the speech irrespective of whether our interests appear in the policy statements, I do not know. Because we cannot be members of each and every committee to know this. In fact what we are saying here is an eye opener to the committee. If it is contained in the policy statement they would like to know if it is there. You handle it according to whatever they have heard from us.

Mr Speaker, let me briefly tackle the exports of fish where I appreciate the diversity in the export sector. But I want to sound a word of caution that when we are pursuing this export drive, we must also be mindful of the needs of our people, yes. Fish is fetching dollars into this country but we must leave something to our people. I received a report during one of the workshops on food security that the people I represent, the children in my area, are suffering from stunted growth. One of the reasons is that they are not having balanced diets. In fact, they are not taking fish in particular and this stunted growth leads to poor development of their brains. I, therefore, suggest that while we are looking for dollars for some of these very vital things for our people, we should put a quota of exports so that we leave something to our people.  

As I speak now, my people are feeding on carcasses, these are the fillets, the bones, they are feeding on skins of fish; they are feeding on fish rejects and red meat. I am meant to understand that red meat and fish rejects are not good for human consumption and our people are forced to feed on these -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Do they export every type of fish?

MR KIWALABYE: Every type of fish is almost exported.

THE SPEAKER: No.

MR KIWALABYE: Mr Speaker, the Nile Perch has been the common man’s delicacy because it has been cheap and it has been in abundance. But now with this export drive, the prices are so high; even if the fish meat is available, the peasant cannot afford it. Ngege is also being exported and in fact in one of the speeches of His Excellency the President in the past he said he is also going to coax the Europeans to start developing interest or taste in the other species, which are found in the rivers. So, even nsonzi or these other things will also be exported in future. 

I have a fear that in future even the fillets, the bones, the carcasses, may not be available to our people because they are going to be processed in the factories to produce fish meal for export again. So, I am worried. That is why I suggest as a way forward that Government should think of a quota to be put so that some fish is exported and some is left for our people. This also goes for the invisible export, the labour export, which we are now trying to organize, the nurses especially. If we are not careful we are going to deplete this country and we shall find ourselves in a problem in future.  

I note that the level of poverty is persisting despite the rate of growth of 6.5 percent, on average, per annum. This is because we have not managed to transform that growth into people’s household incomes. There is a group of a few people who are benefiting from this growth and not many. But if this is the case, then measures should be taken to see that our people benefit from this growth by raising their incomes.  

Finally, I am touched by lack of time of His Excellency the President to go to Kasana ground and meet his comrades-in-arms. These people encamped in Luweero fought for the peace we have. They support the Movement, politicians do not instigate them, and they have been frustrated. We have heard a report from the committee here to show that much of the money was paid anyhow. These people have got genuine claims. His Excellency the President should find time to go and talk to them; 30 minutes are enough. I cannot believe that he can visit Luweero and fail to see or meet these people and hear from them. I urge those who are responsible for organizing His Excellency the President’s visits to make arrangements so that he goes and talks to his comrades-in-arms. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.28
MRS VICTORIA MWAKA (Woman Representative, Luweero): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to join the previous speakers who thanked the President for his Address to the Nation. I want to say that I support the motion.

On page 1 the President spells out very clearly why the NRM went to the bush to fight the previous regimes; namely, to give the people of Uganda total sovereignty over their affairs and secondly, to ensure security of persons and property of Ugandans. I am saying we the people of Luweero benefited from this policy, and on behalf of the people of Luweero and on my own behalf I would like really to congratulate and thank the President for his firm stand on the principles that took him to the bush in 1981 and for having sustained them this far. Sometimes we have principles, but sometimes if you are really shaken left and centre, you are forced to abandon your stand. But I am happy the President has stood and has not abandoned his stand. The people of Luweero are actually behind him totally.

We no longer want the war of the gun. Kony has fought for the past 18 years but he has not benefited. In Luweero the war was by the people themselves and within five years the whole programme was over. I am not saying that perhaps the people of the North are not part of that war of liberation; that perhaps we started on a wrong premise and thought that Kony would win and we sat back. But the people of Luweero did not sit back, we joined and at the end of the day, definitely sanity returned to Luweero and we can even go further and give examples. There was one called Itongwa who wanted to bring chaos back to Luweero. Within two weeks he was finished. So, I am happy with the Arrow boys and these other voluntary groups who have come together and have been able to clear their area.  

In Iganga, Lakwena came and in two weeks she was cleared. So, Mr Speaker, I think even we the people sometimes are to blame for really not joining hands together to see how we can solve our problems –(Interruption) 

MR ANANG-ODUR: Mr Speaker, I wish to thank Prof. Mwaka for giving way. The implication of what Prof. Mwaka is trying to assert is that the people in the North have not come out until recently to help bring down insurgency in the sub-region. Perhaps the Professor might have not been in this House sometimes, but I wish to restate what has been stated here many times.

As early as in the 80s, the first groups of people who were formed to fight against Kony were the original Arrow Groups in Kitgum and in Gulu. They did a good job. Mr Speaker, you have been told that these groups, which were formed to fight Kony, were transferred together with the LDUs who were given by the people in this area and taken to Congo to fight in the Congo war and many of then unfortunately have not come back. This has been done many times over in the Lango sub-region. They say, “We trained boys for LDUs and they were transferred to the Congo.” These LRAs came back to kill people who were left behind unattended to because their sons had been transferred to Congo.  

Mr Speaker, I think this is very important information to be given because indeed Prof. Mwaka will appreciate that in that situation people in the North think that there must be some other agenda for this war. Because if it was not so, the boys they give to fight Kony would not be transferred to fight in the Congo and Sudan, especially Congo when Kony has not been handled. I wish to thank you, Sir.

PROF. MWAKA: Thank you very much. I appreciate the concern but I am saying if these people were ambushed from the very beginning like what happened in Iganga perhaps the thing would not have exploded as much to take 18 years. That was my point. 

I want to state that today we want the war of the vote. We have carried out elections, we carried out the referendum even if they say it was null and void, but the people made their concern. You see, Mr Speaker, it is like cooking food and some of it gets burnt and you refuse to eat because it was burnt. It is not the same as saying there was no food, the food is there but the food is burnt. So, you can cook some other food –(Interruption)

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, we were advised on this Floor of Parliament that we should not touch or talk about the issue regarding the judgment by the High Court. Is it in order for my sister to continue talking about the matter, which is now with the courts of law? 

THE SPEAKER: Well, I do not know because there are many referendums we are going to have. I do not know which one she is talking about.

PROF. MWAKA: Thank you very much, hon. Speaker, for that wise ruling. What I was saying is, I was giving a good example that we cooked food here in Parliament, it is us who cooked it and it got burnt, it is not the President who burnt the food. Even if we say we do not want the food to be eaten, the food was there.

MR KIBAALE WAMBI: Mr Speaker, about the food that we cooked in the Sixth Parliament in which Parliament I was, I remember very well we cooked that food but the truth is the President was one of those who supplied the firewood. So, if he gave too much firewood it was burnt, if he brought less, then it must have come when it was not ready. I remember we met in the International Conference Centre as a movement caucus and the President came and addressed us. The late Wapakabulo was the technician who designed the cooking pot and His Excellency supplied the firewood. So, His Excellency has also some blame for the food having been burnt.

PROF. MWAKA: Anyway, the honourable member is excused because he is not used to the kitchen conditions. (Laughter) When they give you firewood you do not pump it all in the – the whole bag of charcoal in the sigiri in one day because you are given. Anyway, what I am saying is we should leave the people free to make the decisions they want; they know what they want. If it is a referendum, leave them to decide. 

I can give you an example. Moi wanted Kinyatta to become the President. He did not like Kibaki but at the end of the day the vote decided and now Kibaki is the President. So what is the big do? Let us go for the vote, those want say, we want, those who do not want say, we do not want. We count the votes and then whoever takes the day will take the day. Now what is the big do? We are splitting hairs. To me, the people of Luweero are waiting, if it is referendum they will go full blast, if it is the vote they will go full blast, the decision will be made and then they will adhere to whatever decision would be made.  

We also want the vote of the pen and the brain. I am very glad the President has realized the usefulness of the pen and the usefulness of the brain. Let us go to page 4, he said, “As I said in my address to the African Development Bank, one stimulus that can help our society to transform is paying our scientist world class wages/salaries so that they use their knowledge to help us achieve this strategic goal and add value to our raw materials”. I think when you realize a problem and you tackle it that means you are concerned. But sometimes we debate here as if nothing has ever been done, as if the President has not identified anything, as if there is no Government policy. 

There is a difference between having a good intention and how that intention is operationalised. The operationalisation of these programmes is the concern of all us. We are Members of Parliament; we are being paid to go and work. So, why should we just criticize the President rather than join hands to solve the problem? I think there should be co-ordination, we should work together; we should not point fingers at one person. There should be negotiation, and the President is very good at negotiating. He does not take permanent stands. I give him credit for that.  

The President has given support to the education sector and the medical sector. He negotiated with the doctors and there was no strike. He negotiated with Makerere people and the strike was diffused. That is a model person. Where will you get a head of state who will just go everywhere trying to solve problems? That shows the man is concerned; give him a chance.  

Mr Speaker, I am also saying there is war of the dollar. Anybody who has a dollar, my friend, they listen to that person. Look at these young men, the Ezra’s; overnight he is somebody. I do not want to be asked, “Do you know where he gets his money?” That is his concern. The fact is he gets his money and he shares it with other people amicably. So, what do I mean by the war of the dollar? I want you to look at page 3, the President says, “One of the new points the vision highlights is export-led growth.” This is why we have put a lot of emphasis on analysing the internal, regional, international markets, and how Uganda can access these markets.  We have people in the East African Parliament; we have people in the Africa Parliament; we are represented. That means our views will be taken as far as the issue is concerned. 

We are complaining about AGOA. Yes, the intention is good. When you are starting an investment you make losses to begin with. It can even take five years before you realize the benefits. If we are still making losses as far as AGOA is concerned, this is in the short-run. In the long run we are going to benefit because the programme now is going to go on for 17 years. I think by that time we shall be there. So, let us not throw away the baby with the bath water because the first trial is not doing very well. Let me give you examples, which concern women –(Interruption)

MR NYANZI: I thank you, honourable member, for giving way. I would like to inform the House that although Kananathan has not benefited very well, but now in Mityana we have an exporter of coffer, Kato Enoch; he is already processing coffee for the American market. 

PROF. MWAKA: Thank you very much for supporting my stand. Mr Speaker, I know poverty is biting hard but I think it is the policy of the President - I do not know why we people of Luweero - although people are saying these people have not been paid. I want to remind you that you are talking of Luweero Triangle not Luweero District. We checked with those people and they were about only four people of Luweero District.  The other people are from Kiboga, Mubende and Bunyoro. That is Luweero Triangle.  Should problems of Luweero Triangle be solved in Luweero District? We told them to go back to their respective districts and that is where they should make their claims. So, those who feel really very concerned about the people of Luweero, I want to inform you that we are more concerned than you are.

The President has initiated a programme in Luweero District of meeting stakeholders to see how we shall get out of poverty. He wants every woman and man in Luweero to be able to get Shs 20 million per year. He initiated two meetings. The first and second meetings were held and we are having the third meeting on 22nd this month. Hon. Nsibambi, you wanted to say something? Okay, I was saying these people –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: How did you know that hon. Prime Minister wanted to say something? He had not stood up.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Professor for giving way. I was simply being embellished by what she is saying. I support her very much indeed. (Laughter).

PROF. MWAKA: Mr Speaker, we are having our third meeting on 22nd and we shall meet consultants on major development issues. We are meeting Members of Parliament, local stakeholders and farmers. Every group will advise the other. That is the participatory approach to problem solving and at the end of the day you should see Luweero people swimming in money although now you are sympathizing with us. The President has taken the lead, and I am saying he started the war of the gun in Luweero. We are saying we no longer want the war of the gun, now it is war of the dollar. He has come back to Luweero to wage the new war of the Shilling and the dollar. So, if you are saying that poverty is now the problem, then if poverty is no more we shall be on the right track.  

Mr Speaker, –(Interjections)- just one small point. The problem is the war in the north. I agree it is a problem. If it took only five years and it is 20 years now ever since that war ended in Luweero, but the generation is still lingering on. What will happen to a war, which has taken 18 years? That means it may take 40 years for the people of the North to become what they were before this war. I have participated in doing research. I did one in Luweero, we have a report; we moved to Gulu, we have a report; we moved to Katakwi and Teso, we have a report; now we are working on one in Kasese and Kitgum. We are saying that even if you know you are right, you tell the other person, “Okay, you are right.” I think it is high time we told Kony that he is right because I think the man is insane and arguing with an insane person sometimes does not pay. But it is good now that we here – because I am not from there although I have done research. You leave and then the next day you find that things are really bad. 

We hear that the war is ending soon. Let me hope that the war is ending soon because if a-third of the country is facing problems, you cannot say that you are safe. It is like our body, even if you have a problem of this small finger, it will throb in the brain. So, we are losing money in Uganda because many people have been put on – if that war were not there definitely, Uganda would be very far. I pray that those on the negotiation table really negotiate to see that this war ends and Uganda will be on the right track once more. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.50
MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA (Mwenge County South, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a few comments to make. I will start by supporting the motion and my comments are mainly on page 11 of the State of the Nation Address, on Parliamentary issues. But I will start with page 12. 

Mr Speaker, I was delighted to hear for the first time and in my time in Parliament the President specify a legislative calendar. This is an issue, which we have been yearning for and I am glad to note that this time around he did make note of the fact that we have particular Bills coming up and of particular interest to me, is the Domestic Relations Bill.

I think people do not grasp the importance of the Domestic Relations Bill because maybe as hon. Prof. Latigo said, it is viewed in terms of issues of just sexual matters. But I would like to say that considering that this Bill has been in the offing since 1965 when the Kalema Report was made, if this Bill could be passed this year, this would be a very good record for the Movement Government.

There are other issues, which I thought I would highlight at this point in time, especially issues that pertain to the Sexual Offences Bill. All of us who live in this community of Uganda know that defilement is on the increase, incest is on the increase, issues of HIV/AIDS have not been addressed in any of our laws and these are issues that I would like to see the Government addressing especially by bringing to Parliament the Sexual Offences Bill. 

Apart from this we also have what is known as Female Genital Cutting or Mutilation and this is happening in the Eastern part of this country where small girls have their private parts cut off. Mr Speaker, in line with Article 33 of our Constitution, it is in our interest –(Interruption)

MR KIBAALE WAMBI:  Mr Speaker, I am from the east of this country and in my tribe in Bugisu there is circumcision for men and in the neighbourhood of Kapchorwa, which is Kapchorwa District, there is circumcision for females. But I have not witnessed in any part of Eastern Uganda any tribe cutting off the private parts of individuals be they male or female. May I be clarified by hon. Dora Byamukama, my good friend, which tribe is this one, which is busy cutting off people’s private parts, and the Ministry of Internal Affairs has not taken charge of this? (Laughter)

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Hon. Wambi, I thank you for that.  I would like to state here that on a serious note, last year on November 30th, I had the pleasure of accompanying the Deputy Speaker to a cultural day in Kapchorwa and we were categorically asked by this community that we as Parliament should enact a law that bans female genital cutting or mutilation. I had occasion to even see some of these young girls whose private parts had been cut off. At an appropriate time I will bring to Parliament a report, which shows clearly some of these problems. Some of these women are barren, others cannot give birth properly, others die from bleeding; so it is a very serious issue hon. Wambi and I would like you to take it seriously when we bring this Bill.

I am glad to note that when a group of activists came to your office on the issue of torture, you highlighted the need to address torture in homes, Mr Speaker. Indeed, we have torture in homes in form of physical, psychological and emotional abuse. We would like to have a specific law on domestic violence in the near future. In the same spirit that the speech of the President has highlighted the good working relationship between the Executive and Parliament, I propose that when we do bring these bills as Private Member’s Bills, we get the appropriate co-operation from the Executive.

My second point is on page 11, again on Parliamentary issues. I noted with delight that the President was very clear on the issue of the harmony between the Executive and the Legislature. He notes that it is always important to remember that if you build good and strong governance, all the branches of Government must support and not work against each other. The Executive is grateful for the good relationship, which exists between the Legislature and us in the absence of whips. This is a very important statement, Mr Speaker, because I would like to assert that in future when they talk about the Government of the day, they will not be saying that Parliament was on its own, the Executive was on its own, and the Judiciary was on its own. I think the more we realize the need to support each other and not work against each other, the better because we are all working for the common good of this country. 

I also note with some degree of interest the fact that he notes that we have been working with each other in the absence of whips. But, Mr Speaker, you know that there have been some self-appointed whips and when they have deployed themselves, there has been chaos in this House. I would like to propose that we continue working in the absence of whips since we have worked well so far without them.

Finally, I would like to talk about the issue of resolutions and reports. On page 12 the President talks about reports, he also talks about resolutions. My concern is, when we read these reports of the House, and when we pass these resolutions, how should the Executive treat them? So far I think what we lack is some kind of tracking system whereby we should be reminded that certain resolutions were passed, certain reports were made with certain recommendations and, therefore, call upon the Executive to report to this House on implementation or as to what has been done.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. I have read at least four ministerial policy statements. Most of them, especially one from the Ministry of Education and Ministry of Works, have been responding to this year’s budget. It has been doing well and I hope it will continue. This is the information I wanted to give.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Thank you, honourable member. I am part of the Sessional Committee on Public Service and Local Government and we noted this morning that our particular resolution on pension arrears was not even mentioned in the report of the policy. Therefore, I am talking from an informed position whereby I am saying that it would be in the interests of all of us to take resolutions and reports of this House seriously.  

I would like to thank the Prime Minister for the effort he has made so far because I note when it came to the report on the war-ravaged areas, ministerial reports on several issues were already being circulated to the House. I think this is a good spirit, and I would like to encourage him to promptly respond. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is up to you but it is now 6.00 p.m. This debate is ending tomorrow. It was allocated three days; we have now taken three and a half days. We have taken the names of those interested in contributing; tomorrow we shall be able to finish because the mover also has another programme to attend to. So, I think it is a convenient time to adjourn. Therefore, the House is adjourned until tomorrow. We shall start a bit early. Can we start at exactly at 2.00 p.m.?  [Hon. Members: “2.30 p.m.”] Okay, we start at 2.30 p.m. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 6.00 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 14 July 2004 at 2.30 p.m.)

