

Tuesday, 14 July 2020

Parliament met at 3.01p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I have a few issues to communicate. One, I would like to inform the Minister for the Presidency that the Complimentary Medicine Bill, which was passed by Parliament more than a year ago has not been assented to, and it has not been returned to this House.

If we do not hear from the President in the next few days, we shall be obliged to proceed to do some things around that Bill. However, before that happens, the Complimentary Medicine Bill should either be assented to or returned to this House.

Secondly, honourable members, despite all our efforts to approve the Supplementary Budget for a number of agencies, I continue to receive complaints from the Uganda Police Force that they have not received their money. I also continue to receive reports from within the health sector that a number of the health workers have not been paid their allowances. Last week, we raised issues regarding the Uganda Virus Research Institute. 

Therefore, I hope that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will be able to tell us what has happened because we did our part to pass the supplementary appropriated and so, we expected the money to have gone to where it was supposed to go.

Thirdly, on 20 November 2019, hon. Mbabazi Kyomuhendo of Kagadi presented a petition concerning the residents of Mpeefu, Kyaterekera and Ndaiga sub counties who were then in danger of immediate eviction and requested the Government to find a solution, including compensating the absent landlords. 

The petition was sent to the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development with a directive to address the prayers of the petitioner and report back by the 17 December 2019.

As we speak, the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development has not come back to this House yet a notice has been issued to the petitioners to leave the land within 45 days. 

Therefore, I would like to direct the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to expeditiously intervene and address the case of the affected population and report back to this House, on the action taken, within one week.

Honourable members, I also inform you that I received a letter from the President returning the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (Amendment) Act, 2020 which we passed on 21 February 2020. He indicates as his reasons for the return the following:
    1. That the renaming of the “Public Procurement and Disposal Authority” to the “Public Procurement Legislation Authority” without providing for the transfer of liabilities and obligations of the PPDA authority to the new authority left a lacuna in the law.
    2. The contracts of employment and the contracts with the service providers relating to court cases and other contractual obligations needed to be transferred to the new authority to avoid uncertainties.
    3. He also proposed that section (5), which has been proposed for deletion should be retained but that the subsection transferring the obligation to PPDA regulatory authority - He also takes issue with the fear to repeal section 90 of the Act, which also affects section 89 and clause 37 of the Bill which has also been repealed.
    4. He said that these sections which you will find in the letter had administrative issues of the authority, which needed to be reintegrated and had been agreed upon by the Cabinet.

On part 7(a) of the Act relating to the tribunal, he said that he found it contradictory that Parliament effected several amendments to it, in establishing the tribunal. According to the President, the changes by Parliament to the membership of the tribunal, the functions, procedures and powers need to be reconsidered to enable the effective operation of the tribunal. Further, the President said that the transitional provision of the contract of the Executive Director of PPDA is not clear. He as well asked for clarification on why the term of office of the Executive Director of the PPDA was extended from three to five years under clause 12. There is also a letter from the Attorney-General on the subject, which I will pass on to the committee. 
Therefore, the minister will be required to formerly come and lay the Bill again so that the committee can reconsider it. When he does so, we shall send it to the relevant committee for perusal and report back.

I have also received a petition from the newly elected leaders of Bukedea District including the district councillors and the councillors for LC III, LC II and LC I. They allege that they have not been paid their ex-gratia honoraria in the last financial year. I would like to refer this petition to the Minister of Local Government to study it and report back on the action taken by Thursday next week.

Similarly, I have received a petition from the LC V councillor for Mityana Central, in Mityana District, against the endless torture and assault of the people of Mityana by the UPDF. He bitterly complained about the assaults against Mr Joseph Luzige, the Chairperson of LC V of Mityana when he went to rescue a pregnant woman who was being brutalised by the officers. I refer this petition to the Minister of Internal Affairs to investigate it and report back to the House on Thursday next week.

Yesterday, I received a delegation of former RDCs and their deputies. They complain that although Parliament enacted a law in which they were described as senior civil servants, the law does not consider other terms relating to their employment because that when they end their tenure, they go home with nothing. 

Therefore, they are requesting that Parliament provides a method of looking after them when they retire. I will forward that petition to the Committee on Presidential Affairs for perusal and report back.

Thank you very much. There were now few matters of national importance.

3.10
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance and specifically regarding to the President’s State of the Nation Address in which he informed the nation that Government would take up the responsibility of supporting the private sector with essential utilities: electricity and water.

The President went on to state the period between April and June this year. However, to date, National Water and Sewerage Corporation continues to serve private enterprises with bills. Also, electricity is not catered for. The bills cover the period that the President precisely referred to.

My prayers are:
    1. Government should come out and clarify what the status is. Should the President’s statement be taken as the truth, given that he is the Fountain of Honour?
    2. What has been done regarding the State of the Nation Address, which is a very serious address to the country? Should citizens expect that there is going to be action or should they forget about it? 

Thank you.

The Speaker: The Rt Hon. Prime Minister is directed to come and explain to the country the issues raised by hon. Lubogo by Tuesday next week.

3.12
Mr joseph ssewungu (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am also raising a matter of national importance regarding the flouting of COVID-19 health regulations by some ministers.

In March 2020, Cabinet, with the guidance of the Minister of Health, approved guidelines that guided the President to issue presidential directives that included, among others, stopping gatherings of over 10 people, closing of schools and places of worship – I put emphasis on that – social distancing and wearing of masks while in public.

To our surprise, over the weekend, the minister who is supposed to be the custodian of these regulations that are leading us to the desired elections was seen flouting the same regulations. She was seen in a procession with citizens of Aromo sub-county in Lira District without observing social distancing. She also addressed a crowd of people without wearing a mask.

The Electoral Commission also revised the election road map to change from public rallies to scientific or virtual campaigns basing on the guidance of this minister and some political parties have found this undesirable - (Interruption) 

Mr ssewanyana: Thank you. To add to that information, the honourable Minister of State for Kampala Capital City Authority, hon. Benny Namugwanya, who has been heard on radio over and over again stopping arcades from opening, boda bodas from taking passengers and taxis from operating normally, was seen on Sunday in Madudu, Mubende District holding a rally of more than 2,000 people. They were standing, gathering, singing and enjoying normally.

Those of us who represent people who mostly work in arcades now wonder what the intention is of telling us that in order to operate normally in this city, one has to follow the standard operating procedures.

Madam Speaker, our people are suffering. Even this morning, while they attempted to open arcades, police arrested more than 300 people over flouting the standard operating procedures, which were put forward by the minister.

The Speaker: Hon. Ssewungu, please conclude.

Mr ssewungu: Madam Speaker, while the minister was flouting the regulations, police took no action to apprehend her. However, to our surprise, some of the opposition members like hon. Ssemujju Nganda were arrested by police while interfacing with their electorate on Friday, 10 July 2020.

My prayers are:
    1. The Minister for Health, hon. Dr Ruth Aceng, should explain to the House why she flouted the COVID-19 regulations and she should apologise to this House. 
    2. She also has to tell us whether there is coronavirus or she has been misleading the President - (Interruption)

Mr kasibante: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have watched footage showing what happened in Lira when the Minister for Health, Dr Ruth Aceng, was mobilising supporters for the forthcoming elections. I have heard her speaking to the press explaining what she was doing. She said that she had gone to sensitise Ugandans in Lira on how to use masks.

In the footage, there was no health official in attendance, not even the district health director. The people who were distributing masks were National Resistance Movement (NRM) cadres who are her supporters and who do not have anything to do with these health standards.

The Speaker: What is your point of procedure?

Mr kasibante: The point of procedure is whether it is not procedurally right for this House to move a censure motion against the Minister for Health. What these ministers are doing - It is not only Dr Ruth Aceng but also the Minister of State for Kampala Capital City Authority. We are at pains when arcades cannot be opened under the guise of not fulfilling the Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs).

The procedural issue I would like to emphasise is whether it is not prudent that we move a censure motion against these two ministers. Thank you.

Mr ssewungu: My final prayer is to prove - The minister has to come here and apologise. In addition, why are we still having a lockdown and ongoing curfew for the last three months?

What about these ministers who are flouting the laws they have put in place? They sit next to the President and whatever is taking place is out of the guidance of the Minister for Health. It is only doctors who are not given –

The Speaker: What are your prayers?

Mr ssewungu: Madam Speaker, I have made my prayers. The law enforcers should not discriminate while enforcing the COVID-19 regulations and presidential directives. 

The minister should also come and inform us whether she has been misleading the country to keep us under lockdown for the rest of this period when she knows the fact that people can move freely and campaign. I beg to move. Thank you.

The Speaker: Honourable members, the Minister for Health is required to come and explain to us and the country whether or not she flouted her own guidelines issued under the Public Health Act. 

The Minister of State for Kampala Capital City Authority should also come to this House and explain what she was doing with a crowd.

Beyond that, I would like the Government to be more serious about the issue of this COVID-19. Can’t we learn to live with it and just organise our society to manage it? How long is this lockdown going to continue? (Applause) It is important that we guide our people on how to live with this situation but to talk of lockdown for a month, two, five or seven months is a problem!

I also think the country needs an evaluation of this lockdown so that we can know how to move. Keeping people in suspense is not right. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you should arrange and give us an evaluation so that we discuss it in the House.

Mr ssemujju: Madam Speaker, the procedural issue I would like to raise on the same subject matter is that, you had directed that this Parliament receives periodically weekly briefings. However, we are not receiving these weekly briefings to Parliament. 

I was violently arrested. I am a Member of Parliament and I could not interact with the people I represent. Then, on the same day, I was violently picked and thrown on a pickup, the minister responsible, who the police quoted, as they arrested me, was dancing in a procession and enjoying herself as if someone had announced that COVID had ended. 

Therefore, the procedural issue I am raising, Madam Speaker, is whether you should not direct the Government to continue briefing Parliament weekly, as you had directed; to know where we are in the fight. How much threat remains? What can we do to continue with our lives? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have also noted that, for the last three weeks, there has been no update from the Government. Therefore, this Thursday, you are required to come, explain and continue explaining until this lockdown ends. 

3.21
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Madam Speaker, you appointed us to represent Parliament on the national taskforce, which we have been doing very faithfully. However, whenever we gather complaints from Members of Parliament and take them to the national taskforce, they are just ignored. 

I thought I should also raise this; that the complaints we get from members and take to the national taskforce are not given the respect that they are supposed to be given. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. When they come, we should take them on. 


3.22
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, with the advice - and I love learning from role models, like the honourable minister, Aceng, so I beg to throw away the mask.

Madam Speaker, I am a leader who walks the talk from role models. I rise on a matter of national importance – (Interruption) 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, you are our great leader in Parliament and you are putting on your mask in this session. Is hon. Macho in order to throw away the important asset at this time; a mask, when you, yourself, have been guiding us on protecting ourselves? However, at this time, hon. Macho has thrown away the asset, without your guidance, and continues to address us without wearing a mask. Should we let this happen? Is it in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we agreed that we should all wear masks in public and we are in public. Hon. Macho put back your mask.

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for your guidance, although I was running from the Ugandan representative to the World Health Organisation.

To go to the matter of national importance, on 2 July, the Cabinet Secretary for Agriculture in Kenya, hon. Peter Munya, wrote a letter to the Kenyan Sugar Authority stopping the Ugandan raw cane exporters from exporting sugarcane to Kenya. 

This issue has caused a lot of problems with partner states. This is because the letter was very abrupt and the farmers and traders had already loaded their cane on the trucks, which they had paid for some days back. As I talk now, we have more than 500 cane trucks on the Busia border that were stopped from entering Kenya and they have taken more than five days. 

The cane has started drying and the farmers are counting many losses together with the traders. At the same time, the truck owners are charging the traders every day, which is becoming a very big problem. 

Madam Speaker, I move this, in line with what the Kenyan Government did on the issue of stopping the export of milk; that Kenya, as a partner state in the East African integration, is doing business with a partner country in bad faith. They started with the milk. The issue came on the Floor of Parliament and the Government of Uganda has not acted at all. At the same time, they have now moved to raw sugarcane and there is also a plan to stop all the poultry products. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I pray that the Kenyan Government tells the partner states whether they are interested in the East African integration or are pretending. This is because, in the normal case, for every protocol to be abused, you must tell partner states more than three months before. 

Madam Speaker – (Interruption) 

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, colleagues. Madam Speaker, as people that come from the region that – (Interjections) – who of the two is the Speaker? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kibalya, you are not properly before the House.  

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, since the minister refused to put on the mask, we are also taking the fashion.

THE SPEAKER: I think you should take the fashion of the Speaker and not the minister. 

MR KIBALYA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. We are getting concerned, as people that come from the region growing sugarcane. The ministry concerned, which is the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives, only talks about sugarcane when we put them on the wall to say something. They do not show any responsibility and wish to promote those ones growing sugarcane or that they need to help the region growing sugarcane. 

Many cane trucks are stuck at Busia and cane plantations have been burnt; a colleague raised it last week. The supply is above the consumption of millers. We have a full Ministry of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives that cannot even think of those suffering. 

Madam Speaker, we need to know, from your Office, if this ministry is for other areas and regions but not Busoga. Or is Busoga also part of the region that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives is supposed to serve? Thank you. 

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, I would like to agree with my colleague that in case it was coffee or cows, action would have been taken quickly. 

However, my prayers are: 
    1. That the Kenyan Government should, with immediate effect, without conditions, allow the trucks that are parked in the Malaba and Busia border to enter. This is because these people signed agreements with the Kenyan mills that are waiting for them. 
    2. The Minister of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives and the East African Co-operation should help to intervene to solve this problem with immediate effect. 
    3. We too, the Ugandan Government, should teach Kenya a lesson. We should stop the Irish potatoes, salt and plastics coming from Kericho with immediate effect so that they learn the pain our people are going through. 
    4. The Kenyan Government should come out clearly and tell the partner states whether they are interested in the integration or they are pretending. 

Those are my prayers, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives, are you aware of the trucks at the Malaba and Busia borders? 

3.29
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND CO-OPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker, yes, I am fully aware of the trucks that are at the border. It is true that we have had a number of challenges with the new minister of agriculture. He was in trade before and he was shifted to agriculture. Of course, he started with the sugar, poultry and a number of items and now he is going to sugarcane. 

We have engaged with the Minister of Trade, my colleague, but she says she is consulting. The President also said he is going to talk to his counterpart, on that matter. 

However, we have decided to fast track the issue of constructing a factory in Busoga for the growers. We want to train the growers in cooperatives so that we fast track that. Otherwise, we have not had a solution about the situation in Kenya.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, when will the Republic of Uganda set in place the principle of reciprocity? Why is it that we are being hit repeatedly and keep doing nothing? 

MS KYAMBADDE: Madam Speaker, we have an engagement with the High Commissioner to put in a Protest Note over that issue. However, in the meantime, let me consult on that matter.

THE SPEAKER: No. Honourable minister, first, it was the milk, then the sugar and now the sugarcane; and it is still the same Government and the same country. We want you to apply the principle of reciprocity. Stop their trucks from coming. That is when they will understand that it is an issue.

MS KYAMBADDE: Madam Speaker, I take note of that.

3.32
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Sembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Our colleague raised very clear prayers. The honourable minister has said that the Government is planning to have a processing plant in Busoga. That was not among the prayers, although we appreciate it. However, that is in the long-term.

However, for the short-term - the prayers were clear and we want to know the action you are taking. We do not want to lament here that my colleague is very stubborn and not doing this. The issue is that Ugandan trucks that are carrying sugarcane are stuck at the border. What is it that you are doing as the line ministry and as Government? 

Madam Speaker, I think we should take action as a whole House. We should not allow their trucks that are coming in until it is a win-win situation; they cannot stop our trucks and yet we allow theirs, that is not how things should move. Madam Speaker, I want us to conclude on this as a House. We should not leave it hanging. This is my prayer. Thank you.

3.33
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are all aware that sugarcane is a perishable good. My colleague Macho was very clear like hon. Kawooya has said. The issue at hand is the trucks which are stuck at the border and that is what we want the minister to tell us about. We appreciate the factory in Busoga, but that is for the long-term. The issue is the trucks which are stuck at the border.

Secondly, we need continuous follow of this business without interruption. Thirdly, the Ministry of Trade and Industry has to put in place a desk officer to always coordinate the matter, so that we do not continue to encounter these problems. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, when will the trucks leave the border?

3.34
MR DAVID MUTEBI (NRM, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Madam Speaker, while we talk about the trucks that are stuck at the border, I want to bring to the attention of the minister the fact that even sugarcane out-growers supplying factories here are stuck with cane, yet Government encouraged out-growers to venture in this business.

It takes a farmer an average of four to five months to get a permit to deliver cane to the factory. We have established that in some of these factories, workers within the factories are now engaged into trading - kind of back door trading. 

They buy cane at very low prices and then deliver them to the factory while they deprive the out-growers of permits to deliver their cane. We need an intervention directly from the minister to engage the mill owners and managers in order to negotiate for our people. Otherwise, farmers are suffering.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister of trade, in Busoga Region alone, there is in excess of seven million tons of sugarcane and yet mills are not able to consume it. It is a very serious issue.

3.36
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is a big concern, which has been raised. These farmers have already incurred losses; who is going to meet these losses?

In addition, in case the memorandum of understanding is signed, who is going to incur the losses? Is it Kenya or Uganda? As you follow up this issue, make sure that those losses are clearly settled. Thank you.

3.37
MR ROBERT KASULE (NRM, Nansana Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Of course, there are many problems of cane in the whole Eastern Region. However, Madam Speaker, I think we should allocate time for this matter. When you cut cane, beyond certain days, you cannot supply it. It is dry and has lost the juice that you intend to squeeze out. 

My request is that we send a protest letter from our minister to the Kenyan Government by Tuesday. Secondly, Parliament expresses disappointment with the Kenyan Government; otherwise, by Tuesday next week, it would be two weeks before our people supply their cane.

Therefore, we should also show displeasure as the Parliament so that maybe the Parliament of Kenya may intervene on our behalf. However, we should protest after our minister acting on the Protest Note to the line minister in Kenya.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I propose that we need to make a resolution which my counterpart should hear. Mr Muturi should hear that Uganda, is angry with them. Therefore, we need a motion, we debate it quickly, make a resolution and express our disappointment. Can we do it tomorrow? In the meantime, honourable minister, we want a report about the 500 trucks parked at Malaba and Busia. Thank you.

MR NSAMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. These are matters of the East African Community. Whereas we require the minister of trade to take action, we also need the Minister for East African Affairs and the Minister for Foreign Affairs to come and take these matters seriously. They begun with diary, maize and now they are cutting out each and every thing. The Minister for East African Affairs should come and tell us-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think there are two areas: On the issue of trade, we are going to have a motion and a response from the minister tomorrow, about what has happened. On the performance of the protocol, the Minister for the East African Community Affairs should come and update us on where we are. Is it there or not? 

Hon. Bagoole, draft a motion which we shall debate quickly tomorrow. Hon. Mbwatekamwa, you have the Floor but for only two minutes.

3.40
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA: (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter of national importance I stand to raise is about what the Minister of State for Microfinance, hon. Haruna Kasolo, said over the weekend when he declared Uganda a COVID-19-free nation.

Madam Speaker, hon. Haruna Kasolo, while appearing on a local FM radio station called Kafo FM – which is his radio station anyway – said there is no Coronavirus in Uganda, adding that the figures that are being given out in regard to Kyotera are just inflated. He said the only cases that are in Uganda are for people who travel through our borders to other districts – (Interjection) – yes, I will table the evidence.

Madam Speaker, when I went to donate an ambulance to my people of Kakanju Sub-county, I was arrested yet we were not more than 20 people. We had been well-spaced and wearing masks. The challenge is to see a minister stating that there is no Coronavirus in Uganda –

THE SPEAKER: Where is the tape? Do you have the tape?

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Yes, I do. I am going to table it. I think the Government should come up and tell us. Madam Speaker, allow me to table evidence titled: “Anti-Covid-19 by honourable minister Haruna Kasolo.” My prayer is that the Government should lift the lockdown immediately because ministers have shown that we do not have COVID-19 in this country.

Another prayer is that the minister should come and he gives us a statement. Thank you.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, Cabinet sits every Monday and it is a meeting of ministers. I am one of the ministers who attend Cabinet every time it is called. There is no such a decision that has been taken in Cabinet to lift the lockdown. I have listened to hon. Gaffa Mbwatekamwa saying, “ministers have” as if Cabinet sat in a meeting and took a decision. That is why I stood up to ask whether it is in order for hon. Mbwatekamwa to mislead Parliament and the country.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the issue is that three ministers have, by their conduct, indicated that there is no Coronavirus in the country, by going without masks; by calling public meetings; and by probably speaking up. That is what he is saying. I think we shall ask hon. Kasolo to come and explain the context of that tape. Can the Clerk also arrange to listen to it so that we are sure about what is being alleged?

MR KAHONDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue I am raising regards ministers, especially in relations to COVID-19. Last week, the Minister for East African Community Affairs had a rally in Rurehe Parish in Rurehe Sub-county. He also had a rally in Rutooma Parish in Rurehe Sub-county and another rally at Mr Kibirige’s place and in Rwanza. All those rallies had more than 300,000 people.

Madam Speaker, ministers are setting a precedent that Ugandans are actually free to move, free to campaign and free to gather. The Government should be clear on this matter or else they should allow us to go and interact with our people. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have already ruled on those matters. The Government should come here and we discuss the impact and evaluate the lockdown; do we still need it or not?

3.46
MR GODFREY KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The country is calling upon this great House to provide leadership. You can fool people for some time but you cannot fool people all the time –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are not dressed properly before this House. Where is your mask? (Laughter)

MR KATUSABE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Put it on. 

MR KATUSABE: Should I put it on? Oh, yes! (Laughter) Madam Speaker, for evil to thrive on planet earth, you need one ingredient: good people like you, Madam Speaker and honourable members in this House, to do nothing.

Madam Speaker, you are number three in the entire country. You are fully aware that we have lost a lot of people – there is a very sad incident that happened in Jinja. A young woman who was trying to find her way to work was shot dead –(Interjection)– in  a hospital in Jinja and she died with a bullet in her stomach because she could not afford Shs 500,000. 

In Kasese, Madam Speaker, a young man was shot dead by security officers because he was trying to get food to a grandmother who was hospitalised at Kasese Hospital. 

A fortnight ago, Madam Speaker, a deacon was shot dead by security officers under the guise of implementing the COVID-19 guidelines.

Madam Speaker, it grieves my spirit. Ugandans are and Uganda as a country is now a laughing stock. It is not enough to call for apologies. We should lead by examples. The people flouting regulations in their own countries have resigned. 

Madam Speaker, if it pleases you, I would ask, specifically, that the Minister of Health, as she prepares her submission, comes along with her resignation letter. I do not think that we are prepared for more foolery.

Madam Speaker, boda bodas can no longer work, arcades are shut down, everyone is trying to survive. People are in their homes starving to death under the foolery of the so-called COVID-19 guidelines from the same minister. This House should demand nothing except a resignation from the minister if we want to be taken seriously - (Interruption)

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, honourable member, for allowing me to give you information. Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for the guidance you have been giving to this House all along. 

Today, over 600 people have been arrested in Kampala for trying to open their places of work. I remember a question about distribution of food arose when we were here. The food was to be distributed to the vulnerable poor. However, those that were working in arcades, malls and salons were not given food yet they were told to stay home. It is now four months. These people can no longer afford to stay home because they cannot pay rent as their shops are locked up. They are choking with loans since they cannot work. 

Let us put ourselves in the shoes of these people. While our work places are open, their shops are not. They send for goods - Madam Speaker, as we talk about what we export, these people also ordered goods from abroad but they can no longer meet their obligations regarding their credit. They cannot afford to go back and pay rent. They cannot pay utilities at home and they do not have food. 

Madam Speaker, I support you and hon. Katusabe that the time for the lockdown is long gone. We should learn to live with this virus and work with it within the Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs). How can you open markets and fail to open up shopping malls and centres? It does not logically add up. 

Therefore, I would like to call upon every one of us here to be empathetic to these young men and women who are trying to find a living. Who of us can go for four months without earning and still run a family and a constituency? Let us be empathetic and think about them the way we think about ourselves. If we cannot close our work places for two months, imagine four months without being at work yet you have children at home. What else can they do? They have to come down and open their work places since they have rent, taxes and utilities to pay and children to look after. We must, therefore, be empathetic and walk the talk as leaders of these people. Thank you very much.  

MR KATUSABE: Thank you, hon. Nsereko.

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude. 

MR KATUSABE: Madam Speaker, added to my list are your daughters and sons - the boda boda riders and those that teach in private schools. The proprietors of those schools are telling them, “we pay you from the school fees. Now that learners are no longer in school, we cannot pay you.” 

Madam Speaker, these people have families and needs. This is the reason why I am very hurt that the minister behind all of this is the very one acting in contradiction. Therefore, as we wait for her, decency and civility require that she comes to this House with a prepared resignation letter. We also want to send that message to her appointing authority. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think we had already asked the minister to come and explain. Hon. Songa, use two minutes. 

3.54
MR LAWRENCE SONGA BIYIKA (NRM, Ora County, Zombo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an urgent matter concerning the treatment given to some districts in West Nile because of COVID-19. 

On behalf of the people of West Nile, I would like to say that most of the districts in West Nile are now unlocked but Zombo, Nebbi and Adjumani districts are still under lockdown. In order to go to Arua, one has to pass via Nebbi, Zombo or Moyo districts. My concern is: when is the ministry opening Zombo, Nebbi and Adjumani districts? It is illogical to think that we can leave these places under lockdown because of COVID-19.

When it comes to the issue of border business, Vurra border is actually busier than Pader border, which is in Zombo District. If it is true that Zombo, Nebbi and Adjumani districts are high-risk areas for COVID-19, why have we failed to get face masks up to now?

My prayer is that Zombo, Nebbi and Adjumani districts should be opened but people should be advised to adhere to the strict standard operating procedures. I think that will help the people in West Nile to access services, which are mostly outside those districts. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Ministry of Health is directed to come and advise on when Zombo, Nebbi and Adjumani districts will be unlocked and the issue of distribution of face masks in Zombo District. Hon. Nsamba, two minutes.

3.56
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the new role of Operation Wealth Creation in scrutinising the budget of this country.

When the President was delivering the State of the Nation Address, he indicated that some officials of Operation Wealth Creation had highlighted key items that are a waste. Yesterday’s New Vision had a headline indicating the key areas that Operation Wealth Creation officials threw out of the budget as it was passed here.

Madam Speaker, the budget proposal is a Government proposal to this Parliament. Government brings up their proposals and then we scrutinise. Scrutinising the budget is the role of Parliament. In the wake of COVID-19, we came here and asked Government, “You laid out budget proposals before COVID-19, as Government, can’t you look at these proposals and come up with a new budget proposal that takes into consideration COVID-19?”

As a Member of Parliament, I feel that if the meeting is going on and Operation Wealth Creation officials, who are not even mentioned, are throwing out items from the budget we passed here under the order of Cabinet, it is very unfortunate. If there was any matter that needed to be reviewed, Cabinet would have sent the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to this Parliament. We have a Committee on Budget that would have scrutinised and made amendments to the budget proposal.

Madam Speaker, this is very unfortunate. My prayer is that the ministers responsible for this, especially the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development who has been sent to the Operation Wealth Creation officials, should come here and clarify this new role of Operation Wealth Creation in reviewing and scrutinising the budget.

Madam Speaker, this morning, I was at the Rural Electrification Agency offices and I was informed that Operation Wealth Creation had said that some lines under Government of Uganda funding are not a priority, so they are going to be stopped from being worked on. That is very unfortunate. 

We need the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come here and explain this new role of Operation Wealth Creation, which is unconstitutional and not in the law. He should also explain why they bypassed the Parliament of Uganda. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, respond to that very quickly. 

4.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable member for raising this issue. 

When the minister read a speech here and when we laid the proposals on the Table in April, we promised the country and Parliament that we shall come back to make some additional adjustments. When the budget was read in June, we repeated the same statement. Since then, the Executive arm of Government has set up a joint committee comprising of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Operation Wealth Creation and other people to review the budget and see whether we can make some adjustments. 

When these adjustments are made - Hon. Patrick Nsamba, we are not naïve; we know that the authority to appropriate money lies with Parliament. For any adjustment that requires Parliament to make a decision, we shall come to this House. So, the work that is being done so far is on the side of the Executive. When that time comes and Parliament is required to make a decision, we shall come to this House and request for authorisation. 

THE SPEAKER: That is a Government assurance. I hope they will be able to come back. 

Honourable members, before we go to item No.3, I have just received an email from one of our children called Joel Madondo. He is a footballer who is engaged with Wydad Casablanca of Morocco. For the last several months, however, he has been stranded in Morocco. The club has also confiscated his passport and he has been put in isolation. 

I would like to call on the Minister of Education and Sports to examine the situation of Joel Madondo and help him to either come back or streamline his contract with the professional football club where he had signed for three and half years. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE UGANDA NATIONAL EXAMINATIONS BOARD BILL, 2020

4.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Ms Rosemary Seninde): Madam Speaker, I beg to present to this House the Uganda National Examinations Board Bill, 2020. 

Madam Speaker, the current Uganda National Examinations Board Act, chapter – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know what is happening to the Cabinet. They are trying to speak to Bills each time they bring them. This is the third time. Just lay the Bill on the Table and the certificate of financial implications.

MS SENINDE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the Uganda National Examinations Board Bill, 2020 for first reading. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? There are some seconders. The Bill has been seconded. Do you have a certificate of financial implications? 

MS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, it is accompanying the Bill. (Interjections) - I have the Bill. I do not have the certificate of financial implications right here, although it is ready. 

Madam Speaker, the Certificate of Financial Implications for the Uganda National Examinations Board Bill, 2020 is here attached. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Bill is sent to the Committee on Education and Sports for perusal and report back. 

Honourable members, bear in mind that we would be happy if all this work was done and handled before the October recess, which will be in the first week of October. Thank you. 

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION OF MEMBERS OF MATONGO LOST LAND RECOVERY FAMILIES’ ORGANISATION

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Richard Gafabusa is not here. Let us go to Item No. 5 –

LAYING OF PAPERS

4.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the list of accounting officers for Financial Year 2020/2021. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us receive the list. Our Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development will advise us on the way forward. 

MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020 RETURNED TO THE HOUSE BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 91(3) (B) OF THE CONSTITUTION AND RULE 142 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

4.07
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Local Governments (Amendment) Bill, 2019, which was passed by this House, be returned to address concerns raised by His Excellency the President to remove academic qualifications introduced in section 111 of the Act for urban division chairpersons, among other provisions. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the Bill is sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for expeditious perusal and report back. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION UNDER SECTION 8(3) OF THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS ACT, 2005 FOR REVIEW OF THE REPRESENTATION UNDER ARTICLE 78(1)(b) AND (c) OF THE CONSTITUTION

4.09
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I am moving a motion for a resolution of Parliament under section 8 (3) of the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2005 and rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament for review of the representation in Parliament - that is the composition of Parliament - under Article 78(1) (b) and (c) of the Constitution. The resolution reads as follows:

“WHEREAS, during the Constitution-making process, the people of Uganda emphasised that one of the main principles that should govern the composition and functioning of Parliament is participatory democracy and inclusiveness, and that whereas the Legislature should be composed mainly of representatives directly elected by the people, due regard should be made for the representation of special interest groups that had been marginalized by society;

AND WHEREAS Article 78(1) of the Constitution provides that - 
‘(1) Parliament shall consist of - 
    (a) members directly elected to represent constituencies; 
    (b) one woman representative for every district; 
    (c) such numbers of representatives of the army, youth, workers, persons with disabilities and other groups as Parliament may determine.’;

AND WHEREAS Parliament in 1996 determined, through section 37 of the Parliamentary Elections (Interim Provisions) Statute of 1996, which is now repealed, that the numbers for the special interest groups would be as follows:
    (a) Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces - ten representatives;
    (b) youth - five representatives;
    (c) workers - three representatives;
    (d) Persons with disabilities - five representatives;

AND WHEREAS, subsequently, Parliament, by section 11 of the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2001, made provision for the district women representatives and for the representation of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces, youth, workers and persons with disabilities as follows:
    (a) one woman representative for every district; 
    (b) ten representatives of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces;
    (c) five representatives for youth, at least one of whom shall be a woman;
    (d) five representatives for workers; 
    (e) five representatives for persons with disabilities, at least one of whom shall be a woman;

AND WHEREAS the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2005, section 8, provides for the following representation in respect of Article 78(1) (b) and (c) of the Constitution:
    (1) district or city women representatives - one woman representative in Parliament for every district or city;
    (2) special interest groups-
    (a) for the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces, ten representatives, at least two of whom shall be women;
    (b) five representatives for workers, at least one of whom shall be a woman;
    (c) five representatives for the youth, at least one of whom shall be a woman;
    (d) five representatives for persons with disabilities, at least one of whom shall be a woman;

AND WHEREAS Cabinet on 6 July 2020 approved the representation to Parliament of older persons by five representatives in the Eleventh Parliament;

AND WHEREAS Article 32(l) (Affirmative action in favour of marginalised groups) provides -
‘(l) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the State shall take affirmative action in favour of groups marginalised on the basis of gender, age, disability or any other reason created by history, tradition or custom, for the purpose of redressing imbalances which exist against them.’;

AND WHEREAS in the past, women, youth, workers, persons with disabilities and older persons were denied participation in the governance of Uganda through customs and practices that marginalised their status in society and could not participate on an equal footing with others and yet they have special interests that need articulation and representation;

AND WHEREAS their inclusion in the composition of Parliament is a guarantee by the Constitution of minimum participation by these groups in the democratic processes of Government, and their representation is one form of affirmative action which the State is required to take under Article 32 of the Constitution in favour of groups marginalised on the basis of gender, age, disability or any other reason created by history, tradition or custom;

AND WHEREAS the representation of the army has been part of the historical process for the army to appreciate how the problems of Uganda are solved by civil leaders with the underlying objective of evolving a culture of commitment to the rule of law and constitutionalism, a culture in which the army is subordinate to the mandate of the people given to civilian authority in accordance with the Constitution;

AND WHEREAS Article 78(2) of the Constitution provides that - 
‘(2) Upon the expiration of a period of ten years after the commencement of this Constitution and thereafter, every five years, Parliament shall review the representation under clause (1) (b) and (c) of this Article for the purposes of retaining, increasing or abolishing any such representation and any other matter incidental to it.’” - Every five years, we must come here and Parliament reviews the composition of these special groups -

“…AND WHEREAS the period of ten years after the commencement of the Constitution expired on the 7th day of October, 2005, and Parliament in December 2005 reviewed the representation under Article 78(l) (b) and (c) in accordance with Article 78 (2) and resolved to retain the representation, and subsequently reviewed the representation again in October 2010 and October 2015 and resolved to retain the representation;

AND WHEREAS Parliament is required, under Article 78(2), to review the representation every five years after the first review;

AND WHEREAS the review is now due, since the representation was last reviewed by Parliament in October 2015;

AND WHEREAS it is imperative that the review is done by Parliament in light of the forthcoming general elections of 2021;

NOTING THAT Cabinet, on 13 July 2020, approved the retention of the representation of women representatives in Parliament for every district or city and the representation of the special interest groups by maintaining ten representatives for the Uganda Peoples' Defence Forces, five representatives for workers, five representatives for the youth, five representatives for persons with disabilities, and five representatives for older persons.

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament as follows:
That in accordance with section 8(3) of the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2005 and Article 78(2) of the Constitution, the representation in Parliament under Article 78(1) (b) and (c) is reviewed as follows:
    (1) District or city women representatives - one woman representative for every district or city;
    (2) Special interest groups –
    (a) ten representatives for the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces, at least two of whom shall be women;
    (b) five representatives for workers, at least one of whom shall be a woman;
    (c) five representatives for the youth, at least one of whom shall be a woman;
    (d) five representatives for persons with disabilities, at least one of whom shall be a woman; and
    (e) five representatives for older persons, at least one of whom shall be a woman,

for purposes of the representation in Parliament.” 
I beg to move. Thank you.

The Speaker: Honourable minister, we need two motions. The first should be one where Parliament will determine the new composition and the second one should be a motion to review. By introducing the elderly, we are amending the composition as required under Article 78(1) (c) - Age will come later.

Prof. kamuntu: Madam Speaker, there are arguments about age and number. Cabinet simply passed a resolution for retention; therefore, the motion I am moving for a resolution of Parliament is as follows -  

The Speaker: Is that a third resolution?

Prof. kamuntu: No.

The Speaker: Honourable minister, I said that what you have presented should come in two separate motions. The first motion is to determine the new composition of Parliament including the elderly, and then the motion on the review should be separate.

Honourable members, we have agreed with the minister that the motions need to be separated; so, we shall defer this item to tomorrow - Let us hear from the General first.

BRIG. GEN. byekwaso: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I seek clarification on what the minister has submitted on the number of women representatives from the army. It was passed here in Parliament that female representation will always be 30 per cent of the 10 Members, which comes to three women out of the 10 army representatives. So, when you go back and say, “at least two”, then you are taking us back to where we came from.

This is an amendment I am seeking from the minister, if it pleases him.

The Speaker: Honourable minister, I believe you have heard.

Dr lyomoki: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There was also a petition from workers, persons with disabilities and the youth for the representation to be increased from five to ten – (Interjections)- This was a petition, which was given to the ministry. The minister should be able to handle it tomorrow as we come. 

THE SPEAKER: Have you served the minister? Okay, the matter is deferred to tomorrow. Let us go to item 8.

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As the minister brings the document that you have requested for, we have heard the outcry of the prisons and police officials. Is the minister also putting the request of prisons and police officials into consideration so that they are represented in Parliament? 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NATIONAL COFFEE BILL, 2018

4.33 
Clause 2

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Ms Janet Okori-Moe): Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. We have amendments on Clause 1 under interpretation. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we normally do interpretation last in case there are changes. Let us go to clause 2. 

Clause 2
THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 2 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, did you submit your amendment? - Where is it? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I have submitted my proposals to the Clerk and the chairperson of the committee. They are there and that is why I am here. 
I would like to move an amendment that clause 3(7) be deleted.

The justification is that they are saying that some instruments will be sealed and others will not. Every instrument from Uganda Coffee Development Authority must have a seal. I do not know if I am clear, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Would you like to delete sub-clause(7)? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes. It reads: 
“A contract or instrument, which, if entered into, or executed by a person not being a body corporate, will not be required to be under seal.”

What I am trying to say is, no contract should leave Uganda Coffee Development Authority without being under seal. Why should some be sealed and others not? 

They are saying, if an individual like me or you goes into a contract with Uganda Coffee Development Authority, then it will not be under seal. However, if it is a company, it will be under seal. Therefore, I am saying that should be deleted and all contracts should be under seal.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Does the chairperson have any objection? 

MS OKORI-MOE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. The committee considered the proposal by hon. Nandala-Mafabi and objected to it.

There is a general legal provision in all legislations and I would like to refer to the Companies Act, 2012, section 50 No. 1 – 4 and section 55, which does not put all contracts under a common seal. It states, “A contract may also be made orally on behalf of the company by any person acting under its authority, express or implied.” 

When you read section 55 of the Companies Act, it says, “A document executed by a director and the secretary of a company or by the two directors of a company and expressed to be executed by the company, has the same effect as if executed under the common seal of the company.” 

Therefore, whatever is oral can also be executed. We object to the proposal by hon. Nandala-Mafabi, my brother. I beg to move. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, contracts can be oral and implied. There is no reason to segregate and say that a person is not a corporate, so, he should not have a seal. This, therefore, means that there should also be those under corporate for any person. The moment you make a classification in a law, then you must go through it up to the end. 

When you say, “A contract or an instrument, which if entered into or executed by a person not being a body corporate, would not be required to be under seal” then you are making it worse. This is because as an individual, in my own right, I should enter into a contract under seal because you have defined what should be under seal. 

I do not see any reason – What are you trying to achieve by putting this here? Let me understand the mischief you want to cure. Madam Chairperson, you are a lawyer. The moment you decide to enter a contract - and you have said that contracts must be sealed - then it must also have a seal for an individual. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where is the mover? Where is the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries? What is the rationale for this provision?   

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The rationale was, for individuals who are not body corporate, the legal provision for companies and individuals can be very different. That is why for companies, they thought it should totally be under seal. However, for individuals and bodies that are not body corporate, it may not be under seal. That was the thinking.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Under what circumstances would someone sign on behalf of the authority?

MR BAGIIRE: The chief executive of the organisation and the chairperson of the board are the ones that hold the seal of the organisation, the Uganda Coffee Development Authority, those two individuals hold the seal. For body corporate, it was assumed that they have to give a contract that is under seal. However, if it is in the wisdom of this august House that all contracts must be under seal-

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, you see that even the minister cannot manage what he is saying. He is saying that there is no need of a signature for individuals and yet, he is saying that the managing director will be the one keeping the seal and saying that the same person will sign.

Therefore, if the managing director is the one keeping the seal, why shouldn’t he seal for an individual whom he has signed for? What are you trying to achieve here by saying for an individual, there will be no seal. In short, you are saying that there will be no stamp for an individual while for a company, it would be a seal.

Madam Chairperson, without wasting time, clause 3(7) should be deleted because every contract entered on behalf of an institution should have a stamp and here the stamp is a seal.

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. There is a general legal provision in all legislations that says that all contracts must be under seal. Therefore, there is no need to delete it because of that provision. I am emphasising that we leave it because it is just for purposes of emphasis.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, he has said that all contracts must be under seal, then, why do you have this one where you are saying the seal will not be required? Please, read it very well. It says a contract or an instrument, which if entered into or executed by a person not being a body corporate, would not be required to be under seal.

Now, we are saying that if you are saying that there is a general provision, then this does not need to be there. That is why we are saying that for the purposes of the law, to be binding on everybody, whether an individual- because an individual is a person, similar to a company, clause 3(7) should be deleted so that it flows from the beginning up to the end. That is what we are trying to tell you, owner of the law.

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Chairperson, since it is a general provision in all forms of legislation, I think I agree with the proposal.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us stand over it for now. You know, I had no time to look at the amendments by hon. Nandala. Let us go to clause 4.

Clause 4
THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 4-

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, we have amendments in clause 4. The committee proposes that:

    1. Substitute paragraph (c) with the following words, “to promote research along the coffee value chain process and products related to coffee.”  The justification is for clarity.
    2. In paragraph (g), delete the word, “exported”. The justification is that the provision as it stands is discriminatory because even coffee for local consumption must meet the standard prescribed by the authority.
    3. In paragraph (l), replace the word, “liaise” with “coordinate”. This is for a broader meaning.
    4. Insert a new paragraph after paragraph (n) to read as follows: “to promote coffee tourism in Uganda.” The justification is to boost the tourism industry; for example, displaying coffee literature, coffee sample, coffee varieties, coffee testing, processing mechanisms, etcetera.”
    5. Insert the word “to” at the end of the sentence so that it reads as follows, “the objectives of the authority are to”
    6. Delete the word “to” appearing at the beginning of each paragraph. The justification is to avoid unnecessary repetition of the word “to” and for smart drafting. I beg to move.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, if you look at (d), they are saying to promote value addition to the coffee industry and establishing a soluble coffee plant. That means there will only be one coffee plant.

My proposal on (d) is to delete “a” so that there will be soluble coffee plant(s). The justification is to avoid telling them that they will only put one soluble coffee plant.

Madam Chairperson, after (g), insert a new provision to ensure that no coffee moves from one region to another region. The justification is that coffee is grown in different areas and has different tastes and different meanings. If this is controlled, it will help to avoid adulteration of coffee.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, hon. Nandala, you are saying that if I am growing coffee in Elgon, I should not sell anywhere else? Really? You confine me to sell in Elgon only?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, may be, let me help you so that you understand. You know, sugarcane is easy. Madam Chairperson, if you got coffee from Arabic Coffee from Paidha and brought it in Bugisu where there is also Bugisu Arabic Coffee, it will be mixed and treated like Arabic Coffee but the taste is different-

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala, we rejected zoning-

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, what I am saying, you are free to take your coffee to Bugisu, which is already processed as a Paidha Coffee but not to bring it in its raw product to Bugisu or bring raw products to Kampala because you will adulterate coffee of that region. (Interjections)  I want to give you this so that you understand. Madam Chairperson, there is bulking- (Interruption)

MR NSAMBA: Thank you, hon. Nandala. I want to pick your argument. We grow coffee in Kassanda and we might find that the person offering the best price at the time we are selling is in Mbale. Is your proposal suggesting that we, in Kassanda, should not be allowed to transport coffee to Mbale?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Now, you have brought it. What I am trying to say is that the coffee of Kassanda can only move with the name “Kassanda” to Mbale. In the current set up, it would move as coffee but it would be mixed with another coffee. That is why UCDA is coming up with a law that they want to monitor coffee as you see them monitoring the movement of animals so that they know that a particular cow is from a given area and it is moving with a permit. 

We are trying to ensure that when coffee is moving, it should have permit. Are you getting it? The moment it has a permit, it will not be mixed with another one. 

MR OSHABE: Hon. Nandala, I need to pick this. I thought that as Uganda, we are marketing coffee as “Ugandan coffee”. I do not see a situation where we are marking coffee when we are marketing, that “this one is from Kassanda”, “this is from Kasese” and “this is from Bugisu”. I need a clarification to be sure that is the strategy that can put us to the international market in a better way.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is why you hear “Robusta” and “Arabica”. They are there because they have different prices. In the current set up, there is even “organic” and organic is being tied on farmers. There is that one from Sipi Hills, there is one in Mt Elgon and another one in Lower Mountain and many others. Even in the world market now, that is why they are talking of specialised coffee. 

It would be better to have specialised coffee to avoid you bringing coffee from unspecialised place and mixing it with the specialised one to make the quality of the specialised one go down. That is the justification we are fighting for. We are saying that for us to attain market for our coffee, we need to deal with highland coffee differently from lowland coffee and Robusta differently from Arabica.

MR NSEREKO: Madam Chairperson, may be hon. Nandala should be talking of origin marking and traceability. If you inform yourself on this that the authority should undertake the function of ensuring that there is proper marking and traceability of the products mainly in their raw forms as beans – as a finished product, it might not be possible – then I agree with you. However, transboundary movements of the beans should be regulated by the free forces of demand and supply, like hon. Nsamba was saying. 

What he is talking about is what the international standards, mainly due to exports, calls for – that you must classify as “A+”, “Kiboko” and whatever it is. Where I support him is for traceability, quality control and originality. 

However, for transboundary movement – I am in Kampala and I might be an exporter of both Robusta and Arabica coffee. Depending on the demand, I know that if Arabica came from Mt Elgon and I needed Robusta from this other side, no one should tell me that I cannot move Arabica from Mt Elgon or through the new airport in Hoima or wherever. The issue should be the marking from the point of origin.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can you make a proposal to that effect?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, traceability is what he is saying but what we are trying to put across is that the moment I get my green beans and I mix them with green beans from another area, I can tell you that the quality of the beans will change.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Make the proposal and we look at it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: What we would like to say is that –(Interjections)– But I am a coffee dealer. For you, you are a cow dealer. What we are trying to say is that – okay, come and help me.

MS SANTA ALUM: Madam Chairperson, I think the fear of hon. Nandala is addressed in that very clause. The purpose of this Bill is to make sure that the quality of coffee is checked at all levels. Clause 4(g) reads that: “…to control the quality of coffee at stages of the value chain in order to make sure that all coffee exporters meet the standards prescribed by the authority.” 

Therefore, we have the entire authority, which will be responsible for making sure that coffee, right from the gardens to the marketing level, is well checked. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, your fear is well catered for if you read clause 4 from (a) up to the end. I do not see why you should bring a selfish clause where you say coffee from “Region A” or northern region should not be sold in eastern region. As long there is a good price, it should be sold because it should be the forces of demand and supply at play here.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, let me give an example –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Make your proposal.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, just a small one. I am going to make a proposal. Madam Chairperson, Arabica Coffee from Paidha, at this current price, is at Shs 3,800. Arabica Coffee from Mt Elgon is at Shs 6,500. What would happen is that if somebody brought Arabica Coffee from Paidha and mixes it with Arabica Coffee in Bugisu, he would want to charge it at Shs 6,500 but at that time, he will have even compromised the quality of the coffee. 

What we are trying to say is that it can be Arabica Coffee but from a different region. That is why we are moving a proposal that for any coffee to move from a region to another region, it must have a permit from UCDA so that it cannot be mixed with coffee in that region. We are not blocking anybody from buying coffee in any part of the country as long as he is buying knowing that it is from that other region. That is what I am saying and that is the proposal.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is the proposal?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: My proposal would be that after (g), we say that “the authority shall ensure that the movement from one region to another region shall have a movement permit to avoid it being mixed with the one from another area”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now, honourable member, I do not know whether you are not mixing up the objectives and the functions. Clause 5 is where the functions of the authority are.

MR NSEREKO: Madam Chairperson, I would like to propose to modify it. The issue of movement – permit – will bring bureaucracy and corruption –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nsereko, did you present a proposal to the committee chairperson and minister?

MS OKORI-MOE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. This is a liberalised economy and we cannot stop coffee from moving from one region to the other. (Applause) More so, UCDA has the categorisation of the coffee coming from all areas and cannot allow coffee to be mixed. Therefore, I beg the House to reject the proposal by hon. Nandala-Mafabi. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala, have you looked at clause 5?

MR NSEREKO: Madam Chairperson, let us modify that amendment but not just reject it. Whereas some of us do not agree with the movement permit, we are grappling with the issue of marking.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is the proposal?

MR NSEREKO: Madam Chairperson, the proposal would be that amongst the functions of the authority, it shall ensure that all coffee produced shall have clear specifications and markings that conform to its quality and origin.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Have you looked at clause 5? Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, where are you amendments?
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, you told us to take them to the committee. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Did you send them?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I did, Madam Chairperson. I gave them to the chairperson. Where you directed us to take them, is where I went. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: You did not even think you should give me.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, be patient with us.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But I have not seen them.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The reason I am asking for your patience is because coffee is a very interesting sector and so, we should do it as we did for sugar. So, here, we are also looking for our sugar.

Madam Chairperson –
THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you are abusing the privileges of this House. (Laughter) Do not talk about sugar here.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we have agreed on that but on (d) - if you do not delete (a) and put (s), it means the coffee plant will be one. Are you getting it?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is there any objection to that? Honourable chairperson, is there any objection to(d)?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Chairperson, I think we agree with that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: If they have agreed on that, then the final issue is on (l). The committee is saying “to liaise with key stakeholders to organise farmers in the coffee sector”.

Madam Chairperson, the key stakeholders are very clear and these are the cooperatives. I would like to propose that we say “to liaise and work with cooperative societies dealing in coffee”.

The justification is that all farmers in this country are now organised into cooperatives. This will also help to promote the quality of coffee and registration of the members. On that, we are together on that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What does the minister say?

MR KIBALYA: Madam Chairperson, I am seeking clarification from the amendment proposed by hon. Nandala-Mafabi. Cooperatives are also categorised as stakeholders. However, there are farmers who are not in cooperatives but participate in the industry. So, when we just mention the word “cooperatives”, when there are other stakeholders who are not part of cooperatives - Are we, therefore, not eliminating them?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 4 be amended as proposed.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5
MS OKORI-MOE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. The committee has amendments under clause 5, as follows:
    a) in paragraph (c), by replacing the word “sales” with the word “export”

The justification is that cess should only be charged on exporters. The word “sales” may include cess being levied on farmers as well.

(b) In paragraph (h) by inserting the word “profile” immediately before the word “grade.” 

The justification is to be all inclusive.

(c)In paragraph (i) by inserting the words “seed garden operator” immediately after the word “nursery operators”
The justification is to be all inclusive.

(d)Amend paragraph (l) by substituting the words “international coffee organisation” with the words “Regional and international coffee organisation”.

The justification is to promote regional trade and integration in the coffee sector.

(e)In paragraph (m) by deleting the words “and training”

The justification is to avoid unnecessary repetition; building includes training. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 5 be amended as proposed. 

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to seek clarification from the chairperson of the committee. Clause 5 (b) talks of registration of all coffee farmers in the country, farmers groups, associations or cooperatives, processors, roasters, brewers, traders, middle men, persons or bodies involved .

In clause 5 (c), the requirement is to register all coffee sales. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: That has been amended. Instead of sales, they are now exports. It reads “all coffee exports and cess”

MR NSEREKO: Now, what is the justification here? Madam Chairperson, we are living in an economy, where we have all farmers - when you say you are going to register farmers, it means there is a certificate you give as a recognition for registration.

Someone will come here and say it does not require licensing. So, does this mean that if I am to grow coffee, I have primarily a responsibility to present myself to either the authority or coffee inspector to have me registered?

The issue is that all forms of cash crops are being grown in Uganda. Others grow peas, beans, cocoa, potatoes and others grow sugar cane. I should say all forms of crops. Madam Chairperson, aren’t we micromanaging this sector? In any case, what are we trying to cure and promote by registration of every farmer?

I am not trying to legislate in anticipation but what follows there has to do with trade. This appears as before -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, during the general debate, there was general consensus about registration; no Member objected to registration.

MR NSEREKO: Madam Chairperson, it is very cumbersome and bureaucratic. Before we know, it will be another loophole for either extortion or elimination of certain people of our society. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 5 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, if you are talking of registration, you cannot only register coffee sales. (Interjections) Please, listen. We must also register production. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we have finished clause 5. 

Clause 6
THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 6 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7
MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, on clause 6, the committee proposes an amendment that we insert the words, “and any person or body involved in the coffee value chain”.  

The justification is to cater for other coffee value chain actors who may have been left out under the provision. 

Madam Chairperson, the committee also proposes that we renumber the current provision as sub-clause (1) and insert another clause after the existing one to read as follows: 
“If the dispute is between the Authority and any other coffee value chain actor, the party shall agree to an arbitrator as per the laws applicable in Uganda.” 

The justification is to avoid conflict of interest. I beg to move, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think you should leave the renumbering to the drafts people. Just say you are inserting a new clause.  

MR NSEREKO: Madam Chairperson, the cost of public administration in this country is where I have my reservations. We already have extension workers with the same qualifications and yet we are looking at expanding the cost of public administration in this country. If we are creating inspectors for each and every sector, the taxpayer – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, we are on clause 6, please. There was an amendment on clause 6 made by the chairperson of the committee. There is also a proposal for insertion of an additional clause. 
Honourable members, I put the question that clause 6 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7
THE CHAIRPERSON: Is there any amendment on clause 7?

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to amend sub-clause (1) by substituting the words, “fit and proper” with the word, “qualified” and delete the words, “and the directives of the Authority” appearing at the end of the provision and redraft the provision to read as follows: “The Authority may appoint a qualified person to be a Coffee Inspector for the purpose of ensuring compliance with this Act”.

The justification is for clarity and to avoid ambiguity. 
I beg to move. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, on that same clause, if you look at clause 7 (2), it says, “A person designated under sub-section (1) shall be a Coffee Inspector for five years or such a period as the Authority may determine”.  What it means here is that it can be for less than five years or more than five years. 

Madam Chairperson, we must close this and say, “A person designated under sub-clause (1) shall be a Coffee Inspector for not more than five years”. That means it can be less but the maximum shall be five years. Otherwise, if you say, “or such a period as the Authority may determine”, the Authority can determine the period to be more or less. Less, however, is allowed. 

What I would like to do is to move an amendment to say, “A person designated under sub-clause (1) shall be a Coffee Inspector for not more than five years” - (Interjections) - I think you are making a mistake. This person is subject to reappointment. (Interjections) Read the law very well. Let me read the law for hon. Namuganza. It says, “A person designated under sub-section (1) shall be a Coffee Inspector for five years or such a period as the Authority may determine.” Do not just make noise. What this means – (Interjections) – Yes, that is why I am telling you not to just make noise. Stop opening your mouth anyhow. 

Madam Chairperson, what I am trying to propose is, “A person designated under sub-clause (1) shall be a Coffee Inspector for not more than five years and shall be subject to renewal by the Authority”. 

The justification for this is:
    1. To avoid where a person can be a Coffee Inspector for five years or more without renewal under one instrument;
    2. If they discover that this person is not performing very well, he or she can be withdrawn anytime. 

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, I think hon. Nandala-Mafabi is raising a very important matter because when we leave it the way it is, we will not have given any period for appointment. If the desire is to make the appointment for five years, then we should say, “up to five years, subject to renewal”. When you leave it the way it is, you will not have said anything about the timeline and yet the interest was to put a timeline under which a Coffee Inspector shall be appointed. Thank you.

MR KIBALYA: Madam Chairperson, we request the amendment to involve the word “term”. If it is a term of five years, it should be specific whether the term is renewable once or the renewal is open. Otherwise, somebody will be a Coffee Inspector for a lifetime. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is why I wanted the minister to –

MR OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, I think these concerns are captured in clause 2, which says, “A person designated under sub-section (1) shall be a Coffee Inspector for five years or such a period as the Authority may determine”. It is left at the discretion of the Authority.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable members. That is dangerous. It means in Kigezi, I can appoint someone for one year; in Nebbi, I can appoint someone for seven years and then somewhere else, I can appoint someone for 20 years. 

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Chairperson, an organisation like Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA) has a human resource manual and the manual is passed by the board and approved by the minister. Therefore, issues relating to staff in terms of the time that they will serve are always embedded in the human resource manual. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, it is wrong for us to mislead the population by making inaccurate laws. What do we want? We must be clear. 

MS OKORI-MOE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We concede to that proposal. I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we delete the words, “such period as the Authority may determine” and complete the sentence by saying, “for five years but eligible for renewal”. 

MR KIBALYA: Madam Chairperson, I would propose that we add the word, “term” to read, “for a term of five years”.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, if you are saying, “A person designated shall be a Coffee Inspector for five years…”, it means even if he is the wrong person, he must be there for five years. What hon. Patrick Nsamba raised – you can decide that if he or she is an old man who is about to and you give him two or three years. Therefore, if you tie it to five, it will be complete.

Madam Chairperson, I would like to move that a person designated under sub-clause (1) shall be a coffee inspector up to five years subject to renewal by the Authority. The justification is that it is after the performance of the person that renewal can take place.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I hope the drafters can improve the language.

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, coffee inspectors are staff and they are guided by the human resource manual; they are not board members. Therefore, what the Member is saying does not hold water.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, start with clause 7 (1), the Authority will appoint a qualified person by notice in the gazette to the whole world that so and so is an inspector. He has to be gazetted officially so that the world is aware who an inspector is.

MR NSEREKO:  Madam Chairperson, we have extension workers at the districts. They can use extension workers at the district. The issue of saying that these people have special qualities yet they are the same qualities that other people possess. Therefore, it is duplication of services.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there was a proposal for amendment. I put the question that clause 7 (1) and clause 7 (2) be amended as proposed?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8
MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes an amendment to clause 8 by substituting the words “a diploma in sciences” with the words “diploma in agriculture or related sciences” and then redraft the provision to read as follows; “a person shall qualify to be a coffee inspector if he or she possesses a minimum of a diploma in agriculture and related sciences and has extensive knowledge and experience in coffee related matters.” 

The justification is that science is very broad and not all sciences are related to coffee or agriculture as such. I beg to move.

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, I am sure and confident that lately we have people with Bachelor of Science degrees in Agriculture in every sub-county. However, the Authority here says that this was supposed to be an inspector and that it should be somebody of a lower qualification yet at the sub-county, we have somebody with a masters and the inspector has a diploma.

Madam Chairperson, I am in disagreement with this type of qualification. My proposal is a bachelor of science with agronomy. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we should not rush to throw away the diplomas because they are relevant at a certain level.

MR NYIRINGIYIMANA: Madam Chairperson, if there is a human resource manual which defines how the workers and employees of the UCDA are going to be handled; the qualifications of A, B, C and D, are we supposed also to debate on the human resource manual? 

Madam Chairperson, I would like to suggest that the human resource manual be allowed to operate other than discussing its specifications here. We need to leave it as the chairperson had proposed.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But this is the Bill as presented by the minister. He knows why he brought it.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, we should not be confused by people who are bringing up the human resource manual at a time when we are dealing with a law. Whatever the human resource manual is prescribing should be amended to fit the law we are passing today.

Having said that, I have a challenge on this matter where we are describing matters to do with extensive knowledge - the last bit of clause 8 where we are defining extensive knowledge and experience in coffee related matters. When we put this in the law, we are facing a challenge that we have young people who have graduated at university, they have their degrees in agriculture and some even have masters in crop; if we maintain this, we are going to find a challenge.

Let us just describe the level of education that we desire to have but we should leave matters of experience and knowledge to what will be defined in the human resource manual or the guidelines.

MR KIBALYA: Madam Chairperson, much as my colleague is bringing in that, I disagree. We have several positions that will be occupied in the Authority. This is a specific position of an inspector; somebody who is experienced in dairy cannot begin inspecting coffee farms. 

We need somebody with experience and qualifications. This is one position, let these ones with masters so on and so forth occupy - or be extension workers, go in offices and gain experience. We need somebody who is very experienced and has knowledge in coffee because we are suffering with these people in our villages there.

Therefore, in this position, Madam Chairperson, let us have the minimum qualification to be a degree because we no longer want diplomas - (Interjection) - this is an advert; you cannot gazette a diploma for an inspector of one position in the country.

MR WOBOYA: Madam Chairperson, the committee has put a minimum.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I doubt whether the minister will agree. Let us not hike the qualification so high. There are different categories of work that can be done.

MR WOBOYA: Madam Chairperson, it is a minimum; if the competitors are many, they can choose the highest. However, we should not curtail those people with that qualification from competition. This is suggesting a minimum and we need to allow them chance. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, you have listened only to the other side. Sorry. I would like to give experience in the coffee sector. The inspectors of coffee - even if you now ask UCDA, you will get that the best quality controllers never studied agriculture.

That is the reason we are saying that there are people who can do this work through experience and what is important is the minimum education. That is the most vital issue. You can see in most countries that what you studied in the university may not necessarily be what you do as work.

Madam Chairperson, my proposal here is that for somebody to be an inspector is at the level of an officer and officers in Government start at the rank of a degree. At the rank of a degree, it means that you do not necessarily have to be a one qualified in agriculture to be an inspector.

However, you can do further training because there is no university or college that teaches coffee farming alone; nothing. I would like to propose that there should be just a minimum qualification - if you want to go by a diploma but it should not necessarily be for only agriculture.

The Chairperson: Would you like to revert to the original proposal by the minister?

mr nandala-mafabi: I would like to make a proposal that the person who should qualify to be an inspector should possess a minimum of a diploma in sciences.

The justification is that anybody who knows science can know Agriculture - (Interruptions)

Mr abala: Madam Chairperson, when you talk about a minimum in sciences, it might be in Chemistry or Physics, if we leave it at that.

My argument is based on our visit to Denmark. Our coffee is the worst packaged in the entire world; that shows the quality of people who manage it. That is why we are saying that we should be able to look at quality in terms of the people who are going to handle this matter.

In my opinion, somebody should be a graduate. I do not know why we are running away from it. It must be a degree in agriculture. I propose that Members adopt this. Thank you.

The Chairperson: Honourable members, there are still Government institutions churning out certificates and diplomas. We cannot discriminate. This is not right. Honourable minister, what is your view?

Mr bagiire: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. You have just put it rightly. Bukalasa is in place; it is a Government institution and producing diploma graduates. They are very good technical people who understand their job.

Secondly, on the issue of the visit to Denmark and that our packaging is the worst, this is in the area of processing. This is where we have food scientists who are also taught how to package.

On the issue of scientists, this is a matter to do with issues of agronomy and quality of the crop in the garden and how it is put to the level of processing and marketing. Therefore, you cannot talk about scientists generally. This is a job for agriculturalists. 

The Chairperson: What do you say about the proposal by the chairperson?

Mr bagiire: I agree with the chairperson; a minimum of a Diploma in Agricultural Science. 

mr nandala-mafabi: Madam Chairperson, I would like the minister to help me. If you went ahead to “Powers of a Coffee Inspector”, it states,
“A Coffee Inspector may, at any reasonable hour, enter any place where coffee is grown, pulped, processed, packed, roasted, stored…”

Therefore, do you even need inspectors to be only agricultural scientists for roasting? If you tie it – Madam Chairperson, why don’t you allow that lady to go to the microphone? Why is she making noise? Sit very well - (Interruption)

Mr PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, this is a Parliament of Uganda. We have a minister who is raising issues - instead of coming to speak so that she is recorded on the Hansard, we are hearing her say issues against hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

Is hon. Namuganza in order to keep sending words at hon. Nandala-Mafabi yet she can use this chance to speak her mind?

The Chairperson: Honourable minister, can we hear your proposals? (Laughter) 

mr nandala-mafabi: Let me make my case. Thank you, Madam Chairperson, for that kind ruling but ask her to sit well. 

What I was trying to put across is that the coffee inspector even checks roasted coffee and storage. Therefore, it cannot be only agriculturalists to check because this talks about even quality.

The Chairperson: What is your proposal?

mr nandala-mafabi: My proposal is that the coffee inspector shall have a minimum of a diploma in Sciences. 

The Chairperson: Don’t you want to hear about knowledge and experience in coffee?

mr nandala-mafabi: And with extensive knowledge - Look at clause 8; 
“A person shall qualify to be a Coffee Inspector if he or she possesses a minimum of a diploma in Sciences and has extensive knowledge and experience in coffee related matters.”

We are raising this because these inspectors will be down in Busamaga. If you are assuming that they will be in Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA) offices in Kampala, it is not true.

We are trying to say that these are people who may have knowledge and are in the villages. Therefore, the wording of the Bill is far better than what we are trying to restrict to only agriculture.

Mr nsereko: Madam Chairperson, we have over 1.7 million farmers of coffee in Uganda. We have as many as over 5,000 roasters of coffee; both small and big.

You are talking of an inspector going to attend to 1.7 million people. If the inspectors are regional, they will be around five or six in the sub-regions we have in this country.

When are they going to attend to all these people with responsibilities ranging from carrying out the Authority responsibility of registration to inspection to supervision? Let us be practical in what we are talking about. It will increase bureaucracy and deter the actual desire we want for people to invest in growth of coffee.

The procedure will be long and the practicability of having inspectors attending to 1.7 million households that are involved in growth of coffee is not only a big task but it is not practical. 

You realise that in the last two years, we did not have extension workers and we had not even appropriated money for them. They had been replaced by officers from Operation Wealth Creation. To date, they have not attended to people. This is not practical.

The Chairperson: Honourable members, I would like you to read carefully clause (9). It says, “A coffee Inspector may…” It does not say “Shall”. It is not mandatory. It seems you are worried about curfew.

Honourable members, we shall adjourn until tomorrow. Can I invite the minister to move for the House to resume?

Motion for the House to resume

5.37
The Minister of state for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (Agriculture) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I beg to move that the House resumes and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

The Chairperson: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)
 
REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The National Coffee Bill, 2018” and passed clauses 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 with amendments. I beg to report. 

THE SPEAKER: We stood over clause 3 so it was clauses 2, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the House will resume tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. House is adjourned. 

(The House rose at 5.40 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 15 July 2020 at 2.00 p.m.)

