Tuesday, 11 July 1995

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliamentary Building, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Vice Chairman, Mr Cosmas Adyebo, in the Chair.)

(The Council was called to order.)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE IN CHARGE OF ENTANDIIKWA (Dr Kisamba Mugerwa):  Mr Chairman, statement by the Minister of Finance and Economic Planning on Road Tolls.  In 1995/96 budget speech, the Minister of Finance announced the abolishing of collection of road tolls on the Masaka and Jinja Roads.  At the same time, he emphasised that all road tolls mounted by the Local Authorities were also terminated.  The main justification for abolishing these tolls was that they interfered unduly with the movement of goods and services and, therefore, obstructed free trade.  Such road tolls are an inconvenience, and are not in line with COMESA policy on free trade in the sub-region.  

I now wish to clarify that, the decision to abolish road tolls did not affect the structured power of local authorities to collect revenue -(Interruption)- what it meant was that, we were not and are no allowed to erect revenue check points on the highways.  In other words, local authorities may collect revenue which they are lawfully entitled to collect.  Provided that, they do not obstruct the free flow of goods and services within the country and particularly inter-district trade.  The persons who are liable to paying tax to local authorities must fulfill this obligation.  But on their part, the local authorities find ways and means of collecting their revenues in a manner that is consistent with a free flow of goods.

MR KARUHANGA:  Point of clarification.  I would like to ask the Minister to explain in better detail than he has done.  Because what he has actually succeeded in doing is just leaving us in utter confusion.  And we would like the minister to be a little bit more explicit in telling this House what his statement is all about.  When he talks about inter-district trade; what type of trade is that?  I have never heard of it.  What is the inter-district trade?  Does he mean to say that, the local authorities are allowed to tax and erect road tolls within the district roads which are not national roads and tax those people who are moving within the districts, but not allowed to move outside the districts?  

When he says free flow - interaction of free flow of goods, it seems that either he has been attached by local authorities and he is now trying to rigour out of it and at the same time, retain his budget speech or his situation has not helped at all, and we do not even know what he has now actually announced.  

I would like the Minister really to explain better so that the country and local authorities can know what to do in respect to these road tolls.  When these road tolls were set up by the then Minister of Finance now currently Minister of Internal Affairs; he told us that he was going to generate a lot of revenue.  We have not been told how much revenue was generated by the road tolls and how much money was being spent on maintaining the road tolls.  So, we would like a little bit more light on this.

THE CHAIRMAN:  You have made your point.  I think hon. Members will recall that, last week, the hon. Minister of Finance was asked questions, and he promised that he was going to answer them during question time.  I think, it will be more procedural if hon. Members who are not satisfied with the Ministerial Statement could also put further questions to him so that, we shall give the Minister question time to answer, because you will recall that, there are certain technical issues, in technical ministries like the Ministry of Finance which details more known by the technocrats.  So, it would be better if we really give the Minister ample time to prepare answers.  Otherwise, if the minister is ready to clarify this one.

MR OBWANGOR (Soroti Municipality, Soroti):  You see, Mr Chairman, the House always is led by intelligence and for the illustration of wisdom in this House.  We have in our laws chapter 104; the law which gives the government of the day authority.  I would like to put to him say; in laugh, smile -(Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member, you make your point.

MR OBWANGOR:  Chapter 104 -(Interruption)

MR KARUHANGA:  Point of order.  Is it in order for the hon. Member from Soroti Municipality to talk pointing a finger at the minister and talking to him as if he is his houseboy?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Excuse me, you know, the hon. Member has a habit of explaining while pantomizing and pointing at the person but -Laughter)

MR OBWANGOR:  Mr Chairman, you see the interruption from the Member from Nyabushozi.  I know, it shows, he is the only one intelligent in this House - yes, let him say so.  What I am saying is, Chapter 104 in our law, it gives the government the power with which to organise economically and financially aspects in this country.  Now, this talk by the Minister of Entandiikwa - yes it is Entandiikwa.  I do not think - since the country is now crying, will ever lead us anywhere, positively in any productive sense.  What I would like to say, let us have our ministers be honourables, intelligent to educate us and we cross check the wisdom of this House.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, you see, according to our procedure, whenever there is a Ministerial Statement, the hon. Members can only raise matters requiring a lucidation - that is explanation, but not really to discuss the statement of the minister.  So, hon. Minister, could you clarify where Members should be queried?

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr Chairman, Members may appreciate that, throughout the districts in Uganda mainly those who have produce, may intend to levy on different rates in their respective areas of jurisdiction.  And in so doing, may have a network but which in most cases is not effective, because, they are supposed to levy this produce and products at the source.  But take charchoal, a lorry could collect ten bags of charcoal from one parish and the rest from other parishes.  And by the time they drive out of the source of production, when they have paid for say, just 20 bags of charchoal, when actually the lorry is loaded with over 60 bags of charcoal.  Now, the district administrations tend to make road barriers where they check whether one has paid or not.  And if one has not paid, he is not prosecuted but he is liable to pay.  And in so many cases, districts report that in that way, they have effectively managed to raise quite good revenue.  However, these check points have been obstruction to people who are in transit.  So, much as we want the local administration to continue within the given law to collect revenue from the produce and products from their own districts, we want to encourage free trade in the country and less obstruction and disturbance to travelers.  That is why when the Minister made the statement in the budget regarding road tolls.  To remove the road toll- one, at Nakibizzi and the one at Lukaya. Those were for Central Government.  He, however, went further and said that even for local administration, we should remove all the road tolls.  Having consulted, we have found that the administrations would need some check points in areas of jurisdiction.  And therefore, the statement is that, no any check point or road toll should be erected on a highway.  For instance, Malaba – Jinja - Kampala road.  Kabale – Mbarara - Kampala road and such.  But they are free to have checkpoints in the feeder roads, in areas of their jurisdiction.  Secondly, we are encouraging them to use to pursue and intensify the network.  Most of these districts have just been decentralised and the minister according to his statement, if they incur any expense deficit, they are not going to come back to the Central Government.  So they should be encouraged to find ways and means of collecting revenue in their areas of jurisdiction without obstructing free trade.  

So, the question raised by hon. Karuhanga falls in two parts.  One part is on road toll of the Central Government.  For those regarding fancy, how much have we have raised, how much we are spending that calls for a substantive Parliamentary question.  But for the local administration check points, they have to be removed and are not allowed on any highway. However, the local administration are encouraged -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Would you like to take information?

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  I will take it at an appropriate time; please.  Local administrations are encouraged to collect revenue.  Because since the statement, some traders interpreted it is as it is; they should not even pay.  Perhaps I should mention one in a special case, in case of Entebbe Municipality.  For them, they have been manning a real road toll.  They are not allowed to do that, on a gateway to the country, that being a highway, we have to find a way of how they are going to collect their taxes from the tax drivers.  I can take the information. 
  
MR MARWAS:  Point of information.  Why they are avoiding, the districts to get supplementaries and yet here, when a ministry goes broke or whatsoever the case may be; they ask for supplementary, why are we stopping districts?  And yet the money goes from the treasury here to the districts.  I want that information.

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  To be prudent in spending the money.  Otherwise, they can spend hoping that the source cannot dry.  In fact, the budgets of the districts who are decentralised will not need even to be approved by any ministry in the Central Government.  So, if there is any supplementary, they will swift from the body which has approved their original budgeting.  Because in the first year, they go on vote.  On the second year, they are given block, and the plan how to use the money.  And that budget has to be approved by the council of that district.  Would they need any supplementary, and we have the source for it, they will seek authority from the body which approved he original budget.  So, they do not need to come to the Central Government.

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE (Rukiga County, Kabale):  Thank you, Mr Chairman, for allowing me to add my voice to this Motion, the Communication from the Chair.  This Communication from the Chair was both comprehensive loaded and had a very good perspective of the future.  When people are economically stable and secure, they will not waste time on trivialities.  They will only care about having good leadership and not necessarily where the leaders originate.  When citizens are individually, self sufficient, and do not have to depend on crams from somebody’s table either internally or internationally, then they concentrate on quality leadership and not just any leadership.  Economic insecurity, therefore, is psychological and memorial destructive and politically disastrous both at individual and national levels.  

My worry is that, some leaders in this country, seem to look at their personal gains rather than national benefit.  They seem not to realise that Uganda’s economy though it is growing extremely very fast, it is also extremely very fluid.  Therefore, uncontrolled, irresponsible disturbance could destroy it of course.  I would say that, the economy is on a relevant age and therefore, it requires significant and serious balancing.  

I wish to call upon all leaders and especially those aspiring for the most top leadership to ensure that, what they say or do does not show the economy off balance and therefore lead to political turbulence.  After all, when they get the top, their success and continued leadership strength and acceptability, will depend on the strong economic base.  

Allow me to quote on page 5, in the Communication from the Chair; and it says, paragraph 2; we have therefore tried our best to revive and build an economy which was in sorry state when we took over in 1986.  The economic well being of a country, is the better foundation of stability and democracy; and when the economy is healthy, most other things are healthy.  We need to emphasize that. The President, therefore, should be congratulated together with his government for having realise the right thing and this is the only way forward. (Applause)  

We should resolve and determine not to let anybody derail us, derail the economy and derail the country.  We should consolidate against so far achieved.  The Uganda economy today is equal to where it was in the early 70s.  In fact, the per capita income of 1994; is approximately the same as the per capita income of this country in 1972.  Which means, we are actually 23 years behind.  And that is why, when people say, the economy is growing; but where is the money?  It is because although it is growing, it is coming out of a ditch and we have not left in the sunshine.  Although the economy was at that level in 1972, we had only 10 million people; but today, we have 20 million.  And even our consumption schedule have changed.  Our outlook on life has changed.  Therefore, although we are poor, at least we know the economy is positively growing to where we want it to go.  

Our investment and production schedules have not kept pace with our consumption needs.  This is to me, is a big issue.  All leaders must therefore address themselves to this crucial issue and not just move around making sensational statements, to get cheap popularity when they very well know that, what they are saying cannot be sustained either now or in the next 10 years.  

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor of the House that, we have not increased our productivity because we are not a country of full employment, is not only telling not the truth, but he is actually seeking cheap popularity which can derail this economy and lead it to chaos.  Because, there is no way, you can create full employment in only one year, in any economy.  Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  (Interruption)- far from microphone, he would be there, he will have employment for everybody.  I do not believe.  He is only trying to get employment for himself and not for the people of this country.  So, that is the information I wanted to give, Mr Chairman.

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Mr Chairman, I was going to give an example that in the last year’s elections and some people here lost the elections; but we saw politicians who promised the youth for all employment.  We saw politicians who promised women and the old people food.  But we knew, they will not provide.  And what happens, of course, they did not provide the way they want.  I think the NRM Government must come up very strongly to actually, if it cannot resist at least fight those kind of politicians; because we are tired with that kind of political leadership.  We should not raise the expectations of the people and our peasants; and we should not take them for a ride.  Because in the long run, we are actually derailing them from actually productive exercise.  Therefore, the government should not just sit around and the people be told lies, when we have ways of correcting this.  

I wish, therefore, to appeal to every leader to exercise political maturity and look at reconciliation and solidarity in our political activities.  Otherwise, we cannot keep this country together.  

Allow me to comment on two other issues; democracy and privatisation.  Whatever meaning your assign to ideology or whatever you call it, democracy means and normally involves the rule of the majority.  You cannot run away from it.  Otherwise, then somebody will think for everybody.  In fact, I went further and tried to find out whether democracy is any difference from consensus.  And according to one man’s dictionary for temporary English, consensus means general agreement, the opinion of the majority of a group.  In other words, even consensus goes with the majority.  Because by the definition, consensus means that, there was a middle way where other people could not have agreed.  Otherwise, you cannot have two poles being on the same pole.  

Therefore, this one leaves us nowhere other than to accept that, when you are defeated democratically and if you are democrat, you should accept that kind of democracy.  If you ask for democracy, then you should ask.  Except the results of democracy.  It is true, if you are making a Constitution, may have to take situation where they make necessarily on a majoritarian basis.  However, if you cannot agree on an issue, there must be a way of settling it.  And one way of doing it, is to vote on it.  And if we vote on it, and the majority say, this is what we want; I think as Rock said, one man has no right to silence 99, as much as 99 have no right to silence one.  But whatever the 99 decided, one should abide until he convinces 99 to be with him.  

Therefore, in decision-making, there are times when two options cannot be implemented at the same time.  In that case, you find that the majority view and for that time being, if you believe in democratic principles, then you take that and wait for next time.  We are aware that you cannot have movement to politicians and multiparty politics at the same time.  Therefore, I think if the majority of the people feel that the movement politics be the ones held today, then we should accept that, and wait for another time when the majority of the people would think otherwise.  

Let me now comment on privatisation.  My findings though not very expensive, indicate that economic liberalisation and privatisation public enterprises, is welcome and supported by the biggest majority of the population.  The ones who are more versed with the economic management of the country, know that, one way to fight nepotism and corruption, is to reduce the size of government and expand the size of the private sector.  That way, we also expand our tax base.  That is why the people, ease the style to be used in privatisation of limited company.  We know there are very many ways of where you can privatise.  One is out-right sale, one is partial sale, why government contains the majority or contains the minority and one is management contract?  There is also the off loading of shares on the open market and have them be sold on public market.  However, since we have no money market at present, that option cannot work.  Each enterprise should, therefore, be sold looking at such the best most beneficial optimising option for that an enterprise is.  We must also consider special cases which gives us some benefits and act as foundation for development.  If they do so, then they can remain in the public sector.  Since also the valuation of each enterprise depends on the market value of that enterprise.  Some enterprises can better be diversited now and others can better wait and be diversited at a later date when the market value of those enterprises has gone up.  Otherwise, trying to sell too many enterprises at the sametime may in the long run create a situation where we are under selling.  

One example, that we would not quote, is the case of Uganda Commercial Bank.  Whereas if it became a private bank, it is likely to be more efficient, in our case, in Uganda as a special case where the economy still has a subsistence sector of 36 per cent and above, and the economy is still a cash economy and even the budget itself is a cash budget.  And where the bank has not been looted, and where there are extremely very few financial instruments if any.  Then in such an economy which has got a tour and with minority bas, it is not wise to sell the only national bank, which has got branches countrywide immediately.  Although it could be sold at a situation where the off loading of those shares -(Interruption)

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman, for allowing me to give information and for hon. Manzi to give way for this information.  Many of us in this House and in this country had regarded certain assets of government and this country as permanent and as symbols of our nationhood.  I speak of institutions like Lake Victoria, like the Sheraton, like Nile Complex and indeed UCB.  The information also we had was that; since we gave away management of the Sheraton, it has been doing very well.  Nevertheless, we still own it, even though we contracted away management.  

Many of us have been concerned about the stories we read in the newspapers, about UCB; certainly, we understand that the Nile Complex has already been partly sold.  Is it the intention of government to bring out a discussion paper to this august House, so that we know all the details concerning privatisation of these national institutions so that we are satisfied and through us, our people are satisfied.  That is the kind of information perhaps the speaker who knows more about the economy can elucidate, so that many of us who are a bit concerned about this issue can be satisfied.  

So, I am asking are we going to have a paper from government so that this august House can discuss these privatisation methods? (Applause)

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor of the house.  Whatever authority in Uganda Government or otherwise, sells that palace of banking, Uganda Commercial Bank; will commit the greatest crime in Uganda.  Because the materials, if you look for it, you cannot get.  You will not get it until another 100 years.  I was one of those people who were architects of the creation of Uganda Commercial Bank on the 6th October, 1965 to make a decision to create a Bank of Uganda when acting as a Minister for - do not play, moreover if you sell Uganda Commercial, you have got hell of poverty and slavery and you will not have full employment. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  I think hon. Members - you see there are so many of you who would like to contribute - and I think you should, therefore, give time to one another when one is on the Floor so that in turn, he could be given time to speak.  Because, giving information from time to time, has a tendency of derailing the speaker who may lose track of the Floor of the argument.  I would, therefore, argue that, you should restrain yourself from giving information so that we save time and we give time to as many of us as possible.  And I would also call upon you to restrict your contribution to 10 minutes.  Order, hon. Members.  In this case please, could you get the information and wind up?

MR KANYOMOZI:  Point of information.  On the question which was information from hon. Kanyeihamba in response to a contribution from hon. Manzi.  The PERD Statute which this House passed stipulates that every 6 months, this House should be informed of the progress on privatisation. (Applause)  Your two representatives on the Committee have been insisting that this should be done by the Ministry of Finance.  I can inform you here as prepared report which he should have come and presented to you here long before January.  The report is long overdue, we insist that it should be presented as quickly as possible even if possible, before we discuss even the budget.  

Further information is, the joint committees concerned with the economy did sit, analyse the progress of privatisation and did recommend certain measures which would save the situation that hon. Members are concerned about.  This letter has been with the ministries concerned since January.  We have been waiting for a response, unfortunately, my colleague is not here.  The Minister has been promising us to sit to discuss it with him up to now we are also still waiting.  So, I thought the House should know that under the law and the PERD Statute, we are supposed to receive a half annual report on the progress on privatisation.

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Thank you, Mr Chairman, and I thank everybody for that information.  It is so important to realise that when we are divesting on significant enterprise in the country, we should not only look at the economics of it, but we should also at the politics of it and the social aspects of that enterprise.  To give an example, all other banks in this country refused - because I am Chairman of Tax Committee of the National Forum to actually collect revenue on behalf of Uganda Revenue Authority.  It was only UCB which accepted to collect that revenue for a fee of not more than 700 million.  And now, they are collecting 50 billion or we are going to come to collect more than 50.  If this privatisation of UCB takes place, I can assure you, half of the branches of UCB will close, because they are not profit making.  And once they do that, you can be sure our collection from Revenue Authority will decline, because there is no way you will be able to collect unless people can pay through the bank.  Otherwise, privileges will again come up as they used to be.  Currently, we are supposed to contribute 101 billion shillings for the non-performing assets.  That means that, the country is going to contribute 101 billion to make UCB a clean place.  And why should we then after making it clean, immediately sell it before it gathers momentum?  Because then, you are saying that, the person will come and say, it has no market, he will buy it for cheap and will give just everything on a clean plate.  Therefore, we need to revisit some of these institutions and see whether the time is ripe for selling them the way we are doing.  

In winding up as you said, I would have wanted to talk about the tax policy and Uganda Revenue Authority, but I reserve that. I hope, I will get time in the general debate.  As I conclude, I am so concerned and worried that this waterweed which is on our lake, is killing us.  We have brought in machines; they have not done much.  I understand they have brought in these insects, but they do not seem to - can we not try a third alternative?  And that is using manpower, which we have in plenty.  Giving an example, if we have 40,000 people, 2 shillings per kilo, to collect from the lake and each of them collected 500 kilos, we would need 1.2 billion shillings per month to collect approximately 100,000 tones.  In a year, we would need only 14 billion shillings to do a very, very big job.  

The question is, one is going to say, if we pump 14 billion shillings in the economy, we shall create inflation.  Let me quote from Ken’s, in his book general theory of 1936; when Britain was under a situation of general unemployment, and we said, it would pay for the British Government to pay all the unemployed to dig holes in the higher path, and pay another group to fill them tomorrow in order for them to have effective demand.  What we lack is not necessarily inflationary.  And in any case, if I can also quote Professor Rungis, he said, in situations of development, inflationary financing is the best alternative.  Because, there are bottlenecks which cannot be removed unless we create a small impact of inflation in order for you to actually liberate the economy.  Mr Chairman, I thank you.

MR BAKKABULINDI (Workers’ Representative):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I wish to express my sincere appreciation to the entire workers I represent in this august House, His Excellency the President of Uganda, for the good Communication from the Chair while opening the 9th and the last session of this Parliament.  I wish also to thank the President and his government, of course not forgetting the Parliament, for the good work they have been doing for the passed 9 years.  I wish also to appreciate your good leadership in that particular Chair which you have expressed to us for the time you have spent there.  I support strongly the Motion moved by hon. Kiyonga.  However, I have got some few observations to make.  

Something was talked about the living wage.  Indeed, we need a living wage, and we are very happy to hear that the government is very much committed on payment of the living wage.  But the worry is that, as much as government is committed with the payment of the living wage, the Minister of Finance looks as if he is giving with a short hand, and removing with the long hand.  In most companies we have consolidated the package.  If you marked his speech well, he talked about removing Shs. 30,000 from transport that was Shs. 30,000 tax-free.  At the end of it, if you consolidate, you find that, instead of giving a good package to the worker, he has instead made it worse.  Because what a worker was getting in June or April as a package, is going now to get less in July or August, and yet we are saying we were aiming at giving a living wage.  

Having noted that, I would like to also comment briefly about investors or privatisation as such.  We workers are not against privatization as per se.  But we are just against privatisation as far as the modality is concerned, the method they are using.  It is too speedy, too dangerous to the workers and in most cases, it is not transparent.  As some Members were saying, some were complaining about the nature of sense of some parastatals.  Others, I remember during last year when hon. Manzi was raising a point of information, he talked about when can the investment be viable to create jobs.  I do agree with the explanation he gave.  But, my quarrel about the speed of this privatisation is, as much as we are interested in these investors, we should not forget also to be interested in our workers, the citizens of this country.  My suggestion would be that the speed at which this exercise will be is too dangerous to the workers.  If say for instance, one company is being privatised today and you know that there is a lot of workers who are going to be retrenched, why do we not make a programme in such a way that by the time we privatise the 5th, the first one is already viable for the workers to start now having jobs.  

Because as much as the hon. Minister of Finance was interested in saying our investment is doing well, the economy is growing; but mark you, when you see a lot of workers on the street jobless workers, you are also creating insecurity to this peaceful society now we have been enjoying.  We have been enjoying this peace, which has been ushered in by the NRM Government.  But, if we throw out a lot of workers in the street, jobless, I do not know if those workers will continue enjoying this peace.  Already, as I talk now, workers of UTC and People’s Transport Company who were retrenched long time ago up to now, they have never paid them a single package.  What do we expect them to do?  And yet we are saying the investors are doing will and what have you.  Yes, they are doing well, but we should not forget the ‘wanainchi’; as much as we enjoy the presence of the investors and their mushrooming companies, if at all they are there.  We should also enjoy the presence of the wanainchi.  

Hon. Manzi when he was contributing, he was saying that, it is a bit dangerous and it is not proper to sell all these enterprises, majority of them at the same time.  Because he said at the end of it, we can end up recording the low sales.  And, I am also adding not only recording the low sales, but at the end of it, we are going to have a lot of work as being jobless.  And you know, as the Minister was saying, h was asked a very smart question by hon. Karuhanga of which he dodged.  He was asked that, can you tell us how many jobs you have created since the exercise started?  And that one, I think the answer will never come.  

Mr Chairman, again on the investors -(Interruption)

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I wish to inform the hon. Member that, as people are being retrenched, others are laid off, in those organisations which are privatised, then the investment authority is also encouraging investments and new companies are created.  And according to the survey, is that, in April this year, we have created so far 30,000 jobs.

MR BAKKABULINDI:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, I thank the hon. minister for that information of the survey he has carried and I would also like to tell him that, we workers are floating on the street and how many workers have got the jobs.  Hon. Chairman -(Interruption)

DR BYARUHANGA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Not only are these workers roaming the streets, but they have not been paid their terminal - their social security benefits from the National Social Security Fund.  And National Social Security Fund, we have heard very high sounding speeches here from various members praising National Social Security Fund.  I have a list of workers about 30 of them; they have put in their requests up to now.  And this is very small money for the last two years; they have not got the money.  Some of these companies which are viable have asked or have requested the Ministry of Labour to form their own Technical Benefit Scheme.  Again of course, the law we passed here sometime back.  Still biding companies, to National Social Security Fund.  Therefore, not only are these people roaming the streets; they cannot even get small money from National Social Security Fund, I think we better revisit the whole idea of the National Social Security Fund in this House.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member, could you wind up please?

MR BAKKABULINDI:  Thank you very much hon. Byaruhanga for that very good information.  When the Minister stood on a point of information indicated to us that so far they created 30,000 new jobs.  And my question is, those new jobs were they created to Ugandans or non-Ugandans?  I may give you an example; what is SIETICO doing?  And other companies, who are just importing people through raw materials to this country, and you think they have created jobs when we are creating it for the non-Ugandans.  M

Leaving that, still on investors;  I have some query with the method and the way we are doing this exercise.  Iif a company is doing well, why should we diversity it?  I have got one example, Grain Milling Company of Jinja which is one of the factories that are performing very well in this country.  But it is shameful to hear that, it is on the list of divestiture.  And I am asking why?  And rumours are saying that the person who is intending to buy it, does not want the subsidiaries of that company.  The company already has started a project and it has spent about US 3.28 dollars, of which we intend now to forget.  And not only that, if you allow me to quote a paragraph in a good report on wheat and barley debt of projects, it says, and you can see how beneficial that project was going to be to the ‘wanainchi.’  Whereby an investor does not wan to show interest.  It says, project benefits to Ugandans.  Then successfully implemented in which it has already started, the wheat and barley project is expected not only to save foreign exchange, but also to significantly increase farming camps in several areas of Uganda, promote added value by the Milling, Banking and Grilling industries, and create employment in the rural areas.  I think this is a very good idea to the whole society.  And now, such a project which has already started, it has extensions in Mbarara and other areas - Kapchorwa.  But now, here is an investor; who is coming for already an existing company performing well, instead of government boosting more capital to it; we are saying, we are selling it to an investor.  Mr Chairman, I think we need to look into some of these issues.

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. speaker of the House that, Nytil used to employ over 6,000 workers.  Of recent, we heard that it was bought by investors.  The investors I understand have paid for it and the thing has been closed.  Workers have been locked out, they have not been paid anything, they are just roaming about in the street.

MR BAKKABULINDI:  Mr Chairman, if I can wind up on the same company, it does not aim at creating prominence in rural areas alone, but also listen to another fortune.  The current cost of importing wheat grain, wheat flour and brew mould is about US$ 17 million which according to the feasibility study report, is expected to double in real terms in a decade.  The leading industry imports 36 tones of wheat grain and flour which is 96 percent of the country’s requirements at a total cost of US $ 13 million.  You can see that if we encourage our wheat growing here without relying necessarily on these investors, in the long run there is a lot we can save.  I think the Minister of Finance has noted my concern, not only on money, but also on the workers; not only workers, even on other people.  People like you, Mr Chairman.  

I would like to talk again briefly on ‘entandiikwa.’

THE CHAIRMAN:  Could you wind up?

MR BAKKABULINDI:  Ya! I am winding up, Mr Chairman, I have got about two, three points to make.  I would like to talk about entandiikwa.  I happen to be in the system of RC for a long time, and I know how to politicise and sensitize people so that they can understand anything that is being introduced.  The message I want, the hon. Minister to get about the entandiikwa is that, at the moment, in some areas it is confusing the mass simply because the education of entandiikwa has not been enough.  People are lacking education of entandiikwa.  And because of that, you may find that people who are concerned in the Secretariat and what have you, will be only the beneficiaries of the entandiikwa.  And yet, the objective of the entandiikwa was to elevate poverty in the society regardless of whom you are.  So, my concern about entandiikwa is that, it is a very good idea.  I like it and I encourage it, but education is still not adequate.  Mr Chairman, let me briefly talk about security.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Please, could you wind up?

MR BAKKABULINDI:  I am winding up, Mr Chairman.  And I want to talk briefly about security.  As far as security is concerned, we should give credit where it is worth giving.  Surely, NRM Government has created security, has created peace and we would need to thank it for that.  But, my query is one; is on Local Defence.  Local Defence as I told you that initially I have been involved in the system of RC and I know why we initiated the Local Defence.  Local Defence is doing a very wonderful work.  But in Kampala Centre here, they are being misused and in the long run, they are going to lose their credibility because, now an organisation like City Council is using Local Defence for collecting taxes and chasing people - say, the hawkers on the street; whereas this is not the work of Local Defence.  My cry is, people should not misuse Local Defence, so that at the end, it can be hated for nothing while it was doing a very good job to this society.  

With those few comments, I would like to end by making only one observation.  My observation is about the Nansana instance.  It was very absurd that that incidence took place, it was very shameful.  But at the same time, I think it was timely to show the population that the multi-partists are not yet ready for leadership.  Because if one person who is organising such a region, could not control the situation of that limited number that indicates that, if they are given leadership at the moment, they will not be in position to control the wanainchi.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, according to our procedure, the Rules and Procedures in this house, each hon. Member is entitled to 10 minutes for contribution.  And this is actually a time which has been internationally set in many Parliaments.  And I think about three weeks ago, I attended a seminar where this issue was raised.  The issue was that, if an hon. Member has a viable contribution of a very important issue, can you not give that hon. Member extra time?  Now, the answer was that, the rules must be democratically respected.  If it is 10 minutes, it is 10 minutes.  What you could do, you could space up your argument.  If you want to contribute on a point, contribute on that point and then save time for next time.  But it is also out of order for an hon. Member to be given time and he refuses to sit down; this is very un Parliamentary.  I will now urge you therefore that, you stick to the time, which has been set by the Rules and Procedures.

MR MAYENGO (Kyamuswa County, Kalangala):  Mr Chairman, I thank you very much.  I would like to say something in support of the Motion moved by the Minister of Internal Affairs.  But before I say it, I would like to mention something critical which has happened in the last few days in my constituency and I would like the Minister of Finance to take note.  In the last week, the Revenue Authority sent boats to my Islands and these boats of their staff members approached several fishermen and demanded taxes; they also demanded licenses on boats; those who did not have licenses, the Revenue fellows broke their boats.  They smashed the boats; and not only that, they also beat up people, (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Order hon. Members.

MR MAYENGO:  Mr Chairman, when we set up the Revenue Authority in this House, I do not remember that we authorised them to do things like this.  Indeed, if we had authorised them to do things of this kind to everybody who would have been found without a licence on his motor vehicle, the Revenue Authority should have been authorised to set the motor vehicle on fire.  Mr Chairman, as I say, it was created an Act of this House, it is one of those body corporates which should sued if it is necessary, which should answer charges of that kind, I am insisting that if these allegations and they are substantially true, are as carelessly done as that, the Revenue Authority should make itself - should pay these boats, should make sure that those who lost their boats have been compensated.

MR KASAJJA:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Order.

MR KASAJJA:  Mr Chairman and hon. Members, I am standing up here to give information regarding the statement made by my brother and Colleague.  In fact, before we came in here, he told me about this problem, that some of our officers from Uganda Revenue Authority went to his Islands and broke the boats.  I asked him, that what was the reason behind it?  He explained as he did explain, and you remember most of you accepted that it was right if one had a boat and it had no license, you could impound it but not destroy it.  So there, we agreed but I told him that if there were some members from Uganda Revenue Authority who have gone against the established procedures of handling the clients well, Uganda Revenue Authority will take disciplinary action on them and as I stand here, I have not received any information regarding that complaint; but I want to assure the House that I am going to take up the matter and if I find anything true in what he is saying, we are going to take up necessary action on this.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Order.

MR MAYENGO:  Mr Chairman, I appreciate the promise -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order hon. Members.

MR MAYENGO:  I appreciate the promise from a member of the Board.  Mr Chairman, it is becoming increasingly clear that the Revenue Authority is misbehaving.  You have been reading in the Papers that the Revenue Authority closed this business, the Revenue Authority has closed that business, there is a double standard which the Revenue Authority is using.  When it goes to a small business and it finds that there is some reason for demanding, let us say, taxes, they close up the business.  When it went to the Uganda Railways and it found out that Uganda Railways owed the Revenue Authority some money, it impounded a few vehicles, why did they not close Uganda Railways? (Applause)  Why should they close the small businesses and leave the big ones?  If closing up business is a way of enforcing payment which I think is a silly way of doing it, then it should be applied equally.  

The Revenue Authority seems also to disregard what its boss is saying.  On the 15th of last month, when the Minister for Finance read his speech in the other House, he said, tax deposits are abolished.  Five days later on the 20th of June, the Revenue Authority issued a Press Release in the Newspapers demanding tax deposits.  How far independent should this Authority be so that it even disregards what the Minister of Finance says, although I think the Revenue Authority, I think has to be checked.  But definitely as far as the Islands are concerned, nothing will be satisfactory other than the replacement of those boats.  Now, let me talk about the Motion itself.  Let me start -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Order proceed.

MR MAYENGO:  Let me start where the hon. Member who has just took his seat ended.  He was talking about privatisation and so much has been said about privatisation.  The biggest confusion is where the idea is fixed in peoples mind that privatisation means that one entity of an enterprise is sold to somebody as a whole; in which case, there may be virtually no Ugandans buying most of these enterprises, although the Minister here the other day reported that half of the ones they have sold have been bought by Ugandans, still I do not expect that he will say the same thing in regard to Hima Cement Factory, that he will say the same thing in regard to the Nile Hotel, in regard to Nytil, we have been urging the Ministry of Finance Clause No. 25 which we put in part Statute which says, have these Corporations re-registered as Public Companies, evaluate them, specifically say that they can be divided up - the assets, into so many shares and sell the shares to Ugandans.  When Ugandans buy those shares, then they will be owning these enterprises including the Uganda Commercial Bank.  If for example, the Government decided to sell some 10 per cent of UCB first by issuing so many thousands of shares, and Ugandans will buy those shares, there is still 90 per cent left.  Then, another 10 per cent, again bought by Uganda and you do not have to wait for the Stock Exchange to do this; we do not have to wait until the stock exchange comes in to operation so that, we can do this.  It is possible to do this even before the stock exchange opens.

Let me turn to my last point.  The last point is, the record on this House.  The President in his communication praised this House.  He said, we have done a starling job, he said, never in the history of the last 30 years of our independence, has a House performed as well as this one.  I still think different.  From the time of our independence up to now we have suffered, we have suffered poverty, we have suffered miseries, we have suffered all types of embarrassment.  All this has been realised in all the fora that have been talking about the ideas –(Interruption)

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, thank you very much.  I would like to inform my hon. Friend holding the Floor of the House, a Constitution is never early, it is the people - authority that implements the Constitution; when its political ideas are deflected Constitutions are always good in principle.

MR MAYENGO:  Mr Chairman, I was going to go back to the incidents which happened in Moshi Conference, but I notice that the only Member that I would have consulted as to what happened during the Moshi Conference is not around and I happen to be the only one present at the moment, who was present in Moshi Conference.  But, -(Interjection and Laughter)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  But I think you are three here, I can see hon. Prof. Kanyeihamba, I can see hon. Daniel Omara there and yourself is there, please proceed.  Then I am glad they are several.  

MR MAYENGO:  I have been saying that, the root cause of our troubles, of our poverty , of embarrassment, is the poor, unsuitable Constitution and that, until we have produced one which is suitable to this country, I cannot say that we can be proud of our records.  One would say that the Constitution is not being done by this House, but we provided the foundation, we provided the Constituent Assembly Statute and some of the mistakes in it are already emerging.  Mr Chairman, at the moment all the emberishments, all that we have done, all the things that we say that we are proud of, are not any different from the manufacturers of the satanic, they made the satanic ship, but on water the most magnificent thing that ever sailed, filled it with 3000 merry makers going for a holiday trip and assured them it was the best ship.  It could not even sink under any circumstances; it hit an iceberg and sunk.  What we have done here is something very close to that so far.  We are building on the surface and everything looks glorifying and magnificent, but it is like having a ship again of merry makers beautifully done, but with a bottom made of clay.  If it hits one little rock, it sinks the bottom made of clay is the constitution that I am talking about.  The CA must try its best to produce a Constitution which, when the delegates are leaving, each will say, this is ours. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Order, cries of order.

MR MAYENGO:  Incidentally, Mr Chairman, we are not the only ones in this type of dilemma.  In Zambia, on the 22nd of last month, the Zambia Daily has an interesting Article, the Article said; one of the tribes was saying they were not going to recognise a Constitution, they were not even going to recognise the government made up under the Constitution, as long as that Constitution did not recognise - as long as that Constitution did not take care of their traditions and culture.  When I returned here, I noticed in The New Vision of the day before June 21st, the Katikiro of Buganda saying something similar and I said, there are some problems which you share and therefore, we should not feel that we are the ones who are tackling an impossible problem.  These countries of ours were made in a funny way.  Uganda is made of Ugandans, but it was not made by Ugandans; the country was made in a manner not different from the way we make national parks.  You enclose a piece of land and all the animals are there, the squirrels are there, the crocodiles are there, the lions are there, the buffalos -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Order.

MR MAYENGO:  Some are eating grass, others are eating one another.  Mr Chairman, these countries of ours, these African countries for reasons which are known to those Europeans who made the boundaries are like that, when they made the enclosures, they just enclosed us all in; in small minorities - every African country is made of minorities, even the largest tribe, like the Hausa in Nigeria, 40,000 million strong, put on one side, put all the rest of Nigerians on one side, the Hausa would be a minority; each tribe as you put on one side and let the others be on the other side, it becomes a minority.  So, it is a particularly difficult situations to make Constitutions that will not only be enjoyable to the citizens, but also preserve and make sure that the human rights of the minorities are sufficiently provided for.  It is here that I always wish to quote the fellows who made the American Constitution.  James Madson has been quoted many, many times, 219 years ago, he said; A Constitution is like a dress, it must be tailored to fit the contours of the wearer.’  So what does the tailor do first?  Study the wearer; the country for whom they are making a Constitution and make sure we have taken care of the Karimojong here; we have taken care of the interests of the Baganda here; we have taken care - so that at the end, it all comes out with one effect - harmony being created for the entire country. (Applause)  Harmony, Mr Chairman, the late Dr Aggrey in West Africa used to stand in front of the map of Africa and ask himself, the ship of the African continent is like a question mark, the question is, concord or conflict between the tribes?  It must be concord not conflict and at this age, I think we are mature enough to be able to say, we can really sit down and say, have we worked enough to make sure that we are all sufficiently happy under this Constitution if we fail, the record which Mr President spoke of in his speech that we have done a magnificent job, will be false and will be deceived.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR BALMOI OYAT (Lamwo County, Kitgum):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I stand to support the Motion and in supporting it, I should like to join my Colleagues who spoke before me in thanking the President for the presentation of the Government Policy on this particular occasion in a precise manner.  We are all grateful and the whole country is grateful for that.  In it, the President did mention something very interesting, this was; quote.  He talked of the community development leaders.  I found this point very interesting; very interesting in that, we, Members of Parliament sitting here in this House should take this message very seriously, because unless we are people orientated towards the development, there is no way we can lead this country to prosperity and many are already crying of poverty; which is true.  But there is a starting point in my view, that is, as leaders, it is imperative for Government to enable the leaders to perform in that direction of community development leaders; because you cannot fight a lion with bare hands.  

So, I would suggest that government does something in that direction to uplift the standard of performance of leaders and thereby, a standard of living of our people whom we represent.  I have very little to add on the Constitutional making.  Suffice to say that this Constitution should have been made by statesmen, but unfortunately, we have too many politicians in that CA; each pushing for his own interest and not the interest of the wanainchi.  What a pity?  And if people are going to say they have nothing to do with the Constitution in the making, in various other ways, there is no way, Uganda must continue.  I want to remind those prophets of doom, that our people want peace, you may demand your entandiikwa, but leave us alone.  Let the people of Uganda go on holiday with peace.  

I would like also to comment briefly on the minerals.  There was mention of some minerals; like oil being found in Bunyoro, which was very good news.  But that Ministry of Natural Resources kind of has not done enough and I would like to encourage them to explore and survey mineral deposits throughout the country, not just selected areas.  For instance, in Lamwo County in Kitgum district -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Order, hon. Members.

MR BALMOI OYAT:  I wish to assure this House and Government at large that, we have plenty of iron ore deposits in a place called Aringa, not Aringa although the spelling is the same, the pronunciation is different.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Which if exploited and surveyed would assist the government of this nation.  Why do I say this?  I say so because our ancestors have been making all sorts of spears, knives, what, by extracting this Iron Ore and the mines are there for all to see.  Unfortunately, the history of this country is that, nobody cares to look around; even those charged with the responsibility to do certain things for the people.  So, areas that have been neglected are just left on their own.  Briefly too, I would like to mention a few points on the issue of a living wage.  The payments of a living wage is, I must say, over due.  In other words, government must not merely state its position that it is committed, it must do more than that.  Unless we have a speedy movement towards the payment of a living wage; there is no way we can expect this country to move forward or even wipe off poverty; because we are going to use both Civil Service and those in private companies to do work; may be the private sector can look after that better, but I am concerned about the Civil Service.  If we expect an efficient Civil Service, we must feed it.  Since our time is limited, let me talk about the case of Burundi, because it was mentioned in the communication.  I was one of the few people who had the chance to visit Burundi at that time, the country - Burundi was the envy of Africa as far as democracy is concerned.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order hon. Members.  

MR BALMOI OYAT:  Mr Chairman, protect me from some hecklers.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Order hon. Members.

PROF. WANGUSA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Sir.  I want to ask the Member, would you kindly clarify whether that was true in Burundi in pre-colonial days or more recently?

MR BALMOI OYAT:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I am referring to a most recent position of Burundi.  As you know, it had undergone series of coups and it was the first country in Africa to move towards democracy, multiparty, tying up the military together with the civilian administration.  In fact, by that time, they had even built a monument of unity, a promised land.  Now, today Burundi has gone to the dogs and I only want to say this; that if we are not careful in Uganda, we will follow suit; because we are craving for theoretical democracy, but we are prepared to practice democracy.  When you are democratically defeated, you say no.  I do not understand it -(Applause)- I do not understand it.  What democracy are we talking about?  What democracy are talking about; the democracy we have involved in those country is a very high record, which should be maintained. (Applause) 

In connection with that, I want to request the members of the CA who will soon come back for reconsideration stage, to please, be statesmen; even people who have learnt the lesson of consensus in this House are misbehaving, I wonder why?  But my own position is that, we are not going to allow anybody to derail Uganda as long as we are leaders.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order hon. Members.

MR BALMOI OYAT:  Mr Chairman, I want to talk briefly about security, Mr Chairman, in particular reference to the North.  First of all, I want to thank the two Ministers of State for Agriculture, who acted promptly in Mbarara when we were invaded by red locusts.  This indeed is commendable and very exemplary.  I wish all in charge of authority in this country would follow suit.  

I wish to say if the Minister of State for Defence who is my personal friend, had acted like hon. Nasasira and taken the trouble to go to the ground to see what was happening in the North, things would not have gone out of hand.  But as it is, Government did not, talking generally, take keen interest and looked at the situation in the North as an Acholi affair and this was unfortunate.  I think the only person known to me who is serious about the Northern insecurity is the President himself, because when Atiak was attacked, he flew there; he even directed those camps after him, they have worked.  I am not belittling them, do not harbour any doubt in your minds hon. Members.  

Now, I wish to appeal to hon. Members that, let us from now, hence forth, change direction and look to the problem in the North as a Ugandan problem.  We the leaders from that sub-region have done everything possible to fight that insecurity.  I would myself come out and show myself individually as a champion of fighter against Kony right from the beginning from 1989 up to now I am still fighting.

MR OKER:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  (Interruption)- and that it is an issue for Ugandans and not the Acholi people alone. (Applause)  I want to say this because sometimes the Ministers get up and other people they say, those are your problems, go and finish it first.  But I would like to say as a medical person, that if you are having headache, it means the rest of your body is sick.  Now, to me, Uganda is sick because one finger in the whole of the nation is sick and we should treat that finger very seriously and, therefore, I am requesting - my humble request I am not getting doctor, I am sorry, it is we the doctors who are here.  I am saying this, that we should address this issue very seriously by requesting the Sectoral Committee on security to go to the border of Sudan and Uganda and see for themselves and make a correct recommendation to the Minister of Defence.  They will then see the exactly the problem which is there, why the war is not coming to an end, why the Teso war has come to an end.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order.  Order from hon. Mwandha.  

MR MWANDHA:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is it in order for hon. Members at the back to continue laughing when the hon. Lady is making a very, very serious statement?

MRS OKER:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I was just giving an information and I thank the hon. Member, because while I was making a very vital information for the nation, other people at the back were laughing and he did recognise them and I wish to say that the Acholi people had denounced the was since the beginning of the rebel in the North; because hon. Okeny Atwoma and eight other members went up to Sudan to tell the people of Acholi that that is not the way to approach an issue.  Leaders come and go but the country remains; that was their message.  However, the people violated, they did not take that message and we had to plunge the country in chaos, that region.  My only submission is that, let them - the Social Committee on security go to the North and see the boundaries, see the boundary between Sudan and Uganda, then they can assess for themselves why this was is not coming to an end.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Order, hon. Balmoi, could you wind up?

MR BALMOI OYAT:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to thank the hon. Lady for that information. (Interruption)

LT. COL. SERWANGA LWANGA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, here is some information I wanted to give the hon. Members holding the Floor and also to the hon. Members.  Maybe, it will be of some importance to this House.  The war in Acholi land, has taken another course.  It is no longer the insurgency we knew in 1987-86-88; and I do not also agree that we should blame it on the Acholi people, it is not true, because what is actually happening is that, Sudan is clearly aiding these Kony rebels.  So far, Sudan has managed to defeat SPLA and moved a bit near our borders, it is now very easy for Kony to sneak in and sneak out.  Recently, Kony went back.  Hon. Member was talking about the Minister of State that they went to Mbarara in gears and crashed the locusts.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Order.

LT. COL. SERWANGA:  But I remember the Minister told us here that, the locusts which came to Uganda have got a breeding ground in Tanzania and Zambia, and that they are going to send money to follow those breeding centres; so that the locusts no longer fly back to Uganda.  I think also this House should -(Applause)- because, the breeding ground is known.  So, I do not think it would be good for us to come here and accuse, either troops or accuse government or ourselves that we have - the breeding ground is known.  So, this House should decide at one time what to do. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Order.

MR BALMOI OYAT:  Thank you very much, I want to conclude by saying, I am in total agreement with Government Policy, but I would like to urge government to move a little faster in that direction.  Secondly, I suggest to Government to think about a security road along the Sudan border which is hostile, right from Aringa, Koboko, this West Nile side, Acholi and so on; because Mr Chairman, the county that I represent, that is Lamwo, the entire Northern border is with Sudan, the whole of it, except a little one with Kotido, just a small bit.  So, if we had a security road to arrest any problems that may occur in future, it would do us a lot of good.  We make a first class murram road, this is why Kony has survived; because Kony does his havoc and his troops are made - it is made difficult for the troops to move because there are no roads, there are no logistics and so on, the fellow just goes and does things the way he likes because of absence of that and I would ask this House to support -(Interruption)    

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Order.  

MR BALMOI OYAT:  I want to express, Mr Chairman, my disappointment with the inability of this company called WADE ADAMS regards to the roads between Kafu and Karuma, which has lasted for many, many years and nothing is happening there.  I understand this company has gone broke and government should do something about canceling it, the contract or do something serious.

MR OKWERA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor, some information about WADE ADAMS I was driving from Gulu to Kampala this morning.  So, I know exactly what is on the ground; WADE ADAMS won the contract in 1994 and 1993 and 10 per cent down payment which amounts to over US$ 800,000, was paid to WADE ADAMS and up to now, as I have seen this morning, what he has already done, cannot satisfy a man with a sound mind.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR BALMOI OYAT:  Mr Chairman, the man is busy turning our tarmac road into murram roads -(Interruption)- I want -(Interruption)

MR KARUHANGA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member that he is actually attacking the wrong person.  The problem cannot definitely be WADE ADAMS, the problem must be the people who gave the contract to WADE ADAMS  and who are not supervising and making sure that the amount of money they have paid is committed to the task that the fellow stood to do.  Secondly, WADE ADAMS did contract to repair this House, I do not know which year, but a long time ago, I have not seen much work going on, but it is wrong to attack WADE ADAMS for that type of work which is leaking here.  What we should attack, are the people who are paying these cheques and were holding these contracts to the contractors whom they do not supervise.  I would call upon the hon. Member who is responsible for the area where the road is, to go to the right source and complain, not much about the company but about the people who are supposed to be holding the stick and the carrot and the cheques.  

MR BALMOI OYAT:  Thank you, Mr Chairman, I take note of the wise advice - 

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order.  Could you wind up?

MR BALMOI OYAT:  I finally want to urge the government -(Interruption)

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr Chairman, I would like my Colleague, the hon. Member holding the Floor of the House to clarify which government contracts to build, to work on a national basis, whether or the local government?  There are always Inspectors of Works, what happened in this case?

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Please hon. Member, could you wind up?

MR BALMOI OYAT:  Mr Chairman, for all this information given to me, is an indication that this one is a serious House as reflected in the Communication; and I would like to urge government to move progressively and quickly to arrest the situation from getting worse.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR MORO (Koboko County, Arua):  Mr Chairman, I would like to take this opportunity t thank you for giving me this opportunity to air my views on this Motion.  I stand here very strongly to support this Motion.  If someone does something good for you, I think it is proper and in order to thank him and to appreciate for the good he has done to you.  I would hate and I think I must say thank you to our government, the NRM Government for maintaining peace of this country. (Applause)  I think I am one of the only persons in this august House, I understand Obwangor is one of the oldest, but I think if he is the oldest, he does not beat me by more than 20 years.  I was born during the colonial era, I do not know exactly when I was born -(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order, hon. Members, please proceed.

MR MORO:  Because, by that time, the records were not -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order.

MR MORO:  Put in proper order and as such, up to now, I do not know when I was born, but I assure you that, I know the times when the Europeans were still here and I know hoe the Europeans ruled us.  It was a very indirect rule through the chiefs, our people were more or less slaves; all the day time they did not realise, they thought it was a very good rule.  But I think their rule was not as good as the rule today we are enjoying under the NRM.  After our people had gone to fight for the colonialists and when some of our people were well educated, they started agitating that they wanted to rule themselves and I think everybody was very happy, we wanted us to rule ourselves, but what happened after Independence, I know there were leaders, like our ex-President Obote, when he came from Kenya.  I did not know Obote, but when politics dropped in, he came back and I think he was famous, everybody appreciated; we were very happy we wanted to rule ourselves.  The Europeans gave us - granted Independence, but what happened, even during the Independence time when we were campaigning, being let us suspend politics, let us work together as a Movement. (Applause)  I think that is because of what actually happened, brothers kill themselves, mothers kill themselves, in-laws became enemies -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Obwangor, why do you not wait, and I give you time to contribute substantially?  I will give you time to contribute.

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, because I will forget, he made a statement, hon. Akure is laughing, he made a statement to the effect that he does not know how old he is.  But Obwangor is the old man in the East.  Now, it is better to be old but intelligent and productive.  I have paid all my taxes, so long as - I am taxed, under the philosophy of no representation without taxation.  I am here in Parliament, no one of us into this honourable House alone, we are chosen by our people.  I am going to talk one day, that is, we want a young man, a young man we worked together, yes we worked together old and - for Uganda’s duty.  

MR MORO:  Mr Chairman, I thank the hon. Obwangor for better information.  I am very pleased.  But as I said, when something good is done, let us appreciate the good part of it but when it is bad, let us say, this is bad, because this is the experience that from Independence up to now, the government we had, had given us a headache, there was less development, but more presses.  I think you will agree that there was more presses, our media was used to praise either the President or the Chairman of the District Councils and very little was actually done in educating people about development.  I did not know whether I am wrong or correct, but I think at least, when NRM came to power, we are seeing the fruits, the good points of it which we should appreciate. (Applause)  If you do not appreciate, if you do not see the development which is going on, I am sorry, I have said, what I know, is that the development is going on very well, but our stomachs, most of the stomachs are still they are not like mine, they are -(Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Order.

MR MORO:  If development is taking place, could be carried right to the homes of every individual, every Ugandan at his home and if we could see the stomachs coming like the roads, and the schools and the hospitals, which have been rehabilitated, I think we should really then say, credit, we are very grateful and I think I still maintain that we are grateful to the NRM Government.  Having said that, so far, I am very happy I have said, but what worried me now, through you the Members, the way we have been discussing here, I am not really very, very happy; even what goes on in the CA, I am not very happy.  I am not going to talk much about it, but I am telling you a small problem, if not well tackled, can cause chaos.  I understand a small frog was in water and then it mixed the water, and that the whole water became bad.  So, if there are some people in Uganda who are complaining, I am appealing to you, let us listen and then try to see whether we can solve those problems together.  When I came to Parliament, it was the most difficult time in our area, when this Government was not wanted and the words, the letter RC was not wanted.  If you wanted to die, you would join, but I think some of us were the few who joined because of the good politics of the government.  So, I think some as far as I am concerned, I am still very strong behind the government, we, if we go home and allow these people instead of shutting them down like Cecilia Ogwal it seems to me that we are giving Cecilia Ogwal more fame by -(Interruption)

MR TIVU:  Point of information.  I would like to inform my hon. brother that, in Uganda, we are and, therefore, global political development, the Movement system will demise like the communist system guiding Russia.  What I am saying is, we should take the unrest of the people and adopt it into the Movement system to keep in pace with the global political development.  Thank you.

MR MORO:  Thank you.  I think I have read those books even the different Resistance systems -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Order.

MR MORO:  I am not saying that the Movement type of system is bad, but I think we have now reached a stage where we can through the good work we have done, go and campaign.  The next I stand in my place, I am going to stand as a Movement - the man who is going to stand there and then see if he is going to succeed, because for me, you see, sometimes what I fear is, because today, I am here and - if I was not here, my children would not have gone to school and today they are in school because I am here and the place is peaceful that is why today I am standing here.  But I feel that we must have that spirit of togetherness as advocated by the thing and we should teach these other brothers, that even if they have diverted a little, they should come back, we join hands and we work together so that we develop this country.  If you are going to say, okay, because I am in the House, let me make the best noise, and as I was saying here, let me say it.  Okay, if people say, okay, Moro has spoken well, Moro has - but if at all what he says is very correct, the other time I heard some people were hiding under the bananas, I do not know whether you heard it, somebody was - Moro is speaking here, they –( Laughter)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order.  

MR MORO:  I think that is enough.  Let me also make other contributions because I was telling my hon. Obwangor who is -(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Order.

MR MORO:  Obwangor who was here, he was Attorney General and Minister of Justice I think.  There was a problem in West Nile when the Civil Servants there who were Catholics said they were victimised, they went on strike, they were all - some were dismissed, Obwangor was one of them who went to mediate.  Instead of mediating, Obwangor was praising the UPC.  But you know what happened after two months, do you know what happened after two few months?  After a few months, we heard Obwangor was where?  In Luzira!  So, -(Laughter)- that is what - that is why I am telling you, that is why I am appealing to you that it is better for us to work together to persuade those together than shouting so is wrong, what, yes, he is wrong, he walked out, but let us try to convince him why.  After all, democratically they were defeated, that is why I say okay, I brought that point to tell you, that is what is good today, may not be good tomorrow.  So, we must be very careful.  I remember the story of the late when they made a very good proposal, but when it came to a question of hanging, was there anybody who did it?  So, the future is different, but let us ask all the members who are here, who think that togetherness is better, let us work for the good cause of this country.  

Now, I would like to bring two other issues; one of them is the poverty, I think the President mentioned that it is true that there is poverty in the countryside.  Two, people have been retrenched others demobilised, others were either lazy, naturally at home, they are also poor, but I think we must find a way to create these people productive.  We have talked about the demobilised people.  Others got their packages, others we have not given them packages.  I think let us save for a kind of system where we organise these people, bring them to places where we can make a large area, either to do farming or to do carpentry or to do shoe making.  I think that would be more useful than to say okay, we abandon them.  That is a very touching issue.  

Another issue which I would like to bring to your notice is that of pension.  You work for so many years and then you are confident that at the end of your retirement, you will now sit and get money more or less which is free because of your past services.  The pension which was given to our retired civil servants now is not enough; particularly so when the two zeros were cancelled.  Some of our retired officers used to get say, 300/- for a month, when the two zeros were struck off, they got only 300/-.  I do not know what the 300/- can do and if you look very carefully, most of our retired servants - their wages, their pensions, cannot do anything.  I would appeal to this House to look into this matter.  I am happy that government is looking to the payment of civil servants and other employees.  We should also consider these retired old men who worked for this country and worked very well; thus also pay them well so that they will retire well.  

Lastly, I would also like to mention something about the agricultural products which we talked of particularly the cash crops.  I am very happy that this and government have instituted bodies to look after these crops.  Coffee had got Coffee Authority.  Cotton has got also an Authority.  Others have got other authorities but our main crop, tobacco.  I think up to now, tobacco, there is no body that looks after tobacco.  Although I am very happy with the BAT- though they have done something, at least, to make people survive and give them some employment, I am not really very happy about the reward of these people.  Tobacco work is a very tedious work.  It takes a very long time for you to produce tobacco.  It is one year and a half - digging the land, prepare the land, cutting the firewood, cutting the grass and curing - it takes a long time but the reward - what they get now, I am telling you, although some of them think that is much, it is nothing compared to the work done.  

So, I am appealing to this council this big House not to stand by looking while our people are suffering.  Government is getting a lot of money out of tobacco, more than the farmers.  The farmers are getting about 3 billion - the workers but the government is getting more than he workers.  I feel that this body could at least appeal to BAT to try to raise the prices for the values of tobacco because currently I do not think the payment given to people on compared to their labour is really sufficient.  

I hope the House will take this issue very seriously and I will also appeal to government to do more, to encourage the farmers to grow the crops and get the markets through the values authorities or bodies so that our people can really enjoy the fruits of our good NRM Government.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. (Applause)  

THE VICE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Aliu.

MISS ALIU (Soroti District):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I come here to support the Motion.  We joined the NRC in April 1989, in its fourth Session - we are now in its ninth and the last Session.  We have come a very long way.  Some of us when we joined this House, came from an area where skirmishes and death were the order of the day.  Today, Soroti is one of the most peaceful areas in this country. (Applause)  Indeed, in 1990 December, the entire representation of Soroti and Kumi was almost wiped out in a single ambush incident and the architects of that ambush are now sitting in the CA. representing some parts of Soroti District -(Laughter)- and we are working as brothers and sisters, for people to come up and work together like that and still continue talking even after such incidents, I squarely place it o the leadership of the government of the day working together with the people. (Applause)  Government alone could not achieve it but government and especially the leadership had to work with the people of the areas so that today, I meet these people who wanted us dead and we laugh and share jokes.  

The President in his speech covered a wide range of things of great importance to this nation.  I will just make a few observations on one or two of them.  First of all, the economy is very vital for just not the survival of individuals, but vein of a nation because if you are compromised economically, you have no independence.  We have been told that Uganda ranked 13th in the world in the rates of economic growth.  Which is great an very good and I must commend government for its policy which is at least pointing us and we are now seeing we must be headed to a right direction.  However, in today’s or yesterday’s paper, we also read that Uganda ranks 10th in the highest rate of infant mortality.  This is a contradiction.  I say this because in spite of the serious campaign on expansion of immunisation to reduce infant mortality, we see that out children are still dying in greater numbers.  There must be a problem somewhere.  It cannot be that the immunisation people are not working.  I think there is a basic problem; that what we see our children dying of today is no longer these diseases but the cause of poverty and the status of the women who cannot actually look after these children properly.  I say this linking it to today’s theme of World Population Day.  The theme is ‘women - a vital link in development.’  I think here in Uganda, I am not an economist, but what I observe is this, we are focusing our mind entirely on medium and large-scale industries.  The big people who already can do something.  We have forgotten the rural areas where the poor and majority of these women live.  Let us address the question of these women.  If we do not, we are not going to develop the way we think we are.  If mothers continue not to know how to look after these children, how to feed them, which direction are they taking?  When we are developing and when we are looking at different areas of development, one of the most important areas to focus on is women.  Let us accord these women education.  Education is development.  Once these women are educated, there is no need even to tell them that take your children for immunisation, give them clean drinking water.  It will be automatic and most of these problems we are fighting now, will be solved automatically with education.  

You gave us only ten minutes, so, I will be very brief on some of these issues.  Somebody here mentioned on employment.  I think one of the areas this country and we as leaders of a nation, always need to be informed about are the figures, the statistics - As a student of development studies, now that we are saying economy and there is no doubt, it is.  For some people it is very difficult to see but some of us can see, to convince the majority of the people of this country that actually privatisation is doing us some good, it is meant to create jobs and employment.  Let us have statistics in this country of unemployment and we see how these new privatised industries are absorbing people.  If we can convince these detractors; that can you not see, this is what is happening, we are creating new jobs but if we just talk and there is nothing to show them, it is very difficult to convince them,.  I will now go on something which is of current importance to this nation, Constitution making.  Sometimes some of us who are observing from outside, I think because you are out, you can see some areas which maybe people who are in cannot see.  We have been reading in the papers all sorts of things.  I am sure those people who are in CA, they have the best of intentions but I think they are letting themselves run away with their emotions.  Emotion more than logic is the order of the day for most of these people.  I say this, because I read in the papers that after the famous vote when the multi-partists walked, there were celebrations of those who won and then I think mourning for those who lost.  This is wrong.  The Constitution is not like hundred meters’ race where you race.  The winners suddenly throw up their hands celebrating; even hundred meters’ race, there are judges who judge that you have won.  These people are there just laying down the rules for the game.  The people to run the race are Ugandans, not those people in CA.  We have sent them there to give us the best formula to see that this country is governed well.  Now, if they do not give us the correct rules and the Ugandans run this race and they lose, they are the ones to either judge whether we have won or not; not those people.  Even those who walked out, they had no right.  On the other hand they had all the right because it is also a basic human right to disagree and do what you want.  So, for me, I do not blame those who walked out.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Information from hon. Matembe.

MRS MATEMBE:  Point of information.  The information I would like to give to this hon. House and the hon. Members is that, really we people in the CA, right from the start if you remember even our general debate statements, we all want to come out of that exercise all as winners, no losers.  We do not want to see a situation where other people lose or other people win and I can assure you, we have been really trying our best.  You know that, to really reach consensus and if you will agree with me, there are just a few issues which as any other individuals you may not agree with your colleague.  Therefore, the impression that seems to be created in this House that really we are not nationals and we are not committed to work for this nation to come out with consensus, is not really correct.  So, I want to assure you that even those people who walked out, even those who remained, we had to spend two weeks trying to work outside that House to be able to reach a consensus which we could not reach.  For goodness sake, our inability to reach a consensus on these two issues, should not imply in any way that some of us are coming out as winners celebrating and others as losers.  Right now, even for reconsideration, we are still pre-occupied.  Some of us do not even sleep.  We are really pre-occupied to solve the problems of this land. (Applause)  I want his impression to be removed.

MISS ALIU:  I want to thank the hon. Member for that information, and I want to assure you here also that everyday we who feel and know what it means for Uganda to be we also do not sleep, even if we are not in the CA.  It is a great concern equally to us and this impression has been conveyed by actions.  It is not merely feelings of being mis-reported but we are seeing it.  So, I only pray and hope that hon. Members who are in the CA really for this last part, must use reason and logic and not emotion to come to the final conclusion of this Constitution. (Applause)  

I say this, because the last events of last Sunday came as a rude shock to most of us.  We saw how easy it was for just a few individuals to have caused a total destabilisation of this nation.  I know how it began, I do not know who was behind it, but I would like to appeal to all political leaders that please, trade carefully and carefully and remember that when you go there and cause whatever you cause, you may return home and find that you have no family, or you have no House or you have nothing left.  At this particular moment, we must trade with caution.  Even our words we use and we say publicly must be measured.  You cannot just go and talk of your head and issue language which may initiate action you cannot control.  So, as an individual who has come from where I have come and has arrived where I have arrived, really the last we would like to see a backward role to those days.  We have left them behind and we intend to leave them there and move forward. (Applause)  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Information from hon. Omara Atubo.

MR ATUBO:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I thank the hon. Member for giving way and may I inform her that the basic legal status of the CA is the CA Statute which was made by this House?  Therefore, she is very right to say that this House cannot just watch the mess which is going on in the CA.  The basic mess in the CA which is in the Statute made by this House was to allow 72 people to be indirectly elected.  Thereby creating an artificial majority in the CA. (Interjections) I also wish to inform the hon. Lady that out of the 286 Members in the CA, 214 were directly elected by the people of Uganda.  If you take the number which some of us opposed very seriously in this House about indirectly elected people and directly elected people who constitute the majority and how they are going to affect positively or negatively the out come of the Constitution, we were shouted down in this House.  Today, this House bears the greatest responsibility for creating the false majority in the CA which is the basic headache for the Constitution making process.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  I think here from Omara Atubo’s information, he should also be informed that in 1979, a group of 30 Ugandans selected themselves far away from here and they came and created a government but the people of Uganda allowed to work with that government. (Applause)  Because here the information hon. Daniel is giving is that the impasse now in the CA is due to the indirectly elected 72 Members -(Interjections)- false majority, okay, then if that argument is to hold, Ugandans could also ask that in 1979, why was that the 30 who elected themselves outside Uganda could come and form a government which the Ugandans agreed to work with.  I think, let us not mix so much of the issues in the CA here.  I would like to say this -(Interjection)- Order, order please.  I would urge you.  Do not spend too much time on the proceedings of the CA.  Let us not try to drag the proceedings here to embrace what is taking place in the CA.  Let us try very much to restrict ourselves to the Communication from the Chair.  Otherwise, hon. Members do not take too much time on what is taking place in the CA.  I would ask you to minimise your contribution as much as possible and try to base them on the Communication from the Chair.

MISS ALIU:  I think, Mr Chairman, I would like to conclude.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Information from hon. Elyau.

MR ELYAU:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, this is a very statement which cannot be left to go.  I do not want this House to be derailed that there is a very big problem in the House because if we agree, then, we are abusing this House that it did very bad to pass a Statute but I am saying, Mr Chairman, that we were elected on merit which some people have left.  They are no longer doing on merit, they are caucus which is not in the Statute at all. (Applause)  That is the problem in Uganda today.  The caucusing has brought shame to this country.  What are they caucusing for?  Even the people who voted them say, what are they doing there?  Caucus what purpose?  These are the people who have spoilt us.  We have suffered and the people who are giving problems were once ministers in Museveni’s government.  For example, my brother Atubo here was a person who came and assisted me to get the people back from the bush and he was talking very excellent for the government.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Information from hon. Karuhanga.

MR KARUHANGA:  Point of information was completely misleading.  First, there is no mess in the CA.  By some group to create a mess in the CA, but there is no mess.  Secondly, to say that 214 people should have been the ones to make the Constitution and therefore, the mess would - therefore, the 214 who have had the majority is also not true, because if you lie even on the people who were elected from the constituencies themselves, the overwhelming majority, more than two thirds, still favour and are not members of the so-called National Caucus for Democracy.  Secondly, the so-called 72 people who are being attacked include women who represent 39 districts.  Now, these are now referred to as people who we passed here and it was an unfortunate choice.  I think that description of an unfortunate choice of the women in this country should not have been constituted and as elected, not justified to be elected.  But even if that was the case, there are six women out of those who are Members of the National Caucus for Democracy and then the case of the youth.  There are workers.  The workers did not vote for Article 94.  Instead, they voted with you.  The only person probably who can be blamed is the disabled who is only one and could not divide himself into two.  The army which has got ten delegates.  More than 10 per cent of them did not vote, they abstained and stayed aside.  Therefore, that assessment of 72 is a false number.  

Secondly, it is very important to inform the hon. speaker holding the Floor that, the debate which made our friends walk out was carried out in the best possible procedural way that we can imagine.  Out of the 64 people who voted for that Motion, 34 spoke in favour of the Motion.  Out of the rest who did not support the walk out, only 29 spoke representing the 200 and others who held that opinion.  So, even the speaking was in the favour of those who still walked out.  But in spite of that, trying to accommodate them the debate which made them to walk out was this - that we want to have the multi-party system in the Constitution, we want to have the Movement system in the Constitution and we want to have any other democratic representative system in the Constitution; but the people who walked out said no, we want to be the only ones in the Constitution; because they were already provided for in Article 59 when we were discussing one of the provisions.  So, when we tried to say, let us play fair -(Interjection)- So, while it was obvious that the overwhelming majority of the CA delegates - more than two thirds were for the Movement in spite of that overwhelming support, the CA took two weeks to discuss one Article in an attempt to find a consensus where we can say, you are there, we are there and we go home all of us happy, but these people said no, we want to be the only ones happy and we do not want you to be happy.  So, that was - how far can we go in reaching the consensus. (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member could you wind up now?

MISS ALIU:  Before I wind up, I would like to say that it is very sad for a Member of this hon. House to stand up and say this House created a mess.  It did not.  Following the policy of NRM to include vulnerable groups in the process of developing this country, it was found necessary to have these groups represented in the making of the basic Constitution of this country.  I do not see anything wrong in that and therefore, I am very saddened to her that women and others who have a chance to go and have an input in that Constitution have created a mess either them or us here, I do not know who but in between there is a mess attributed to this House.  I do not think that is correct.  

Finally, I would like actually following this, to address my fellow women colleagues of this House.  The President has recognised what NRM has done.  NRM Government has recognised how much it has done for the women of this country.  Women were given special seats representing districts and others contested with men and found their way in this House.  Now, my appeal to my hon. Colleagues, the women in this House is this, sometime a month or two ago, Member of this House together with those in the CA met and I thought the idea of that meeting between hon. Women Ladies of the both Houses was to try and chat out a new strategy for the women of this country.  I was very shocked to find that at the meeting the issue actually turned to make it easy for district women representatives to come to this House.  This is wrong.  That seat is already assured to women.  The women should use that seat to make sure that fellow women - those trodden down there, get to know their rights and take active part -(Applause)- in decision making.  It is not for us to decide to make it easy for ourselves the few privileged.  I would really like to see women take up this and get women out there mobilised and they know their rights and duties -(Applause)- because in doing that, then we would have managed to sustain this affirmative action will die with NRM.  It is very important that political leaders who are women take this challenge and they should work to make sure that these women know what they are supposed to do other than working for their individual survival as politicians. I do not support that. (Applause)  There are too many detractors around.  This topic on women is always blood raising.  

I would like to conclude by saying, I want to appeal to Members of this House whom I have come to know and work very closely with and interact freely for the last six or so years.  I am proud to be a Member of this current NRC, very proud because the Colleagues we work with in this House have proved why they are here despite whatever they say outside, they are capable Members and I would like to say whether they are in the next Parliament or not, they should continue the good work they have been keeping up in this House because it is important that we continue even outside.  Otherwise, what we are standing for today, will also disappear.  Mr Chairman, I beg to support and I thank you. (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Miria Matembe.

MRS MATEMBE (Mbarara District):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I am certainly grateful for the opportunity to contribute on this Motion of thanking the President for his clear and precise speech at the opening of the last Session that is ending our term.  I am grateful because you never know next time, - so that I am here, I am grateful that I am making these comments.  I want to thank the President very much for thanking us.  Rarely we politicians are thanked.  It is very rare.  Many times, they tell you, you have done nothing; whether you have spent sleepless nights, especially we now the NRM people these days.  When we went to look for votes in CA, we were being asked, what have you done?  You have done nothing.  Yes, indeed, how could they see what we have done when in fact, we had done so well that what we had done had become taken for granted.  We took over the management of our society in Uganda against a terrible background.  Against a background where when a politician gave you a kilo of sugar, it was great.  We had to sing and dance his name because he has given you a kilo of sugar. It was against a background when just a mere piece of soap from a politician was great. (Interjection)- yes, from Nyamurunga and the rest; was very wonderful.  Now, we took powers against that background.  We have worked so well that the sugar is plenty, salt is there, soap is there.  Everything is there, that now they say no, what are you doing now?  It has now become like the work women do.  You see that a woman in the house, fetches water, collects firewood, cooks the food and all this stuff, at the end of it all, they say, what do they do?  

So, for the President to have noticed that we have been working so well and thanked us, I am so happy.  Otherwise, to others we are liars, we are thieves, we are cheats and when you get somebody tapping at your back, then you feel great and you get more rejuvenated to work harder.  So, I am appealing upon you hon. Members that with this motivation now, let us work harder to make this what appears to be difficult environment to be good for us to manage the finals which are coming next year.  

I want to make a few observations on the speech.  Just a few things.  I want to talk about the divestiture.  Mr Chairman, and hon. Members, this House made the Act of privatisation and I remember in that Statute of divestiture, we agreed that some of those funds should be used to be given to local industrialists as loan to establish industries and develop our areas.  That is what we said.  Now, as we are in this House, I do not know how many of us know how much of that fund has gone to those local industrialists and investors.  I think this House has a right to know about what is going on.  We should be told how many public companies have been divested.  How many of them and how much money have we raised out of these industries and where has this money gone?  Because for me, I want to say that this money is a taxpayer’s money.  The tax payers of the whole of Uganda and, therefore, we as Parliamentarians should be able to know how this money is being utilised because we would like to know in our area - we would like to see our local industrialists in our areas partake of this fund through loans so that this money can be evenly distributed back to our people so that they can make their own industries and will create jobs for our people and this will solve some of our problems I am certainly glad that Ugandans benefited in the divestiture because from the speech we are told that 38 per cent or whatever which Ugandans have had shares but Ugandans need to benefit more in the funds that coming out of the sale of these industries and I am saying that this House should be told - in my view, there should be periodical statement about these divestiture programme so that we know how many have been sold, how much has come out, where is it going?  Because, me I talk on behalf of Mbarara people.  The Mbarara people are very seriously industrialising and they need to partake of this fund of the divestiture and as I talk, some of them who are industrialising have told me, they have seen nothing and when they try, the process is so difficult and yet it is not difficult for non Ugandans of local industrialists.  I think we need to look into this matter so that Ugandans can benefit from this exercise.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Information from the Minister of State for Finance.

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr Chairman, much as I had promised that we shall have detailed report for this House, I would like to remind the hon. Members through you and inform them that the other time, I had given these statistics that out of 17 enterprises, 34 at present have been divested and we have realised 51.72 billion as of June, 1st 1995.  The 11 of them have been offered to prospective investors and amounting to 19 billion.  25 public enterprises are under preparation and 18 for liquidation and that the funds are banked in UCB but be used for the industrialisation promotion and among them, those who have benefited in the Kinyara Sugar Works, rehabilitation project and Uganda Spinning give details for cent in future.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Supplementary, point of information.  Mr Chairman, the hon. Lady holding the Floor raised a very important point when she did mention that with this divestiture, it is not all that difficult for foreigners to acquire whatever they want.  Just now the hon. Minister has mentioned Uganda Spinning Mill Lira which was divested in March last year and a certain was supposed to have bought it but up to now as I talk, unless he gave the hon. Minister that money yesterday, it has not been bought and it has not been re-advertised for any tender.  So, it pains me if at home I am informed that, that has not been divested because the ‘Muyindi’ has not paid but in Kampala from the mouth of the hon. Minister, it is purchased.  I stand puzzled.  Maybe in the -(Inaudible)- of time, he may clarify this but, the point I am re-enforcing is that the people of Lira like those of Mbarara are looking forward to industrialisation and this would be an opportunity for them to collectively buy and get on well.

MR NKANGI:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the speaker holding the Floor that, I have reservations on the funds from divestiture because the information I have is that, in the Reform and Divestiture, we are using about 100,000,000 dollars to sell the - you know, the secretaries who are involved in selling and reforming and turning around and so far out of 170 enterprises, we have only realised about 52.2 million dollars.  Now, you can gauge whether we shall even be able to reach the 100,000,000 dollar mark, which we would have spent in divesting these enterprises.

MRS MATEMBE:  This is very startling information now.  The last one, because it shatters peoples’ hopes and I think the hon. Minister of Finance who has just informed me, who had set my mind at rest, had better started working better because this is very serious.  These funds are from taxpayers and once we sell these pubic enterprises, we should sell them properly.  You know the sale is being taunted with corruption.  These are some of the problems which are coming up so that our people may not benefit from this exercise.  My appeal is that our people should benefit from this exercise and the local industrialists we are talking of - urbanisation and industrialising our areas, I would like to see this money go so that the specific individuals, zealous industrious individuals who are forming companies which have prospects like Mbarara, we have this industrialist, Mr Mwebesa.  He is putting up a very good big, sizeable industry - steel.  But we cannot get of this money.  He goes through everywhere, he is suffering, he cannot get it.  This is very serious.  I think I have talked enough on this point and we should get the details of what is going on because the hon. Minister’s information did not even include - it said some of it went to Kakira.  Okay, I want it to go to industrious individuals whom we know in our areas and why do you not ask us anyway?  We know these people back home.  In Lira, in Soroti, everywhere so that we know who should benefit.  Now, I want to go on the next point, the point on the children.  I know there is speech about the coming law on the children and what Parliament has done about the children.  Of course, we established the National Council.  I understand also it has been a bit disturbed.  The operations there, you know -(Interjection)- Yes, in the council itself.  But anyway we passed the council that is good but we have not seen the fruits much more.

MR BWANIKA BBALE:  Point of information.  It would appear the hon. contributor is out of date as to what is happening.  The National Council for children has not been established by this Parliament and I think the first reading was done last week.  Therefore, the Council you are talking about is not legally established.  Thank you.

MRS MATEMBE:  Sincerely, Mr Chairman, I am getting the information from the Chairman of the Council of children which is non existent and I heard with my ears on the radio the appointment of councilors and I am wrong now to assume the Council is there because publicly, it has been existing and I have been knowing all these affairs because I have interest in children.  Am I wrong?  If it has been defacto existing, pending the jury existing, I have a right for goodness sake to comment on it and its operations.  Anyway, it is soon coming the law and I appeal to Members to pass it and pass all the laws relating to the children but in the meantime, I wish to, in my strongest terms, condemn in totality the brutalization of our children that is currently going in schools these days.  It is a shame.  I have grief.  I personally, have been in contact with these traumatised and disabled children because they have been beaten, they are tortured and they are just finished and it is happening and I do not know, nothing is happening.  It is just like the defilement which was going on right and left and it continues to go on. (Interruption)  The defilement of our children.  Now, the brutalization by beating in schools.  What is happening to this society?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Information from hon. Mayengo.

MR MAYENGO:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Lady that the brutalization of children she is talking about is actually the mistreatment of teachers. (Interjections)- exactly.  As much as the teachers are mistreated, they will mistreat the weaker ones and the weaker ones are the children.

MRS MATEMBE:  Exactly, Mr Chairman, I am indeed very scandalised.  It is scandalous, and completely inhuman for the hon. Member, Israel Mayengo, to justify the brutalization of children on the mistreatment of the teachers.  It is very shameful.

MR MAYENGO:  Point of order.  Is it in order, Mr Chairman, for the hon. Member to misunderstand me to that extent?  I was not saying that is justified or that it is justifiable or that is right for the teachers to mistreat the children because they have been mistreated.  I have been saying, instead that because the teachers have been mistreated in so many different ways, they express their anger upon the children.  I condemn both the actions of the teachers and actions of the government.

MR TIVU:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, on behalf of the professional teachers, I would like the hon. Member on the Floor to clarify the discipline of a child for a professional teacher is based on certain facts and on the gravity of the offence which the child makes.  I want here to clarify the circumstances under which the professional teacher has been mishandling our children.

MRS MATEMBE:  Mr Chairman, that is academics.  I am talking of children who have been beaten thoroughly.  They are lame.  They bring them to me.  How can he start telling me of how you beat and the professionalism of beating a child to disabled state in this manner when I am talking on behalf of the children of this country who cannot talk for themselves?  I do not know whether he is a father or anything but sincerely anybody who has fathered or mothered a child and knows the pain of bringing forth a child and the pleasure of having a child, and then the pain of seeing that child crippled through a caning; whether it is professional caning or unprofessional, it is terrible.  I have all these children, I have cases; the Masaka case.  I think the Chairman knows.  The boy is traumatised, the Nsube child, the Iganga child.  I have seen all of them.  The Lira child who died.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Information from the hon. Member.

AN HON. MEMBER:  I think if somebody beats a child, that child even gets paralysed or he dies, that is criminal nature.  That is not professional.  such people, it is police to handle such cases but we mean that - what the hon. Member there was saying is that in teaching profession, little discipline is required.  At a certain degree, I am having children.  I know I love my children and I want them to get education.  So, now, then I think we should also give teachers the way how to perform their duties.  Therefore, anybody, any teacher, it is like a soldier who is given a gun and he goes and kills innocent civilians and people.  That, he guns people down.  He is handled by the law of the country.  Therefore, the issue of the teachers mishandling children.  That is a criminal nature, please, let us leave it to police.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Could you wind up hon. Member?

MRS MATEMBE:  Mr Chairman, you can see the importance of the subject I am talking about.  That is why hon. Members are informing me but I would rather get those which are condemning these things. (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  This is a matter which is rather crucial.  In the methodology of bringing up a teacher in the educational psychology in the methods of discipline, caning is not there.  You will rather have students staying in school and write and fill a book or do such other academic things that would make them feel that I would not like to do it again.  Beating is a by-law to societies, within the Ugandan society, that is a by-law but in methodology and professional methods of teaching and I have been a teacher educator, you do not cane and this is out. (Applause)  It is out.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MRS MATEMBE:  Thank you very much for that professional information upon which I was challenged.

MR MWANDHA:  Mr Chairman, I do appreciate the concern of the hon. Member about the behaviour teachers towards children.  I condemn it.  Mr Chairman, I think the hon. Member should condemn everybody.  Whether teachers, mothers, fathers, other people who actually mistreat children because I think if she just emphasizes the teachers as people who mistreat, beat, mainly disabled children - there are step mothers, there are mothers, there are fathers, there are all sorts of people who are doing a lot of wrong things to our children.  So, she should condemn everybody.

MRS MATEMBE:  Mr Chairman, I certainly appreciate hon. Mwandha’s information, if he remembers I started by saying I condemn the brutalization of children and once I condemn, I am condemning all those people who are involved in brutalization but I specifically brought out the category of the teachers.  Not all the teachers by the way but some of the teachers as you have been seeing almost in everyday paper, there is a brutalization of a child - child abuse.  Otherwise, I agree with hon. Mwandha that all those people involved in abusing our children, should really stop.  I would like the Minister for Education, for goodness sake, to take action because right now like in Masaka, the school is still going on, those people who beat the child are still teaching.  I mean what is this really?  Can they not face criminal charges?  There is law and even that child of Nsube Primary School where the child is there disabled in a wheel chair now, the evidence has even disappeared.  So, all these things and I am inviting the hon. Members, please take love and concern to children because really our society when it was destroyed having more decay, it seems we lost the whole love that we are supposed to have the human feeling that we are supposed to have vulnerable people like children.  That is why in fact, we se this brutal Kony brutalising kids during wars.  It never happened.  But now, you look at this Kony, taking all these children, abducting them, they come back -some of them when they are traumatised, they are raped, they are defiled, their future is gone.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Minister.

MRS OKWIR:  And to the whole nation that as we speak here, the brutality in Acholi region by the Kony rebels is beyond mention because it is the children that have been the target for Kony and they have suffered.  As we speak, Uganda should come out and demand for our 200 children who up to now we do not know but we believe they have sold as slaves in Sudan and this august House should demand that these children be returned through our Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  Thank you.

MRS MATEMBE:  Thank you very much hon. Member for that information.  I think this House should follow up and I request for an explanation and even demand for these children so that they can be brought.  I would like to call upon the NRA please, to intensify this struggle against this Kony although he has turned shape now.  He is being supported by those people in Sudan.  I would like now to thank the Court because some danger has come and when they arrest these defilers sentences are now increased.  Bu not yet to my satisfaction because at least, I would like to see a defiler put in there for ever - for life imprisonment.  So, I am grateful to the Court and I am again inviting the hon. Members to really take action in their areas because when these girls are defiled, they bring them to me.  You also interest yourselves in those cases so that they bring them to you and so that we can fight together as a team on these defilers.  Of course, I cannot stop talking without alluding to the woman question.  The President talked the involvement of woman and accepting women as partners.  I am certainly very grateful and the people of Mbarara are very grateful for this involvement of women and recognising them as partners in the business.  I am sure you have not regretted having us around.  It is good two heads are better than one.  I am so grateful that you still support us on that matter.  I would like to invite you to support the Bill when it comes here so that we are encompassed the Bill which is coming here to decide how we shall be elected to the next Parliament.  So, you look at it sympathetically and as usual in the spirit of support and solidarity so that we know that you are still with us.  But as far as you know, we still have a long way to go.  

Madam honourables, this is what we have to suffer with in the houses all the time.  People who cannot see the truth of the matter, people who cannot understand that democracy means participation of war; people who cannot see the reality; people who speak the truth.  Can you imagine the national caucus for destruction brings disturbance in the CA and then they say that it is we the hon. Women and hon. Youths who have been working as a very nice united caucus that has cut across regions and tribes.  We have been having a caucus of women use workers and it has cut across tribes and we have been talking on once common front.  We have actually helped that exercise.  How can the national caucus for destruction and dictatorship come here and say that, we are the cause of the problems  

So, I am still on the woman question.  I would like to thank the hon. Women who have done a great job.  You my Colleagues are women who did not go to CA, I still uphold you.  You did a very good job because if it was no for us in this House, we would never have had the 39 women here.  You remember, hon. Members, hon. Njuba had put only 8.  I did not know that there was that hidden agenda to reduce us.  Now, it has been exposed.  But he had put 8.  You together with the hon. Gentlemen helped and the 39 went there.  You did a very good job and you have put a mark on Uganda here.  We have done it.  I want to appeal it to you not to be discouraged at all.  In fact, by having the CA.  We are now many women politicians.  We have numbers which are here; we have numbers which are there.  The next task now is to be able to solidify and allocate ourselves in those constituencies and compete and come here in the House.  Therefore, I want it to be on record that, hon. Members in this House, the Women have done very well together with their hon. Men and also in CA we have been doing very well.  I want to assure you of that.  We have been cutting across barriers.  Even with hon. Cecilia Ogwal on the women question, we were together.  But I wish to use this platform today to invite all the women of this land now to know that we have to a very crucial stage.  They have to know which side of the bread so that they can participate effectively.  

Therefore, a challenge to you, my sisters, let us go and mobilise women so that when we come to the finals of casting the votes to the full democracy, we know how to cast it properly.  People are already saying that we are the cause of the problem.  Do you think if they got there, we would belong anywhere?  Somebody has already said that once he reaches there, he will make sure the Constitution is destroyed and he makes another one.  So, you see we have to vote properly so that we still maintain our participation.  In conclusion, I want to say, hon. Members the task ahead of us is very crucial.  I can compare this exercise as a football match.  The whole democratisation exercise.  We are in the same finals in the CA.  We are trying our best.  The finals are coming - the next elections.  For goodness sake, if we do not really become united, and we strategies on how to break through wicked tricks that have destroyed this land, those people are still there.  Therefore, we must be united in this House as we have ever been and we join the other people and we do a good job for the next elections, so that return good people in this House even if we may not return to it.  Let us return people who are developmental minded.  I thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  With that, we come to the end of this session.  We adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.


(The Council rose at 5.30 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 12 July 1995 at 2.30 p.m.)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

 



