Thursday, 17 July 2003 
Parliament met at 2.20 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on your behalf, I want to welcome our guests in the gallery. They are our children from Gayaza Junior School (Applause). They are accompanied by members of staff. You are most welcome to see what is going on here in your Parliament.

REV. DR KEFA SSEMPANGI: Mr Speaker, as a person who has worked with children in this country and as a parent, I was shocked by the story which appeared today in the New Vision that 45 children were drowned in River Moroto by the Kony rebels. 

Mr Speaker, I do not know whether there are any precautionary measures that Government has in place to protect the remaining children. The story of abducting children did not start yesterday. I guess it started in Lira, went to Acholiland to Gulu, Kitgum and Pader, now it is in Teso. Today it may be in Teso, but tomorrow it may be in the central area. So, my question still is, what does Government have in place to take care of the remaining children who have not been abducted? 

Mr Speaker, two years ago I wrote to Mr Olara Otunu, who is in charge of children in conflict areas; I never received any reply. And I guess this man is a Ugandan from Acholi land. How can world organisations like the UN turn a blind eye to what is happening today to our children in Northern Uganda? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you Mr Speaker, and I thank Rev. Kefa Ssempangi for the point he has raised. 

No doubt it is regrettable that children, alongside other people, should continue to suffer within these conflicts. But I think as Members of Parliament we need to realise that where conflict is, people suffer, including children. And the ultimate solution really is for us to continue making more and more efforts to ensure that we deal with these conflicts conclusively. 

I do not think that within Government it is possible to guarantee specific measures. I do not think we will go out and say “there is a conflict here but children are completely shielded”. But we have general measures, for example once it is known that there is a conflict in an area, sometimes schools are closed so that children can be able to go home, where we think there may be better protection. So, Mr Speaker, it is not possible for Government to speak conclusively or specifically, that the children will be excluded from the conflict.  

Lastly, I think we should not place false hope in the United Nations. In the conflicts in Congo, conflicts that were in Angola and elsewhere, the population suffers across the board, including the children. I think the ultimate solution is in our hands as the people of Uganda, the Government of Uganda and the Parliament of Uganda. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MRS OKOT SANTA (Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Because of the conflict, which has been taking place right from Acholi sub-region to Lango and Teso, last week the members of Acholi Parliamentary Group (APG) together with Lango Parliamentary Group (LPG) had a series of meetings to see how we can handle the issue, which is public and is being mentioned by some of the government officials. We wanted to see how we could move backwards to the people whom we represent, and see how we can handle the issue.  

In those three meetings, APG and LPG resolved that we should have a joint meeting, before we travel backwards, with the different ministries. We wrote letters and invited the Minister of Defence, the Minister of Internal Affairs, the Minister of Disaster Preparedness, the Minister of State in charge of Security and the hon. Minister of State for NURP. We thought before we go back home, we would get some information from them, which would allow us handle this issue perfectly.  

Mr Speaker, I would request you to allow me read a statement on behalf of the two groups. I thank you Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to make this brief statement. I believe that caucuses in this Parliament have become a useful tool for conducting government business outside the formal fora. In the situation of Lango and Acholi sub-regions, I believe that our caucuses have a big role to play in the area of peace, security, unity and development. We are convinced that so far our efforts have yielded very positive and progressive results, since 1986. 

However, Mr Speaker, I have been mandated by the two groups to make this statement about our disappointment with the Ministers of Defence, Internal Affairs, Security, NURP, and Disaster Preparedness who failed to attend the consultative meeting with us this morning. They, without a single apology, never turned up. We are highly disappointed. It reflects lack of co-operation.  

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay this on the Table and to give a copy of the programme we intended to discuss with these ministries to the Rt hon. Prime Minister. I will also give our communication with these ministers, so that it can be discussed further in another meeting. 

We have a long programme and we intend to make the public and the people of this country know that we are working together with the Government. They must know that we should all join hands as people of this country to make sure that we try our level best to resolve this conflict, which has gone from Northern Uganda up to the Eastern Region, without pointing at each other. 

We will do this by making a group of Members of Parliament and leaders from a certain region to go and handle issues in their districts once such a conflict like LRA has attacked them. We must try and work together as people of this country to see that the war is resolved. I beg to lay this on Table, Mr Speaker.

DR KIYONGA: Thank you Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank hon. Santa for the statement she has just made. In particular, we must welcome and support our colleagues from areas hit by insecurity and insurgency whenever we can, so that they are constantly in the areas to be able to support the efforts to deal with the conflicts in those areas.  It is regrettable that my colleagues, the ministers, who were invited to this meeting, did not turn up and they did not send an explanation as to why they did not do so.  

What I can state here is that this week has been particularly busy. We are hosting President Kibaki from Kenya, and most of those ministers, except the Minister for Disaster Preparedness, were involved this morning in the bilateral discussions. But as hon. Santa said, maybe an explanation could have been sent. I think next week when they return, they will be able to explain, Mr Speaker.

MR MOSES KIZIGE: Mr Speaker, as you may recall, yesterday a petition was presented to this Parliament by hon. Martin Wandera, the Workers’ Representative, on behalf of the people of Bugiri.  After reading through the petition, I realise that the issues raised are mainly constitutional and legal. The petition was committed to the Committee of Public Service and Local Government. But it is my humble request that the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs be fully involved in handling this petition. Probably the two committees could work together in handling the petition. I beg you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much for your observations. I see no problem here. The mandate was given to the committee in charge of local governments, and there is a mechanism that can be used by any committee to get assistance from another committee. They can always co-opt members or some lawyers from the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee to assist them. Therefore, I see no problem.  

I think your request has been heard by the committee members; they can get whatever assistance they need to be able to understand and make a fair report on the matter.

MR JAMES MWANDHA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Going back to the very sad event of the children who were drowned, I wanted to find out from Government whether there are any measures they have put in place to assist the parents and relatives of these children to cope with the grief of losing children in this manner. That is what I wanted to find out, Mr Speaker.

DR KIYONGA: Right now concentration is on how far we can go in recovering the dead bodies, because we assume that all these children have died in the water. Definitely, at some stage measures will be taken to ensure, as hon. Mwandha is saying, that the parents be assisted at least to ameliorate the grief that obviously goes with the loss of children. I think next week a formal statement will be issued on the fate of the children.

THE SPEAKER: I think it is proper to stand and observe a minute of silence.

(The Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  The people we represent on a number of occasions speak through questions for oral answer. Since we started recently, I have not seen any question for oral answer featuring. 

Mr Speaker, as if that is not enough, I am standing here to raise a query for the 20th time on a question of public importance related to the electricity tariffs. You have always come to my rescue, but I am standing here to protest. 

I raised a question of public importance, stating that the rates or the tariffs we are paying for electricity are faulty mathematically. A question was put before the Minister in September last year. We are soon getting to another September and the question has not been answered, and it may never be answered. I am in a dilemma before the people I represent, because I have quantified evidence that we are paying a wrong tariff figure. What is your advice, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: My advice is that the Minister should come as soon as possible, or when he appears, to deal with your issue. (Laughter).

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

1. THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2002/03.

2. THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2003/04 ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE.

(Debate continued.)

THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Mr Speaker, yesterday you did guide us that the hon. Minister of Finance should wind up the debate this afternoon. But I wanted to request for your permission; there were other key general and crosscutting points raised by honourable members of the House. If you gave me five to seven minutes, I thought I should clarify them.

Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, you will have noticed during the debate that a number of our colleagues did make reference to the point of equity in development, particularly as it relates to Northern Uganda and the rest of the country.  There were also comments about the rate of development in the country. I want to clarify on these and two other points. 

Hon. Omara Atubo, hon. Odur and Prof. Latigo tried to go to the extent of bringing illustrative statistics to show inequity in development between the north of the country and the rest of our country. 

Mr Speaker, what is true is that the north of our country in relation to the rest of the country is not as developed. All of us need to appreciate that fact and keep it in mind. Even when we have come here to talk about poverty going down, it is also statistically demonstrated that in the case of the North, the poverty has been going up. So, that is an established fact; we have a problem, we have apparent inequity between the South and the North in general terms.

I think that needs to be quickly qualified; since the late 1980s and early 1990s, the Movement Government has tried to carry out affirmative economic programmes to assist particular areas of development in the North. For example, NURP I and NURP II were put in place, and now as we all know, NUSAF should be starting any time. 

In the case of Karamoja, we had the Karamoja Development Agency. And I think the policy of decentralization was also supposed to have the effect of ensuring that budgetary resources go to all areas in an equitable manner. 

I think Parliament will do well to first accept this situation but also look at the factors that we need to focus on so that this problem will be definitely cured. First, there is the question of insecurity which all of us have been talking about in this House. 

Northern Uganda, particularly the main North, has been hit by insurgency for close to 16 years. In that situation, even if you have the funds, development is very, very difficult. Even when roads are tendered, normally you get one or two contractors who are willing to go to that area. Some of them once they start and they are threatened by the rebels, they quite often abandon these projects. So, I think one of the current constraints is the matter of insecurity and as we have said, we should do everything possible to bring this to a close.

I also thought I should take this opportunity to refer to the question of the land tenure system in this country, in the face of the policy of private-led development. We are now going to have nationals and people from outside who want to invest particularly on land. They will want a convenient way of accessing land so that they can carry out development. 

My perception is that the land tenure system in some parts of our country, particularly in the North, might have the effect of disadvantaging that part of the country in the sense that land is communally owned. The investor may want to go to a specific point and he may perceive that this is going to lengthen the negotiation, so he may not immediately be attracted to an area with such a system. 

There is also the policy of decentralisation. Much as it is ensuring equity in allocation of resources, there are some negative aspects that we need to attend to. Many districts tend to say they will only employ people from their areas irrespective of skills and qualifications.  This is likely to disadvantage districts where the level of education is not so high, or difficult areas like areas of insecurity or areas that are not yet developed. I think as Members of Parliament, we need to focus on these issues and see what measures we can take alongside Government to ensure that these constraints are removed.  

In summary, it is factual that for a long time, for historical reasons, the north of our country relative to the south has remained behind in terms of development. There are structural and other issues that tend to contribute to this fact, and we need to work to remove them.

My second clarification relates to the rate of development of our economy. (Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I believe that the Minister knows Eastern Uganda as well as any other part of the country. Particular parts of Eastern Uganda are not very different from Northern Uganda in terms of development. I think this matter should not be simply discussed in relation to situations of insecurity in the North.  

I think the issue of balancing regional development is a very important matter. I think Government has got to look at it in a much more serious manner, so that all parts of the country receive reasonable development without any part of the country being developed so much and other parts of the country remaining poor. It is bound to contribute to insecurity if the matter is not addressed seriously.

MR GEOFFREY EKANYA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. My point is kind of a clarification. The current situation in Northern Uganda and maybe the North East is so complex, where you cannot build valley tanks, valley dams, health centres or roads. In order to make Northern Uganda and North East catch up with the rest of the country, I would propose affirmative action. 

I propose that Government immediately uses the resources that they would wish to put in Northern Uganda, but because of insecurity they cannot use them, to come up with a policy of free secondary and tertiary education for all the children in Acholi, West Nile and Karamoja whose parents are now in camps. These parents cannot raise money to take the children to school to pursue secondary, tertiary or university education. 

Government should do this so that by the time conflicts end in Northern Uganda, we have a human resource that has been built over a period of time. And the people of Northern Uganda will say, “well we were in a period of conflict, but at least Government took care of us”. They will not think so badly about the rest of the country that is enjoying relative peace. This is the clarification and proposal that I leave with Government. Thank you very much.

CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the hon. Minister for giving way. We do not dispute the fact that there was NURP I and NURP II. But what has the impact of these programmes been to the people of Northern Uganda in qualitative terms? That is what we want to know. 

MR NYEKO OCULA: Mr Speaker, I got a bit touched when hon. Kiyonga talked about land being an issue, which is preventing communal land ownership. I would like to get clarification. So far, which developmental Government programmes have gone to the North and the problem arose? Because, Mr Speaker, I believe that the land ownership tenure system in the North is one of the best in the country. The communal ownership of land in the northern part of Uganda has never had any problem.  Even during the Constitution making process we did not have a lot of problems with the land issues in Northern Uganda. So, I seek clarification, which projects have gone on onto the ground and got an obstacle. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Unfortunately, yesterday, we agreed that this should not be turned into - you see the motion is to resolve ourselves into a Committee of Supply and then various committees will be coming up. There will be a ministry in charge of northern development and you will ask the minister those questions. So, I think we abide with the decision we made. Let the minister make his remarks and then we go into a committee of supply. I think there is a Minister of State for Northern Development whom I think is hon. Agard Didi, so he can really deal with these questions.

DR KIYONGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will quickly respond to those questions, which have been raised.  First, the term I used was loose to say, “south and northern Uganda”. I agree with hon. James Mwandha that really when you look at the figures a big part of eastern Uganda would be covered in that definition.

Then hon. Ekanya is saying, maybe in the meantime, we should have interim measures in manageable areas like education where special arrangements can be made for the children in that part of the country so that they do not lose out on education. I can agree with you, Mr Speaker, as we go into the sectoral debates these matters can be further detailed.

The impact of NURP I and NURP II, again this can be explained. But what I meant also to say is that despite this affirmative action, the environment also has not been sufficiently encouraging these projects to have the desired impact.  

On the land issue, that is debatable. I did not say that there are Government projects, which have failed because of the land policy. But my own appreciation of forces that tend to attract investors to an area, particularly on land policy is critical. And it is my projection that this system of land ownership may inhibit private investors to go to that part of the country. If it turns out that this is not inhabitable then there is no problem, Mr Speaker.

So, let me quickly go to item 2 - and this is much shorter - the question of the rate at which the economy is growing. The target by Government is 7 per cent, but as the minister did illustrate to us, the financial year ended when we were at 4.9 per cent and this year we are likely to hit 5.6 per cent. I am glad that many members felt that we needed to make faster progress and I could not agree with them more.  

My own appeal to Parliament, particularly our Committee on Economy, is that Parliament should acquire some consultancy so that they can independently examine the growth rates, and the interventions that we are making so that we can have more meaningful interaction with the Executive.  These are really complicated matters.

Parliament, for example, moved this bill on the Budget Act; initially we felt uncomfortable but it has proved to be such a useful tool. Parliament again has just made a proposal on the pension scheme. You hired a consultant, he has done very good detailed work and this is making it easy for us to have a very good interaction.  So, I think on this issue of the rate of growth, I would like to invite, particularly, the Committee on the Economy to take it seriously and come up with specific proposals.

My third point relates to Kibaale district. My colleague hon. Isoke, yesterday, did make a few points. But, I felt there were other critical points he left and since this matter keeps coming here, I want to give you the six key points on which we are moving on this matter:

1.  Government negotiated with the leadership in Kibaale so that the question of leadership at the district got sorted following the elections.

2. As hon. Isoke said, using the Uganda Land Commission, Government has put aside money to purchase land from the absent landlords for redistribution to the people.

3. Cabinet has already authorised appointment of a National Land Fund Task Force to guide the process of implementing these land reforms and sorting out fundamental problems as we see in Kibaale. And although this committee is to deal with the whole country because of the special problems in Kibaale, it will start as soon as it is ready to move.

4. Cabinet has already authorised appointment of a Commission of Inquiry into the accusations and counter accusations of the land problems in Kibaale. These too should be in place as soon as possible.

5. In the meantime, until we fully solve this matter, the Government is in close contact with the leadership in Kibaale so that when some complications arise, we are at site to handle them and we should be able to bring the matter to order.

6. This is a request. I would like to request our colleagues, the Members of Parliament who come from former Kigezi and the kingdom of Bunyoro to engage in discussions in the spirit, for example, like hon. Santa was articulating to us. Because so often you have seen in this House a Member of Parliament from former Kigezi hitting at a Member of Parliament from Bunyoro, and this is not helping the situation. I think the answer is the two Parliamentary groups to get together and see how we can help each other so that the matter in Kibaale can be brought to a desired end.

Finally, Mr Speaker, my hon. colleague from Kasese, Busongora South, did make some comments on cultural institutions. The Constitution is quite clear, and I think every effort is being made to follow the process of the Constitution. But I wanted to make two observations: 

One; that what we are talking about are cultural institutions, and the Constitution itself is clear that these institutions should have nothing to do with administration and politics. So, those who really support these cultural institutions should observe that boundary as clearly as possible lest wel have complications.  

Really, all our communities have their cultures. In the case of Kasese, we have our clan leaders and cultural landlords who continue to exercise the authority. 

The struggle in Kasese was about political liberation, but there are some people who think that this should be converted into a cultural institution. We take great exception to that, but in a democratic society, we wait for the right opportunity so that we can put this matter clearly to rest once and for all.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Rukutana Mwesigwa): Mr Speaker, allow me to thank the honourable members for their various contributions on the Budget speech. Allow me to thank the chairperson and indeed all the members of the Budget Committee for their contribution to this year’s budget process. Let me also take this opportunity to thank my colleagues the ministers who have responded to specific questions touching their sectors.  

Mr Speaker, honourable members have raised very important issues, and I wish to say that we have immensely benefited from this debate. Since many of the concerns raised on the Floor of the House are related to those raised by the committee, I request the honourable members to allow me respond to these issues at the same time as I answer the specific questions that were raised by honourable members. And in doing so, I will follow a systematic procedure depending on the themes that emerged during the debate.

Nevertheless, Mr Speaker, I wish to state, as you have continuously reminded us, that most of the issues raised by honourable members will adequately be handled when we are dealing with respective policy statements for each sector or ministry.  

The first theme that emerged throughout the debate was the macro economic plan and the budget framework. Mr Speaker, both the committee and honourable members in this House have raised very important issues regarding the performance of the economy, and in particular growth and poverty levels. I beg that to appreciate this point, we view the situation from the perspective of where we came from, where we are now and where we plan to go. I think that is when we can get a clear picture of our performance as a Government.  

Starting in 1986, Uganda has achieved an impressive record of growth transformation and poverty reduction. The real average annual growth rate over the 17 years, that is 1986/87 to 2002/2003, has been 6.1 per cent per annum. Coupled with the reported figure for population growth over this period of 17 years, which has been reported to be on average 3.1 per cent per annum, this translates into per capita income growth of 3.0 per cent per annum or slightly less given more recent evidence that the population growth has been somewhat higher than has been projected.  

This growth has been accompanied by substantial structural shifts in the economy. Between the fiscal years 1985/1986 and 2002/2003, the share of agriculture in GDP fell from 56.1 per cent to 39.4 per cent, with most of the reduction being accounted for by non-monetary or subsistence agricultural production, which fell from 31.4 per cent to 16.9 per cent of GDP. The compensating increase was shared roughly equally between industry, which has risen from 10.2 per cent to 19.4 per cent of GDP and services, which has risen from 33.4 per cent to 41.2 per cent of GDP.  

There have also been dramatic increase in investment, which has risen from 8.4 per cent to 21.2 percent of GDP, exports, which have risen from 5.8 per cent to 13 percent of GDP, imports, which have risen from 8.6 percent in 1985-86 to 30.3 per cent in the year 2003, and Government revenues, which have risen from 6.6 per cent in 1985-86 to 12 per cent of GDP in the current period.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, these shifts have been accompanied by, and were largely a response to a wide-ranging set of reforms, three components of which were particularly crucial.  The first component was re-establishing a reasonable degree of internal security in the country. 

The second component was liberalisation of the economy, and in specific reference to the removal of predatory taxation on exports, and the third component was the achievement of fiscal discipline.  

The improvement in the macro economic picture is illustrated by the fall in inflation from an annual rate of around 150 per cent in 1985-86 to an annual average of just 4.8 per cent per annum over the past 10 years.  

Recently, concerns have been raised, both by honourable members in this House and elsewhere, about a growth slow-down in Uganda. It is true that over the last two or three years, there has been a slight slow down, but recent research carried out by Oxford University has shown that we do not need to over exaggerate this slow-down. Over the five-year period between 1993/1994 to 1997/1998, real annual growth averaged 6.7 percent per annum, whereas over the following five years, that is 1998/1999 to 2000/2003, it averaged to 6.0 percent per annum.  

The research draws on work, which shows that it is easier to start an episode of rapid growth than it is to maintain one in the long run. When you look at 20 countries in Africa with episodes of sustained strong growth in Africa during the period 1960 to 1969, this particular research shows that 15 out of the 20 countries had these episodes terminated before the end of the period. Of the remaining five, which include Uganda, only Botswana and Mauritius had sustained strong growth for more than 15 years. As of 2002/2003, Uganda has equalled the achievement of both Botswana and Mauritius, by sustaining strong growth for more than 15 years, in spite of the very slowdown seen over the past 5 years.   

Contrary to views expressed by certain honourable members in this House, available data will show that Uganda’s impressive growth performance has translated into a significant reduction in headcount poverty over the past decade.  Headcount poverty as a percentage of total population has reduced significantly from 56 per cent in 1992, through 44 per cent in 1997 to 35 per cent in the year 2000. It is estimated that today the figure is much lower than 35 per cent. The fall in headcount poverty has been accompanied by an improvement in a number of key quality of life indicators.  

For example, the percentage of Ugandans infected with HIV/AIDS has reduced from 30 per cent of population at the beginning of 1990s to about 6 per cent today – (Interjection) – Yes, that is a fact. Whilst the net primary school enrolment has risen from 60.5 per cent of children of primary school going age to 76.5 percent.

There has also been significant improvement in access to clean water and health centre contrary to the dim picture painted about our performance. These achievements are in no way mean achievements.  

For the future, it is expected that strong growth will centre on cash crops, mining and quarrying, construction and telecommunication sub sectors. In order to return the economy to the benchmark of 70 per cent, which most members have talked about in this House, and in order to attain our goal of reducing absolute poverty to 10 per cent by year 2017, we have to do a number of things. 

Government will and has been addressing the supply side constraints to growth through sustained implementation of various programmes, which include the PMA, the Medium Term Competitive Strategy and the Strategic Export Programs  

Members have raised queries on our strategy on investment promotion. I am glad to say that Government has undertaken a study with the objective of identifying barriers to investment.  This study is available and we shall start implementing the recommendations this financial year. 

Another study aimed at identifying sources of economic growth and export promotion has been commissioned by my ministry and has been undertaken by Oxford University and the Economic Policy Research Centre of Makerere. These have also come out with a report, which is ready but still in draft form, and which I undertake to present to this august House at a future date.  

While it is true that there has been some slowdown, Government is consciously aware it has in place a mechanism of alleviating the situation. Government knows the problem and it is putting in place measures to control further slowdown. It is not that Government is folding its hands. The slow-down has been as a result of inevitable forces, which I will elaborate as I go along.  

Mr Speaker, both the committee and honourable members raised an issue on growth, and in particular – (Interruption)

MS ERIYO:  Mr Speaker, I would like to raise a point of procedure on how the minister is presenting his brief to us.  We have a copy, which is circulated to members, but whatever he is reading now is not contained in what we have. Is he hiding some information from members, or he does not want us to have the copy that he is reading?  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, it is true that some of my submissions, especially regarding figures were reduced into writing and I felt it pertinent to supply members with copies. I have just read figures, but I am just elaborating and highlighting on the contents of that document.  What I am presenting here is my arranged and programmed way of presenting the situation. You will find that what is in that document is not necessarily what I am reading – (Laughter)- because that document as you may note, does not address specific issues that were raised by members. But if members feel that I should restrict myself to that document, then I will ask members to ignore it for sometime and refer to it after I have made the presentation.

I was saying that an issue was raised on growth and in particular to the Bujagali Project. The committee raised this issue; hon. Muguli and some other members also raised it. It is not true that GDP growth in the medium term is solely attributed to the Bujagali Dam construction. While it is true that the project is estimated to add a percentage point to GDP growth in the year of construction, it is also true that the economy has been and will continue growing with or without the project.  

We have already promised this House that the Executive will present to Parliament a paper on Bujagali when the process is revived. It was also agreed with the Committee on Budget that some time in future a paper on Uganda’s GDP growth will be presented to Members of Parliament for their information and input - (Mr Lukyamuzi rose_)- Mr Speaker, I listened very attentively and I restrained myself from interfering. I wish I could be given the opportunity to – (Laughter)- present my organised presentation, and if any member has any queries or point of clarification – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, proceed.

MR RUKUTANA: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. Both the chairperson of the committee, and I think again hon. Muguli and some other members raised the concern on private sector lending. Government is equally concerned about this matter because we know, and we have continuously said, that to achieve sustainable growth, the private sector must take the lead.  

However, allow me to state that the growth in private sector lending of 15 per cent per annum over the medium term is not stagnant as stated by some honourable members of this House.  This level is higher than the output achieved in the financial years 2000/2001 and 2001/2002. Figures from Bank of Uganda will indicate that at the end of February 2003, private sector credit expanded by 23.5 per cent, which equals to Shs 155 billion since the start of the last financial year. In addition, the 15 per cent growth in lending is faster than the growth in nominal GDP growth and is consistent with the Government fiscal position.  

Mr Speaker, having said that, I wish to say that Commercial Banks have continued to hold huge amounts of excess reserves, and I wish to inform the House that the latest figure is to the tune of Shs 53 billion as on 10 July 2003. The reluctance to lend to the private sector stems partly from the sectors history of non-performing assets, and the inadequacy of bankable private sector projects.  Through its medium term competitive strategy, Government believes that strengthened business capacity at the small and medium enterprise level is the key to improving their access to financing.  

Honourable members should also note that there has been a significant increase in non-Commercial bank financing of the private sector through the formal financial system, such as the leasing and credit from Micro-finance institutions. The total volume of leasing activity reached Shs 15.8 billion as at the end of June 2002 while lending by micro- finance institutions increased by 29 per cent over the June 2000 position.  

Therefore, Mr Speaker and honourable members, I can comfortably state that there exists adequate credit finance with finance institutions, but the problem has been accessibility and affordability by the private sector. All of us here are leaders. It is up to us to see how we sensitise and educate our people, so that they are able to come up with bankable projects in order to access this money that is lying idle in banks. All of us must take a lead, as we are indeed leaders.

Government is committed and will continue to put in place measures to strengthen the financial sector.  In order to allow sufficient growth of the private sector credit, Government will constrain growth of public expenditure in future. This again is a matter that all of us as leaders must look into.  It is up to us to look for ways and means of reducing Government expenditure.  

Another issue was raised on inflation and it was stated that the projection of 5.8 per cent is too high. The members of the committee, hon. Capt. Guma, hon. Muguli and some other members raised this point, and they were very emphatic on it. Mr Speaker, allow me to point out that there is no basis to claim that the projected annual average headline inflation of 5.8 per cent is too high, and that it will result in lack of fiscal control by Government. Current inflation developments are demand driven.  

It is a reality that food crop prices have increased since the beginning of the last financial year. It is also true that fuel prices have gone up and that the exchange rate has faced depreciation pressures. Inflation projections for this financial year take into account the current developments.  This level of projected inflation is in line with a broad monetary growth targets. 

However, Mr Speaker, with the setting in of rains and attaining reasonably better harvests, food crops prices have started coming down, and we hope that this downward trend will continue throughout this financial year thus imparting favourably on headline inflation.  

Another issue raised by honourable members was on Government intervention in the promotion of exports.  Mr Speaker, allow me to inform this House that Government under the strategic interventions programme is already providing incentives to mitigate the negative effect of very low food crop prices and is providing for value addition in most of our products. The measures that have been taken include the following: 

1. The operationalisation of the Uganda commodity exchange.  

2. The plans to put in place the warehouse receipt system to facilitate commodity trading and price risk management. 

3. Support has been given to companies to put in place collection centres, cold storage facilities and solar driers for crops such as pineapples, passion fruits, apples, bananas, etc for the export market. 

To give just a few examples of these companies, we have Hortexa in Mpigi, Sulmafoods in Luwero, Lusaka Growers in Mubende, Confarnet in Kamuli, Confarnet again in Wakiso, Carway (Community Action for Rural Development) in Rakai and African Organic (Amfri Farms Ltd) in Luwero. These companies are all supported to process agricultural and horticultural products for export. They have been supported to construct collection centres with grading and packaging sheds, with charcoal coolers and some with solar driers, and Government is committed to continue assisting other companies that may come up in that direction.

Another measure has been to give Mubuku Irrigation Scheme support to enhance control of water for irrigation, for production, for local and export market. Resources allowing, we shall give the kind of support to other schemes throughout the country.  

Government has been involved in the value addition intervention in non-food crop sectors including, coffee, textiles and garments, manufacture hides and skins and fish processing. Companies like Tri-Star, Southern Range, Nytil, Phenix Logistics, and Lira Spinning Mill have been facilitated to add value to our cotton and improve our textile exports. Studies are being conducted by Government to identify further opportunities to enhance farm incomes and increase export earnings to the rural farmer.

Mr Speaker, and honourable members, another issue raised was the projection in money supply growth. It was stated that while money supply growth was projected to grow more rapidly this financial year than last financial year, the fiscal deficit and budget support inflows were expected to decline. The chairperson of the committee and hon. Capt. Guma Gumisiriza were very emphatic on this point.  

I wish to say that the projection of an increase in money supply growth this financial year of 14.8 percent is due to the expected increase in the private sector growth. We expect that because of the measures we intend to put in place, the private sector will grow, thus calling for more money in circulation and this will result in the projected money supply in circulation.  

There was an issue of exchange rate management and members were concerned. They were saying that there was no projection in the medium term on the money exchange rate. Hon. Capt. Guma again and other members raised this issue. I wish to state that it is not Government policy to target a particular exchange. The exchange rate is, and will continue to be, market determined.  

During the discussions with the Budget Committee, it was pointed out that following gradual depreciation of the exchange rate in the first half of the fiscal year, the shilling faced stronger depreciation pressures in the second half of the year. These pressures were primarily caused by global developments immediately preceding the war against Iraq and these global developments were beyond our control.  

In the domestic foreign exchange market, the shilling was subjected to speculation, especially during the third quarter of the fiscal year. The Bank of Uganda has fought this speculation by tightening liquidity and intervening in the foreign exchange market to support the shilling. Overall, the shilling was projected to depreciate by 7.3 percent on average basis last year against the US dollar. It is hoped that unless other unforeseen circumstances emerge, this trend will be kept more or less the same.  

Mr Speaker, there was the issue of the composition of the consumer price index. I want to inform the House that the consumer price index is based, not only on food crops as was suggested by the committee in their report, but that it covers a wide range of goods and services reflecting consumption partners throughout the country. Domestically produced food crops contribute only 27.4 percent to the consumer price index basket, while food items, which include processed foods, represent 45 per cent.

There was an issue on the management of the fiscal deficit. The chairperson of the committee, hon. Capt. Guma Gumuisiriza and some two other members were very concerned about that issue.  Mr Speaker, as honourable members are already aware, the reduction of the fiscal deficit through a reduction in the long-term reliance on donor funds will continue to be part of Government efforts to be self sustaining.  

While it may seem appealing to run large donor funded deficits to spend on social services, there is a limit to the size of the deficit, which Government can afford. This is because there are negative macro-economic consequences of financing a deficit. Financing a deficit has negative consequences on exchange rate, on interest rates and on private sector credit.  

In addition, foreign funds to finance the deficit may not be forthcoming on a long-term basis, as experience has shown. And this worldwide actual disbursement of donor assistance may depend on the mood of the donors.  So, we cannot sustainably rely on that.

Mr Speaker, it was alleged that the economy has largely been left to the invisible hand of the market. Government has and will always intervene in an open and transparent way. It is not true that Government has left the economy to the invisible hand of the market despite our policy of liberalisation. Government has intervened in sectors where it is clearly manifested that there are market failures. This is indeed demonstrated by the following:

1.Government policy on strategic interventions on production processing and marketing of our exports;

2.Setting up of the Electricity Regulatory Authority and Uganda Communications Commission to regulate the electricity and telecommunications sectors respectively.

As for petroleum, the banking sector and foreign exchange market, the proper legislation have been presented to Parliament, and we expect that when Parliament has finished their deliberations, these will be amble interventions.

As advised by Parliament, we are ready to intensify efforts aimed at regulating the economy where it is deemed necessary but without jeopardizing the policy of liberalization which everybody in this House was party to its formulation.

There was an issue on management of foreign reserves:  Members were concerned about the falling level of the foreign reserve cover. Mr Speaker, while it is true that of recent there has been a slight reduction in the level of foreign reserve cover, it is our submission that the level is still comfortably below Government’s target of five months import cover. It still remains our target that reserves ought to cover six months of imports, and we shall put measures in place to attain this target.

Another issue was raised about the reform of non-tax revenue programmes, and a number of proposals were put in place. I wish to observe that the reforms that have been undertaken so far have yielded better performance. The total non-tax revenue collections increased from Shs 17.5 billion in the financial year 2000/2001 to Shs45 billion in the financial year 2001/2002. It is projected to increase further. 

Nevertheless, allow me to say that we have noted your recommendation to bring on board more activities of the informal sector so as to further widen the tax base without distorting production and investment.  

Mr Speaker, another issue was raised on streamlining the Appropriation-in-Aid. I agree with the committee’s recommendation that Appropriation-in-Aid needs to be streamlined further. It is true that all ministries or Government departments or organisations should abide by section 17 of the Budget Act. We have written to the ministries and all organisations to comply with the Budget Act.  We shall also improve our monitoring system to ensure adhering to this provision. It is our expectation that the new Public Finance and Accountability Act will come in handy to remedy the situation even further.

There was concern on the level of domestic arrears.  It is true that domestic arrears continue to present additional challenges despite the positive steps taken by Government to reduce the already verified stock. However, I wish to point out that there has been a declining trend in domestic arrears. Domestic Arrears for goods and services has greatly reduced over the periods as follows:

• Financial year 1998/1999 the arrears were Shs 87 billions

• Financial year 1999/2000, there was a fall to Shs19 billion 

• For the financial year 2000/2001, there was a further fall to Shs 10 billions

• For financial year 2001/2002, it was reduced to Shs 8.069 billion.

We expect that with measures we are putting in place, this downward trend will continue. But as I said, challenges still remain, particularly in cases of utilities, quota awards, wages and pensions. However, we are not sleeping. We are putting in place measures to address these challenges.  Some of the measures are as follows:

• For utilities, we have asked companies to develop a pre-payment system for services so that we can only consume the services we have paid for.

• For wages we have streamlined procedures on recruitment so that we can reduce the incidence of wage arrears. 
It is our expectation again that the Public Finance and Accountability Act will improve the requirement for accounting officers to have more and better control on expenditure and make it possible for Government to live within the approved budgets.  

Mr Speaker, there was an issue on the national vision. As I clarified earlier, we still have a vision and that vision is Vision 2025. The Poverty Eradication Action Plan (PEAP) provides the link between this vision and the long and medium-term goals. A framework for effective programming, implementation and monitoring is in place. 

This vision is aimed at reducing the proportion of the population under the absolute poverty line to less than 10 percent by the year 2017. There are strategies that have been put in place to achieve these PEAP goals, and we have a number of them, as we shall be pointing out when we meet the committee while discussing our policy statement.  

There was an issue on accommodation for Government offices. Mr Speaker, we noted the observations of the committee and its recommendations. We shall consider these recommendations in the context of future privatisation processes.  

There were issues raised on tax measures. Hon. Nandala Mafabi said that there are some expatriates who do not pay tax. True, there are some expatriates who do not pay taxes. This is because they come under grant agreements signed between the Government of Uganda, and foreign agreements specifically providing that they are not supposed to pay tax. The agreements clearly spell out this fact, and the situation was recognised by Parliament when it enacted Section 22 of the Income Tax Act, 1987. This section provided for exemption of income tax for an expatriate who is working under a technical assistance agreement and whose contract stipulates that he will not be liable to pay tax.

There was another issue on indirect taxation. It is true that indirect taxes, like VAT, are borne by the consumers and not the producers or sellers.  However, honourable members should commend the sellers for collecting and remitting this tax to Government at no cost. Honourable members may appreciate that in some local governments, firms are employed to collect taxes and are paid a fee. But the producers and sellers are collecting these taxes for free, and yet when they fail to collect these taxes, they bear legal responsibility.  

There was an issue on payment of income tax. I wish to inform honourable members that information is available in Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) on the income tax returns for all taxpayers. It can be availed to any member who is interested. However, I wish to point out that the law says that such information should only be used for tax purposes.  

An issue was raised, and so many members contributed to it, as to why we had to increase taxes on fuel and licence fees. Mr Speaker, the decision to increase tax on fuel was made to bridge the gap. As honourable members may know, we had a shortfall of Shs 40 billion and we had to raise it. 

As you all know, there are important government programmes that we have to finance. Government considered tax on fuel and motor vehicle licences as the surest way of generating revenue. The increases in fuel and licences affected mostly luxurious vehicles, which consume petrol. Of course there was an increase on diesel, but this was modest. It is in this context that licence fees on goods, transport vehicles and passenger vehicles carrying more than 28 passengers were not affected by the adjustments. 

Mr Speaker, I wish to point out that it is not only Uganda that increased fuel prices, countries like Nigeria and others increased fuel prices even by 100 percent.  

Mr Speaker, let me conclude with one issue. It has been alleged that there is a fight in the Ministry of Finance on the implementation of the National Planning Authority. I wish to state emphatically that there is no fight. The ministry is committed to implementing the law as has been enacted by Parliament. The procedure has been generated, submission on the estimates of expenditure have already been made to the Speaker, and once the committee of Parliament has finalised its work, the National Planning Authority will be in place and will start its work. 

With those few remarks, I thank the honourable members.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you heard, this was a motion moved by the Minister on 12th June when the budget was read, but we had no time to deal with it when it was read. The intention of this motion is to request you to look at the budget, which was presented on 12th, and do the needful.  That is the purpose of this motion. Once we pass it, then the work will start. 

I think you have heard his explanation. You may accept it or you may not, but this is why he brought this motion. So, really, it is up to you to agree to look at his budget and cut it or increase it as the case may be. I think it is now proper for me to put the question. 

MR BAMWANGA: Mr Speaker, I am sorry to disobey your ruling, but I think hon. Rukutana –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: There is no way you can disobey my ruling, so do not say that. You can make your point.

MR BAMWANGA: Mr Speaker, thank you very much for allowing me to put my case to hon. Rukutana. Hon. Rukutana has explained all the economic indicators that form the backbone of the economic growth of this country. I think members asked you a very important question regarding the commercial banks baseline interest rates. My constituency rang to congratulate me for having asked that question about the high inflation interest rates. 

While we commend Government for controlling inflation to just a single digit, it becomes very disturbing that the commercial bank interest rates have continued to raise to double digits. As I said the other day, Mr Speaker, at the last Treasury Bills auction, the Bank of Uganda was selling the 91 days’ Treasury Bills at 18 percent while the inter-bank overnight trading was at 24 percent. 

A few months ago, some of us had to go to banks to borrow money at 16 percent; three months later, they were asking us to pay at 22 percent. The Minister must give an explanation as to why the cost of money is becoming too high. That is why the investors in the flower industry, the coffee industry and the fish industry have either been liquidated or they are being bought out by foreign investors who access money at low interest rates. 

Can you please, hon. Minister, explain to the whole of Uganda why the cost of money has become so high? I thank you.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As a student of environment, I thought I would need clarification from the Minister in regard to the answer he gave in connection with Bujagali. Next time the Minister talks about the possible source of economic growth in Uganda, he should abandon Bujagali project, save for the tourist aspect of Bujagali falls.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to give information to my Minister because many ministers speak generally about issues that are so concrete, and those of us who have spent time to concretise the matters scientifically feel offended. The inspection panel of the World Bank and international environmental groups have totally discouraged the Bujagali Power Development Project on four dimensions, and I will mention them very briefly, Mr Speaker. 

One, the generation of 250 megawatts cannot be scientifically justified in accordance with the rate at which water flows at Bujagali. Two, the cost of the dam was extraordinarily inflated and the donors got discouraged. Three, there is the corruption tendency, which has eaten up the muscles of all those involved. Four, environmentalists are worried about the loss of a spectacular waterfall, which has very high command in international tourism.  

Lastly, you cannot simply abandon the historical relevance of tradition in association to the spirits of the Kyabazingaship in Busoga. Those are issues.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, we thank the Minister for his response, but I think he would do us a lot of good if he also explained the figures he has given as economic indicators. He should explain GDP per capita in shillings, which has increased, while GDP per capita in dollars has declined. What does that mean in economic terms?  

Secondly, the Minister should explain why in the overall economic indicators, he would not include human development index as a key indicator of progress. Why did he not include the saving rates as a percentage of GDP as a key indicator of narrowing the gap between savings and investment, and therefore, a benchmark for further development? Why is the employment rate, as a key indicator of progress, not indicated on the overall economic indicators?  

Mr Speaker, it is very important for us to appreciate the Minister’s presentation and the figures to allay the anxieties of the members. If this were added to his presentation, it would make his presentation comprehensive. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MRS ZZIWA: Thank you very much. The hon. Minister has alluded to the poverty line, and I expected him to comment on a very serious complaint that was raised by the people of Kampala. Even His Excellency the President was prompted to visit Kampala on June 8th, slightly before the Budget was presented. He wanted to establish whether the figure of Shs 130,000, stated as the baseline for poverty by Bank of Uganda surveys, is actually correct for Kampala. At that time, it was evident that it was not. 

The Minister has not gone ahead to tell us how far he has gone with evaluating or reviewing this figure. I think it is very important, because the people of Kampala feel unjustly taxed when in reality they should get the actual valuation for their situation. I want that also to be considered, and I want to be assured that as this financial year starts, we get the true valuation of our situation in Kampala.

CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Speaker, it is very necessary that even you, as Chair of this Parliament and also an elected Member of Parliament, understand some of these important issues because this is the pivot of everything. 

I am happy that my brother, hon. Rukutana, has given us a lot of literature, but my attention is on the statistics. When you interpret these economic indicators, from 85/86 to-date, there is acceptance by the Minister that definitely the economy is on the decline. 

Mr Speaker, I want to draw your attention to Table 3 on the Balance of Payments. I do not think he gave you a copy. But an economy that has been growing at an interesting rate, I think the second highest rate in the entire world, after China, we have a balance of payment position from negative 194 to negative 337. That is something that we really should capture; the Balance of Payment position of a country. That is one. We do not want some of these issues to go uncommented on. 

Two, the bulk of our people in this country live in the rural areas and derive their livelihood from the agricultural sector. The Minister has told us that there has been an overall decline in the performance of the agricultural sector, by about 16.7 percent. That is the difference between 56 percent and 39 percent. However, he says that there has been a compensatory effect in the industrial sector. Of course, the difference in the industrial sector is about 9 per cent.  

Now, Mr Speaker, remember that the terms of trade of the rural majority are poor. What they sell, in price terms, is not synchronised with the prices of what they need but they do not produce. This is the point that was raised by hon. Kamuntu. When you look at the GDP at factor cost in shillings, you see a huge figure. But when you look at the GDP at factor cost in dollars, you see a miserable decline. That certainly is a sickness within the economy, which you are telling us now, but somewhere in your literature you are saying the economy is growing by impressive figures. 

A further interpretation of these figures really will reveal a lot. Let me stop here, we shall really delve into the details in the sectoral committees and bring out these issues professionally.

MRS GERTRUDE KULANY: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Minister mentioned that the banks are flooded with money. But I am seeking some clarification because some of these financial institutions do not want to serve up country. When you go for loans, they tell you that they are only confined to Kampala. Can he clarify why there is discrimination? Thank you.   

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want clarification from the Minister on the figures he has given on Table 1 on the GDP per capita. The GDP per capita is total GDP over the population.  When you give us figures in Uganda shillings - compare 1985/1986 and 2002/2003 - you realise that there is a very huge figure. But then when you come to the US dollars, the per capita income in 1985/1986 is 247 and in 2002/2003 it is a miserable figure of 224, which shows a decline in the per capita income in this country. Can you explain? 

You have been giving us wonderful figures showing that the economy is growing at a higher rate as compared to the 1985/1986. But I would also be happy if you did explain how we could come to compare the figures of 1985/86 and current year, in respect to the inflation and exchange rate. (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But really, don’t you think you will be served effectively in the sectoral committees, other than trying to get these answers now? Don’t you think so?

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, yes we would be served effectively. But since these are his figures and he has been trying to explain but did not explain, he can still explain to us so that we understand and appreciate. Thank you.

MR RUKUTANA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank you, honourable members, for raising these issues.  As I said at the beginning, we expect that most of the issues you are raising now will be handled when we are handling our ministerial policy statement. (Laughter). Some of them are so important that they call for a big debate with you, honourable members. We have promised this House that we shall give a comprehensive paper, which we shall discuss. After discussion, we expect your input to be so crucial and it will guide us in our –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think I should put the question. (Laughter).

MR MWESIGWA  RUKUTANA:  Much obliged, Mr Speaker.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: This means that next time there will be a Committee of Supply, but it will be dealing with the reports. Honourable members, as I advised, you have a number of very important issues you want to raise with various ministries, the best way to do this is to go to the sectoral committees concerned and raise these issues. 

You may not belong to a particular committee, but according to our rules you can go to any committee and participate in the deliberations. Therefore, you will be able to put questions to the minister concerned, so that your personal or local issues are answered by the minister concerned.

I think this brings us to the end of today’s business. We will therefore go according to the programme of the Business Committee. Committees will be sitting for about two weeks to deal with the estimates falling under their portfolios.  

So, I think from tomorrow, you should set up the plan and inform the officials in the ministries whom you want to interview. Maybe it may serve better if you tell them what you want, what kind of documents they should come with, so that when they come, they do not say that they did not know what to bring. So, tell them so that they bring these documents to you so that you can get very clear authoritative answers from the officers and the ministers who will be appearing before these committees. (Mr Mutuluuza rose_) Any query?

MR MUTULUUZA: Mr Speaker, thank you. I am raising a point of procedure, Mr Speaker, invoking Rule 21 of our Rules of Procedure. If you allow me, I will read it; it says: 

“Subject to any other Rule, the last two hours of a sitting on every Thursday shall be allotted to the transaction of Private Members’ business and that business shall take precedence over Government business.”  

Mr Speaker, we have issues raised by our voters, but we never get a chance of bringing them up for discussion in this House.

THE SPEAKER: That is why after I adjourned the business that was officially on the Floor, I allowed you to deal with this. Do you have any? (Laughter)

MR MUTULUUZA: Mr Speaker, the issue I am raising is directed to the Minister of State for Ethics and Integrity. I get a lot of complaints from my voters that the behaviour of the young generation, especially the girls, in as far as dressing is concerned is shaming this nation. 

Another issue they are raising is that of the Red Pepper. Mr Speaker, they are saying that we should not allow the nation to deteriorate into moral decay. Other countries do not allow nude pictures in newspapers, but in Uganda it is the order of the day, especially in that Red Pepper. I want to request the Minister concerned to clarify on that. I thank you. (Mr Ssengo rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Is it related, is your business related to his?

MR KALULE SSENGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is good the Minister of Integrity and Ethics is around. There are certain pictures, which should not be appearing in our papers. I suppose a picture that is frightening, say of someone who has been cut to pieces, should not be in our papers. Long ago such pictures would not be in the papers because these have a psychological effect, especially on children. But when you take a paper like Bukedde, they will put anything there!

If it is a man who has been murdered, they will put the picture in the papers, and these have got an effect on our young generation. They instill fear. In fact, when you put them so often in the papers, children grow up thinking that killing is a normal thing. That is why perhaps these days we have got many murders taking place. I do not know, Mr Speaker, whether you normally read Bukedde, but everyday you will not miss to see a very frightening picture in this paper. Our laws have got to be invoked so that these people are cautioned to put things, which are human, in their papers. 

Otherwise, if we do not take steps to stop this, we are going to breed a nation of murderers, a nation of people who are used to frightening things, and a nation of people who do not have any mercy. So, I raise this to support my colleague, hon. Mutuluuza, because unless steps are taken, I fear our nation is degenerating morally.  

Indeed, when we go back to the constituencies, those of us who are representing rural areas, people are complaining very bitterly. They think the Government is in support of such immorality, because on no single day has any of our ministers come out to openly caution these people. And, Mr Speaker, it is because I missed a chance to contribute on His Excellency’s address to the nation. I had wanted to complain that our President is known as a great moralist, but I do not know why he missed this point of talking about the morals in our country. I actually expected it in his State of the Nation Address because we are really degenerating! Unless steps are taken, this nation may be nothing a few years from now.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you for giving way. Mr Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from hon. Kalule Ssengo: why does he want the Minister to caution the papers and not the people who offer themselves to be pictured naked?

MR KALULE SSENGO: Mr Speaker, that is very interesting. How would these people really be cautioned when they are looking for money? The papers themselves cannot caution them. What I want to propose is that in future, if some of these papers do not change, we may have to start a national campaign appealing to people not to buy them. This may be the only way out; otherwise, the thing is getting out of hand.

MR KIWANDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is a very pertinent matter, especially here in the Central region because most of such papers normally circulate in the central region. Much as we blame the papers, I think they are the mirrors of our society. If such things were not happening in our society, I do not think the papers would be capturing them. So, if the papers are showing us what is exactly taking place in our generation, and what is taking place in our constituencies, then it is upon us leaders to go out and condemn this.

If the papers do not show this, then how do we know? What is going to indicate what is happening when these people go to the beach? You know, the papers help us - and they are a mirror. Actually, if the mirror shows you that you are naked, do not destroy the mirror. You either dress up - but you do not destroy the mirror. If the radio announces that somebody is dead, you do not destroy the radio. You could instead go and bury. If the radio announces a disease outbreak, then you will look for means of stopping that disease. 

Mr Speaker, this is our role as leaders, political and religious, to fight the immorality, but not to fight what shows you what to fight. I thank you very much.

MR ARUMADRI DRAZU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We must teach our people to start getting used to some of these things. When I was still a young boy, I went to very good Catholic schools and I had no knowledge of these things whatsoever until I joined the University of Nairobi. At the university, my roommate was not a Ugandan. He introduced me to some of this literature. At the beginning, I nearly got disoriented, but with time I found my feet again, and I am very stable. 

I am married in the Catholic Church, I have one wife and I behave myself. So, unless people come to learn about these things, when they hit it at an advanced age, there is no way that they can stabilise. Really, let us not make too much fuss about some of these things. The world is becoming a global village and people get all sorts of information. It is just a matter of sieving it through. I thank you.

MS ERIYO: Mr Speaker, psychologists tell us that we develop in stages and that the way people behave in adulthood reflects a fixation at a certain stage of their early growth. There are people who derive excitement from these nude pictures. There are people who are fixated in the oral stage and therefore cannot do without talking about things that other people would not wish to hear. Sometimes this can be very dangerous to our growing children. 

Personally, I am not happy with the way the Red Pepper and Bukedde are exposing some of these pictures. My honourable colleague says it reflects what is happening in our society, but also exposing it escalates that behaviour among people. Those who do not know about it get to see and know about it at an early age, and that is why there is a lot of defilement. People are even defiling children of three months, children of one or two years, and when they see these things they also want to explore what is happening in these pictures. It is not good!

I wish to suggest that we as a government could influence these papers to put these pictures inside so that it is only those who wish to see them, who buy these papers and see them. By just putting the papers on the street, even a passer-by who may not wish to buy the paper will glance at it and see. I think it is not good for people like me because I do not enjoy seeing those pictures. Thank you.

MR LOOTE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also share the concern of everybody in our society. The critical issue in this is the loss of our culture. Right from the nucleus of the family, if we parents do not instil the culture that we grew up with in our children, then our society is spoiled. I as a parent, if I had a girl child, I would not enjoy having her wearing a mini skirt or putting on these very tight clothes. Not my daughter, if I had any!

So, we need to go back to our culture, those who continue to retain the culture. We Ugandans are very fast in adopting a borrowed culture, and that is the Western culture. So, we have found ourselves in a world that we just borrowed. 

Also, I do not think that even this type of dressing or behaviour is promoted in the school curriculum. I have not seen it in the school curriculum -(Interruption)

MRS AKWERO ODWONG: I just wish to seek clarification from the honourable member. I know he hails from Karamoja region, and we know our daughters from there dress so well that some of their attire is worse than mini skirts. So, what does he say about that?

MR LOOTE: I would like to inform her that –(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: No, I think when he is talking about culture; he is not talking about any culture in particular. He says that so long as you are within the culture of your area, you may see things differently.

MR LOOTE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Well, I will show her more about our culture. We have a wrapper, a very long sheet. My grandmother or my mother wears a very long sheet like a gomesi. So, this business of minis is non-existent in our society. 

She has asked: what about my father? He also has to wear a very big sheet, so that it is wrapped around him. There is no part of his body that is exposed.

Secondly, let us maintain the behavioural changes that we have acquired from our institutions. If the institution continues to instil good moral culture, then I think we may get through. Otherwise, even if we said we are going to campaign through - if we went through the Internet, the newspapers, the magazines, all come in from around the world. It is only that we have to tell people what to take in and what not to take in, and respect our African culture and behaviour. But the role is ours as parents in our respective nucleus families.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I have been so interested in this moral crusade to the extent that when there was a Cabinet reshuffle I was anticipating to be the Minister of Ethics. I am saying this because we seem to have developed an inertia that ethics disappeared with the former Minister, Miria Matembe. For me as a young man, I have more than ample opportunity to see the level of immorality in this society.

Mr Speaker, theft is bad, but there are those who steal because something is readily available to be stolen, while there are those who steal because they are habitual thieves. I am using this to analyse the Red Pepper. They have made the nude pictures available and it is now serving to destroy immorality. So, it is so funny for a Member of Parliament to say that we should go ahead and look for those who are selling those nude pictures. 

I really see the exposure by newspapers like the Red Pepper; they put these nude pictures on the first page. He is providing ample opportunity for our children to get spoiled. I really pray we take this analysis. At the same time, you cannot kill the messenger because he brought bad news. So, it is real irony. 

As hon. Kiwanda was saying, reporting bad news on radio would not mean that Radio Simba is bad simply because it reported the death of your mum. The challenge remains to us as Members of Parliament. A country like France has very strong privacy laws. 

Look at what is happening in the Big Brother Show. Yes, it is even being broadcast in the Parliamentary Lounge, for your information. This is first class immorality! Your children at home are right now watching live sex on TV in the name of Big Brother! The moment we do not struggle to have protective laws, then morality will be a question of the family. You will just have to put a lock on the television so that your children cannot access certain channels when you are in Parliament. 

But I still pose a challenge to the Minister of Ethics and Integrity: the situation is very bad out there. I at one time participated in the arrest of some nude dancers called, “Amanda’s Angels”. I spent 35 minutes at the CPS lobbying with the Police to accept that there was a necessary cause to have these ladies arrested. They gave me two personnel officers to go and inspect the scene and find out if it was as bad as I perceived it. Those Police officers were there for 20 minutes, and they were almost taken up by the show. (Laughter) They were taken up with these nude dancers until I had to remind them that, “Oh, you might not have a case to report. Can we get back to the station?” 

When we got to the Police station, I even threatened to sue the Police for conspiring with these dancers to stage nude shows in an open place like Rock Gardens. So they gave me three Pick-ups full of Police officers and we came and executed the arrest. 

The evidence was overwhelming when they were parading these girls at press time in the morning. Many of them were even drunk, and there is very high trade in bangi in Uganda, and also trade in many other illegal drugs. I do not know the English name for bangi; scientists should help me. There are open markets for opium in Uganda; 30 percent of the youths in pubs are high on opium. So it is really unfair to us young men, who would be here in 30 years time, to see how our colleagues are getting on at that pace. 

In South Africa, for every five men you come across, three have mapengo; they do not have teeth. Those are some of the indicators of the levels of crime in any society - because they were involved in a fight. So, I urge our Minister of Ethics to do something. I put in a case; I made a statement citing personal interest in having those people prosecuted, but they walked away from Police. 

The next day when I was at CPS, Asumani Mugenyi was saying that they released them because they arrested them for their safety; that the public wanted to beat them up. So now that the public was not there, they could go home; and they went home! 

They were staging a show in Mbale last week, and people almost lynched them. And if you look at the kind of attire that they had taken to the stage, it was also in the Red Pepper - you cannot believe where this country is heading! 

Honourable minister, the challenge is enormous. It is not enough just to be saved. You must have some ethics and morality feelers on your back. You must also come to these pubs and have a look. Seeing is believing. Thank you so much.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to give some information to the House. It is not only the Minister of Ethics and Integrity that is concerned, but also this media issue falls directly under the Ministry of Information. The Media Council is there, which is supposed to address this. The Minister of Information should be in a better position to explain this moral decay in our society. 

I remember before we went on recess, a number of people demonstrated and came and presented a petition to the Speaker. The Speaker handed their petition to the Committee of Presidential and Foreign Affairs. The Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs is busy scrutinising this petition and will be reporting to the House, we are yet to call the Minister and the Media Council to address that. 

I am saying this because the chairperson of the committee is not here, and neither is the deputy chairperson of the committee. The Speaker has already delegated this work to the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs. 

However, I must add that I have heard my colleagues here talk about the display of nude pictures of people who have been massacred and killed. In the developed countries, there are gazetted places where these pictures of the nude women in magazines and newspapers are sold. If you are to buy them you must be above 18 years. 

So, if the Red Pepper wants to continue, they should have a gazetted place and there must be strict laws. It is only those above 18 and are interested, who can buy these papers in this country. We know the issue of morality is as old as the olden days in the Bible, when it talked of Sodom and Gomorrah, but we must address it wholesomely. Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Maj. Tom Butime): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In my contribution, I would like to thank the honourable member who brought this matter up. It is a very serious issue and I hope that this House will one day give it time for a proper and serious debate. 

First of all, this House, especially the Sixth Parliament, did pass laws on the media. The Minister can look at them and see how he can help the country. We do not have censorship laws here, our society is free and censorship is always hated and disliked by democracies. Newspapers have editorial policies, the New Vision has its editorial policy, the Monitor has its editorial policy and the Red Pepper and others; all of them have editorial policies. 

Editorial policy explains and says what a paper is up to and what it wants to achieve. There is the Media Council, which the Sixth Parliament did set up in the law, and that Media Council can handle any matter where there is indiscipline, where there is immorality and whatever. But the problem we have today, especially in developing countries, is the explosion of information technology. The Internet, CNN, and M-Net, there are so many channels now. As we sit here in Parliament, those children who have not gone to school are busy having a free day in the sitting rooms watching sex live, is it not? 

The difference of hours among countries also affects us. When it is 5 o’clock here, it is morning somewhere else, is it not? When the children come back from school, others have gone to sleep somewhere else in Japan; things like that. So, there is such a difference in time that when films on the screen are for the elderly, the children in Uganda can access them because of the time difference. The theatres, the Big Brother, all of these have invaded the sitting rooms and the bedrooms of the parents of Uganda.

Therefore, the youths are being raped by this alien culture, vulgar culture, open sex and indiscipline on the screens of television, and the parents cannot help because they are not home. They do not even know how to control - because there is a gadget that you can use to stop a certain programme being shown on the screen of your TV. Some parents do not even know that gadget, and they do not know how to control it. 

Therefore, there is free access of this vulgar culture, this sex on the television screens and the theatres, and the nightclubs where the honourable youth MP from Agago went. He is allowed to go there because he is a young man, he is still recruiting, and he is still in the field. So, there is nothing wrong with going there. But he is a vigilante as far as Uganda’s discipline and culture is concerned. He must be commended that as a Member of Parliament he could go out of his way to report what he had seen to be immoral to the Police. I commend him because his father was one year behind me in school. I am really happy that such a son is in Parliament; I should bring him in the Movement I think –(Laughter)   

Finally, some of the families in Uganda do not have very strong backgrounds. Some schools do not have strong discipline systems There are schools, which have strong discipline and foundations. Some of the distinguished Members of Parliament have been to those schools, including seminarians and others. But not every family has that opportunity of growing, nourishing, developing a disciplined child.

The unfortunate thing is that the child may even go to a school, which has a poor environment and does not allow the child to develop well. We shall rely on the parent, the family and the school where that child goes to, to develop a society where children can shun nudity, where a girl feels by herself that she must appear properly dressed in society. This is unlike the one who will dress to attract attention, to cause murmurs and to be followed as she walks. I hope that as families become stronger and children get better developed by the family or parent, this country will be happier. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank our colleague who has raised the issue. It is obviously – I do not know what words to use. The situation we are seeing in the papers, on television is perhaps worse than war in terms of where our society is going. But the question of the Red Pepper, for example, is just one aspect. 

If we are going to have the morality we need for our society, we have to look at a package of conduct by the elders, by the MPs, by the Ministers and the youths as well. Some aspects are mild, some are extreme, but if the whole package is in the same direction, we are definitely heading for trouble. 

This morning I was talking to a former schoolmate of mine, who is divorced. She was telling me that she could not change and do away with her former husband’s name because her daughter in primary 4 came and said, “Mummy, I want you to save me from embarrassment. Although you have divorced my father, please keep the name because at school my colleagues are going to keep asking me why you changed your name.” 

This is a child in primary 4. This has something to say about the strength of that family. Even in primary 4, the child is embarrassed at school about being asked why the mother does not have the name of the father. 

The point I want to make to colleagues is that some people for example go to these talk shows and you hear them addressing seniors in very absurd language. They abuse a head of state, abuse a minister, abuse an elder, and we say that is okay and that the radio should proceed! Yes, there is this extremity of the Red Pepper but even these other radio stations should know that abusing each other is part of the bad culture. We must really give the example. 

At family level, much as I gave that example of the young girl in primary 4, the family cannot fight this war alone, it is impossible. That is because the child may – hon. Butime said you have the technology to switch off the television - but the child goes to school. This child goes to town and to the nightclubs, which we have allowed to be out there. We have to work out a package of measures and all of us leaders should accept this package not only in law but also go out and work for it. A law in a population, which popularly believes something else will not work; it is useless. How many Pick-ups will hon. Otto take to the clubs to pick everybody, where will you put them? 

So, my contribution to this important debate is that we must condemn this. But as leaders, we must set the example also; how we relate to each other, what language we use to each other and to other people, then we get the moral authority to be able to tell other people – (Interruption)

MS MUGERWA: Mr Speaker, I am forced to stand up on a point of order and find out whether it is proper for the NPC to confuse the House. What was brought here is a very important issue, an issue of immorality. He should not confuse immorality with political aspirations or whatever. Let us stick to that issue, which is, protecting our children. 

Is it really in order for him to divert the House from the real issue and then go into politicking? Let politicians talk about politics, but let us stick to the other issue, which is out of hand as far as Government, the nation and all of us are concerned. I have already raised this issue with the Kattikiro of Buganda when we met him, because that Bukedde paper - I was amazed by the name itself. I was abroad when I read in the paper that our Kabaka gave that name Bukedde bandojje, and it was a very interesting name. Now you find his paper is just misused. 

We want to attack this war of immorality. Let us stick to that. After that we shall talk about politics. Mr Speaker, is the NPC in order to divert the issue - as a parent - and then bring in politics instead of discussing the culture attitude here in Buganda? Is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Originally, we were talking about immorality as brought out by hon. Mutuluuza. But that was narrow. It was a pigeon in a wider subject, and the subject is behaviour. Once behaviour is proper, then even the other one will be handled. So, he was talking about a wider issue than yours. Yours is narrow in the sense that you are concentrating on immorality, but he is talking about the wider thing to encompass immorality.

DR KIYONGA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. Really, I have nothing more useful to add. I did condemn what the Red Pepper is doing, but that is not all. We must go to the bigger contest. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE, ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Mr Tim Lwanga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Ladies and gentlemen, I have been very sick but I am okay now, so if my voice is not coming out well, you will excuse me. I would like to thank you for your concern about immorality in our society. Since I became the State Minister for Ethics and Integrity – as hon. Otto said, I do not know whether it is because I am saved, but I believe the President thought that I had something to contribute to this area. (Applause).   

The issue of immortality in our society is killing the society, and the concerns as expressed by various Members of Parliament this afternoon say it all. All the contributions that have been made are appreciated. All I can say at this moment is that our ministry is concerned about the various newspapers like Bukedde and Red Pepper. In actual fact, this morning we had a brief discussion with the Minister of Information and we are laying out strategies on how to put things right. (Applause). You are not going to hear very much in the papers. I am not going to be making announcements everyday, but you just wait and see. We are on the right track and if laws need changing, we will change them.  

Mr Speaker, we are going to look at these laws and see how best we can create a Uganda that we will all be proud of in the future when we are old and there are young trees that are coming up. We want to see these young people get better moral standards than we do.  

One of the Members of Parliament said that it looks like Government is supporting immorality. I want to ask a question that you, as leaders, what have you done about it, other than talking? Why do you not go back to your constituencies and get people to demand for ethics and integrity from you first? And here I am talking very seriously. How many MPs for example have – it has been alleged many times that some of us had to even give bribes to get to Parliament! Have we asked for integrity from those members of our society who have actually given us votes after we have given them kitu kidogo to elect us to come to Parliament? Let our society demand integrity from us and we will demand morals from our children and build a society that we will all be proud of.  

Last weekend I read in the newspapers about a Mr Alex Tukwasibwe, I think he is from Rukungiri. This is a teacher at Bishop Mazolidi Primary School – it is in Rukungiri I think – and he misused boys! The boys were taken to police, and they made statements. When the man was presented before the magistrate, he was acquitted for lack of evidence. That tells you there is a lot wrong with our society. 

My plan is, as Minister of Ethics and Integrity; that we have got to go back to the roots. We have got to start from the bottom and start building again. I have got the support of so many people in this respect. We are soon going to start radio programmes to rebuild the society. We must rebuild it and together, and we can. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. We thank the hon. Member for Mawokota North for bringing up this issue, which has been handled, and we hope solutions will be found to remedy the situation that is deplorable. 

As I said earlier, we shall adjourn so that you concentrate, in your respective committees, on scrutinising the policy statements. We shall take about two weeks after which we shall assess the situation and let you know exactly when we shall convene to receive the reports. This will depend on how fast we complete the reports, so that we have business to handle. 

Although we will not be having plenary sessions during the period, I appeal to all of you to attend the meetings of your committees so that when we are back here we are all aware of what has gone on in our respective committees and can defend the reports. With this I adjourn the House sine die. 

(The House rose at 4.52 p.m. and adjourned sine die.)

