Tuesday, 19 July 1994

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

(The Deputy Vice-Chairman, Mr Ekemu, in the Chair.)

PRAYERS 

MOTION

(Debate continued.)

DR TIBERONDWA:  Point of order.  Just for us to continue or to start debate on this important subject without a quorum in the House.

THE CHAIRMAN: A quorum is not realised; so I adjourn for 15 minutes.

(The Council adjourned for 15 minutes.)

MR AMIN ONZI:  Thank you, Mr Chairman for having given me this opportunity to air my views about the Motion the Minister of Finance moved on the revised revenue and expenditure estimates and the Budget proposals for revenue and expenditure for the Fiscal Year 1993/1994 and 1994/1995, respectively.  

Allow me before I air my views about the above Motion, to first give my personal view on our former Presidents of State.  I would like to request the government to guarantee amnesty to former presidents e.g. Milton Obote -(Applause)- Godfrey Binaisa, and Idi Amin Dada to return to Uganda and witness the type of Uganda we are building.  I know the point I am raising is very sensitive and serious one.  But to same time, I will give one major reason for my request to the government.  I strongly believe if these Heads of State remain in exile, we shall never have a stable Uganda.  To be exact, these former leaders have supporters who are ready to do anything for their coming back.  

For example, the war in Eastern Uganda and the war Northern Uganda.  We read in papers that there Amin’s men are fighting along ousted the Rwandan Army and also Sudanese Army, who after helping this government to achieve their victory over the rebels, will then turn against Uganda.  There is no smoke without fire. So, if these Heads of State are here in Uganda, some of these problems will be solved.  Let us forgive them and guarantee them opportunity like former President Tito Lutwa. 

Coming to the Motion moved by the Minister of Finance.  For the Fiscal Year 1993/94 and 1994/95, I would like to repeat my request once more for roads, electricity and railway.  I quote from His Excellency, the President’s opening Speech for the 8th Session of 16th June, 1994: “I am working very hard to convince financiers to help us with extending the tarmacked roads to Arua...”

I would like to urge the government to be serious with the above issue.  This issue of Arua road has been said several times.  This time I am sure - I am confident with the good image of Uganda Government abroad.  The Government will be able to secure financiers.  I assure the government, that Arua District is well endorsed with Agricultural Products line simsim, rice maize, groundnuts, tobacco, cotton but mention a few.  So, with a good road and a railway line up to Arua, we in Arua shall be able to supply food to other parts of Uganda.  For example, famine stricken areas.  The government should also take the electricity issue very serious.  (Applause) Once again, I assure the government with sufficient supply of electricity to West Nile Region for 15 years is an example.  I believe to grant - extend western shall be reliable economically.  

For instance, small-scale industries and other projects will emerge and hence creating employment opportunities.  I would also like to say something little about Commercial Banks.  I shall be specific on this point.  Before Yumbe Branch was closed on the 18th May, this year, I received a note from the Director before the closure of this Branch and I responded promptly writing to the Director on 6th May, 1994 to not close the bank but allow me ample time to go and mobilise the Aringa people to decide the bank’s closure: but the Managing Director did not reply me up to now.  

So, I would like to repeat what my colleagues have said that this UCB should revise its decision and re-open these banks. (Applause)  I assure you, Mr Chairman and Minister of Finance, Aringa people are very much disappointed.  How can one walk from Yumbe to Koboko - about 24 miles to bank every day or every week.  That is expensive, Sir.  

I would like to thank the Minister for changes he has made towards the crop of cotton.  I would like to remind the Minister that cotton was our first cash crop in the West Nile Region.  In those years cotton contributed much to the development of this region and it was the main source of income to West Nile Region, especially the people of Aringa use cotton to pay taxes, buy food, clothes, pay school fees from the cash they earn form cotton. I would like to inform the Minister that in order to boost the morale of the Aringa people, the government should reconstruct Dacha Ginnery. 

Lastly but not least, I would like to take this opportunity to inform the government that West Nile contributed much to the peace now prevailing in this country. In the late eighties, West Nilers waged war against the Obote 11 Government; not because that they wanted leadership but because they wanted their freedom and their rights.  (Applause) This was promoted by lack of human respect; looting properties, destroying houses, but to mention a few.  To be specific, Aringa County suffered most as a result of the above causes.  Aringa County became a battle zone.  People lost lives, property and some things like cows, goats and cash money to fight Obote II Government. I am saying here that there is no difference from West Nile Region and Luwero Triangle in as far as contribution of peace in this country is concerned. 

I am, therefore, requesting the government to assign a special programme for West Nile Region, especially Aringa County.  I am saying this because Aringa County was the place of war and a lot of destruction took place there.  

I know, I will be asked about NURP. I am saying, therefore, if Luwero Triangle did not wait for NURP why can Aringa County not be considered in a special case of West Nile Region?  Therefore, Mr Chairman, this region needs a special Minister like Luwero Triangle.  (Applause)

Lastly, I would like to request the Government to reconstruct Arua Air Port.  If this Air Port is constructed, Uganda Government will benefit much out of it.  For instance, the people entering Uganda from Arua, like Zaire, like Sudan, will use it and it generates revenue to the Government. I thank you very much. (Applause)

CAPT. GASATURA (Rushenyi County, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I wish to support the Motion on the Floor, but I want to start with the issue of famine in our country, disappointed somewhat that some senior officials in Government particularly the Prime Minister, the other day, blasted his colleague, the Minister of Agriculture, for not availing him or the Government proper data and information in advance.  And looking at the Background to the Budget right on page 1, first paragraph overall Uganda economy, which is said to have grown by 7.2 per cent. It states in part, ‘growth is expected to put slower in 1993/94 mainly due to slower growth in food crop sub-section which accounts for more than 36 per cent of the GDP;’ and they go on to say, this is mainly due to the poor rains in 93/94 as compared the good rains before that.  

I would certainly have expected the hon. Prime Minister to come across that if the Minister of Agriculture did not give it to him.  I go on to page 8 of the same Back Ground to the Budget, Agriculture right at the top. ”Agriculture registered the modest 1.7 per cent per annum 93/94; and this compares with the negative 1.4 in fiscal year 1991/92 because of draught, and the record 9.2 per cent 1992/93 which boosted over all output to an increase of 7.2. This good performance in agriculture sector in Fiscal Year 1992/93 had a significant impact on over all CPI, which declined from 66 to 2 per cent; “ and you go on again to mention the issue of draught and impact on our food production.  Way back in April, I believe the hon. Prime Minister and other Members should have got a copy from the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning, the 17th issue of key economic indicators.  

I just wish to mention briefly again, that is on roman page 2, which says in part, “the continuous rise in headline inflation is caused by volatile behaviour of food crop prices which dropped 22.6 per cent in the 12 months proceeding up to June 1993 but then it rose.” They go one really every Member of Government should have had a good chance at the information. That is not to exonerate the Ministry of Agriculture for failure to cater for food storage.  Regionally and even by the home.  The noise that is being made now by all of us -(Interruption)

MRS SEKITOLEKO:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I will not tire to tell the public what my job is.  The job of Ministry of Agriculture, Animal, Industry and Fisheries is production of food.  For as long as you have the Ministry in charge of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives, that is the Ministry under which the major silos somebody has been talking about actually fall.  It is the Ministry in charge of Trade distribution and the alike.  When and if there is a disaster, that is the Ministry of Labour and Social Welfare.  I do not distribute food.  You all have your books where all the votes are.  Has anybody ever seen a vote under me for food distribution?  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

CAPT. GASATURA:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, and I will thank my Friend the hon. Minister of Agriculture but if she had hung on, I just wanted to mention that it is unfair on the other hand for the Ministry of Agriculture to produce and push for a level of production and on the other hand the Ministry of Commerce and Industry goes ahead and markets just about everything.  While she says it is not her responsibility, I do believe, I maybe mistaken subject to her correction that the silos are under her Ministry.  Okay, I apologize for that. (Interruption)

MR OPIO: Point of information. Thank you very much Mr Chairman. I would like to give information to the current speaker holding the Floor. I have been listening to the contribution of the Member but I have been at points actually to internalize exactly what he wants to say.  Because he is saying the Leader of Government Business who is the Prime Minister blamed a Minister responsible for Agriculture on food production and at the same time he said that the Leader of Government should have known the information as provided for here in the Background to the Budget.  But I think in my view, the point he wants to make is that the Minister for Agriculture cannot exonerate herself for failure to anticipate the hunger that we have experienced, because we have a department called early warning.  That department of early warning should at least have given a warning.

CAPT. GASATURA:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. We are now in the eighth and last Session of Uganda’s Fifth Parliament.  Being the last Session, we ought to reflect upon our achievements and our failures. I want just to touch on a few.  In 1986, the National Resistance Movement Government upon ascending to power, set for itself a minimum Ten Point Programme; and it would only be fair to look at that.  

Number one is democracy, and they can get many tickets.  (Laughter) The Historical National Resistance Council of 1986 expanded itself to include us. So, the Historicals now included the elected, now the elected, we are also becoming Historical while some may even become history.  The building of the RC system has exonerated the issue of democracy under NRM.  

I am saying this so that Members of Government may feel at ease because time of budget is a time of reckoning, we are going to call them to account but I want them to know we do recognise definite achievements; and of course the recent election to the CA is another testimony of NRM’s pursuit towards democracy. 

It is not necessarily true that it was entirely free and fair exercise.  It may have been fair but not really free when it cost one of my Friends Shs180, 000,000/=. (Laughter) In fact, it was not even fair when at the end of it -(Interruption)

MR BWANIKA BBALE:  Point of clarification.  the speaker has made a very serious statement in this House and some of us happened to be contestants in the election, and so many allegation have been labelled against us that we really used a lot of money.  Now, is it possible for him to clarify to us and maybe substantiate as to who exactly spent that tune of Shs180, 000,000/= because I am also his Friend. He said one of his Friend I am also his Friend, so I do not know whether actually he means me. So, I want to really be clear about his allegation.  Thank you very much. (Laughter)

CAPT. GASATURA:  Mr Chairman, since it was not a point of order, Mr Chairman, I can only assure hon. Bwanika Bbale, my Friend that he probably would not be able to spend Shs180, 000,000 -(Laughter)- and now that he says why not he brings himself into the bracket.  But of course for his benefit and for the benefit of my - I saw recently that distinguished hon. Delegates by the help of my Friend the Brigadier smuggled in a 50 per cent increase on allowances supposedly to cover their expenses. I wish -(Interruption)

MR KATEGAYA: Point of information. Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Gasatura that there is no such a thing that has been passed by CA to increase their allowances.  There are some suggestions in the back room that is all. It has not been passed by the CA.

CAPT. GASATURA:  It seems a lot of -(Interruption)

CAPT. BABU: Point of information. Mr Chairman, I would like to thank him for allowing me to give him information. The CA, since they started, have not discussed, even for one day, their welfare; and the proposals which you talking about are proposals that have been brought in by different people; and these proposals have to be considered and people have to sit down and discuss them.  These are proposals and they are not things that the CA has discussed.  However, they would like to thank the NRC because whenever, the NRC increases we automatically get it.  Thank you.

CAPT. GASATURA:  Mr Chairman, allow me to proceed  -(Interruption)

BRIG. MOSES ALI:  Point of information. Thank you, Sir, I want to inform the hon. member on the Floor and indeed the entire Members of the House that in my other capacity from there, I have discovered that the animosity creeping, among the Members of the two houses. There is an ill-feeling, and people talk against each other for no reason.  The CA there sometimes refers to this NRC House as people who are out-dated or who are greedy and who are so like that.  Now, the same thing here, I think we have according to our status and what we do, we are above this petty, petty things like people who are being - here we legislators and there we are making Constitution. So, we should avoid pointing fingers as if we are school children and so on.  This is degrading us and making us as if we are not meaning business.  So, I want to warn the Members to refrain from recriminating each other.

MRS KIRYAPAWO: Point of order. Mr Chairman, the CA in NRC, instead of what we have on the Floor.

CAPT. GASATURA:  Mr Chairman, I insist that hitherto by constitution, this House is still the legislature and this is where the budget is supposed to be discussed, unlike hon. Babu who is saying they are going to discuss it. No, it is here; and they can make recommendations.  

But, a few words have flown here and there called robbery, theft, embezzlement, and misappropriation of public funds.  I want to deal with misappropriation. Misappropriation is not necessarily theft or embezzlement.  Misappropriation, is appropriating monies for a different purpose other than budgeted for by this House; and in chapter 149, of the Public Finance Administration and Control Act, as amended, Government is not supposed to cut a budget of any department that has been passed by this House before consultation and approval; and here again I look at certain important ministries, again Agriculture. 

I would like to compare agriculture with manufacturing industry.  If we had commitment, the political will to invest in agriculture, today we should be exporting more food than we are importing now.  We should be exporting to Rwanda, to Zaire.  I know the Minister is about to say we are not but go to Busia and of course you know we are in deficit of food.  Mr Chairman, the region is short of food (Interruption)

MRS SEKITOLEKO:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I am in a dilemma because when my wonderful supporter who is supposed to have information starts giving misinformation, then I am on shaky ground.  As we talk now Ugandans exporting food.  If I can speak in specific figures, the amount of food that was bought by one organization alone, that is World Food Programme was worth US$ 20,000,000 in just one year.  So, we are not importing, we are exporting.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR KANYOMOZI: Point of information. Mr Chairman, I thought at the beginning, the hon. Member was complaining about the Minister of Commerce and Trade in exporting food.  Now, I wonder which line he is going to take next, since he is now complaining about non-existence of export. I think let us be consistent in this House so that we are worth the name we are.

MR MWANDHA:  Point of clarification. Mr Chairman, I am getting a little bit lost because various Members of Government are giving different answers.  Now as a citizen, how do I know whether there is a system in Government which controls the export of food out of this country so that there is enough left for the citizens of this country to feed on so that there is no famine?  It seems to me that one Ministry is responsible for reduction, another Ministry is responsible for export and the Ministry which does production does not know what the Ministry of export does and even that, that exports, does not know how much food there is, and at the end of the day, although Uganda produces a lot of food, people go hunger because there is no food, because there is no policy in how much food should be exported; and how much food should be left behind for people not to suffer from famine.  So, I think Government has got to clarify whether it has a policy on the export of food to the extent that actually some food can be left behind for people to food on.

MR KAIJUKA: Point of information. Mr Chairman, I would like to take this opportunity to inform the distinguished hon. Member who has just been speaking to the House and inform him and the House that definitely Government has a coherent straightforward policy on marketing.  If I may say so, the essence of it, and I want the hon. Members to not only be clear but to take this opportunity to explain to their constituents.  The minute you decide to liberalize as a policy, in case some Members have not understood what that means, it means that the future, the destiny of whatever you do in terms of production, in terms of marketing, is in hands of that private entrepreneur who is in business of farming. 

So, what that means is that the minute you produced, and you are free to produce anything, and I think my colleague the minister of Agriculture can ascertain that, we are free to produce anything and make market, any quantities that you may wish to have.  However, in some areas where we have people who definitely do not even know what they want, in terms of food security, I dare say, as I said the other day, it becomes important for the local leaders to make use of bye-laws for example to make sure that they retain some food for - So, I wanted to explain -(Interjection and interruption)

MR BUTAGIRA: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, I am raising on a point of order, Mr Chairman. Before I raise this point, there seem to be misunderstanding by the Minister of what hon. Mwandha was saying.  It is not question of Members not knowing the essence of privatization, this we know, and we know market forces, what he was saying is that, is there a policy?  And now, Is it in order for the hon. Minister responsible for marketing to throw the ball to the local authorities, when what is being asked is whether there is a national policy of which he is the Minister responsible?

THE CHAIRMAN:  The hon. Minister was in the process of explaining and I am sure - you are in order.

MR KAIJUKA:  Thank you, Sir.  I appreciate, your very wise guidance because it comes in very timely to bring us down to what we are discussing.  Hon. Members if I may say this, I am saying our policy on marketing and I am repeating this, is best on free market operation.  In other words, if you are a producer for goodness sake, set your own target on how much land you want to cover, how much you want to produce how much you want to export; and having said so, it is a clear policy, because some governments, that are contrarily run, would otherwise go and produce for the people decide how much people should eat and how much to market, that we do not do! We have opted for free market, however, where inevitably we have areas, perhaps where some Members of Parliament have not - perhaps have been involved with their local leaders to advice their people where we have shortages Government then deliberately only in rare cases of emergencies comes into buy food -(Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is it in order for the Minister of Trade, Commerce and Marketing -(interjection)- is it in order when the hon. Minister knows that even in countries like France, Britain and especially in France, rioted because they wanted to liberalise the agricultural industry.  So, is it in order for the hon. Minister to start talking as though everything in the world is just okay and it is liberalised, when these are very advanced countries and they do not allow liberalization.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, this is neither in the year or which ever of those countries, this is Uganda, I think the Minister is perfectly in order.

MR OKURUT:  Point of order, Mr Chairman, is it in order for the Minister of Trade and Industry to mislead this House, when the President the Head of the NRM Government did state, that this question of having free economy must some how be arrested, that Government should find all possible ways of having some breaks so that we can organise our development economy?

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members order, please.  Hon. Members, I think you need to be patient and give the Minister time to put what he wants in order.  Hon. Okurut could you take your Seat?

MR OKURUT: I am asking the indulgence of the Chair - ruling, because this is what I am stating, is in the President’s Speech.  It is there, I can produce it, and I am saying that is it in order for a Minister to mislead this House about free economy when the President himself has said, that we should have a break on this question of economy, and free economy.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, it is possible that hon. Minister was going to tell you how liberalization was going to be arrested.  I still rule the hon. Minister is in order.

MR KAIJUKA:  Mr Chairman, I want to ask the indulgence of the House to be patient so that, I can explain our policies vis-a-vis marketing of not only food crops but also all other crops.  May I say that our policy is clear; we have encouraged our Ugandan farmers to produce as much food as possible, so that they can sell it not only locally but also externally.  

Having said that, this is in line with our liberalization policy, that does not mean that we are blind to the problems from time to time, where Government intermediates maybe called for and it does come in; and I want to put this on record, that this is not the first time, the Government has come in to buy food from some parts of the country and take it some deficit food producing country.  That is not in dispute; in other words, when you are dealing with a famine or you are dealing with food shortage situation, these are rare occurrence that Government is obviously in position and always does come in to intervene.  But that does not negate the essence of policy, i.e. almost liberating and liberalising, energises and forces on production.  And if I may say so -(Interruption)

MR KAWANGA:  Point of order. Mr Chairman, in view of the fact that, that point of information should be brief and to the point.  Is the hon. Minister in order to make a whole policy statement on his Ministry in such way that we have even lost track of the last speaker whom he was informing, I think it would have been better if he made a real statement, which we can debate at later stage but, point of information is becoming a whole speech, instead, Mr Chairman.

MR CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, could you please, be precise and wind up?

MR KAIJUKA: Thank you, Sir.  I am always precise, let me end by reminding Mr Friend hon. Wanendeya, for example that from the time I was born in this country to-date, I have always known families growing food for themselves, in other wards, if that is not private, I am yet to understand what private is.  I am just interdicting so that we can debate that, that one afterwards. Finally, I want to assure, Members of Parliament and the country, that Uganda had better stop bickering and we get on to production and we market and export, because that is the key, to everything we do.  Thank you, Sir.

CAPT. GASATURA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I hope I can regain my time, as you have been giving them yourself.  Obviously, hon. Kaijuka has been always too long, and I would like to catch up  -(Interruption)

MR BUTAGIRA:  Point of order.  I am rising on a point of order.  Is the hon. Minister of Commerce, Trade and Industry in order to use unparliamentary language to refer to us, that instead of producing, we are there bickering; is this type of arrogance on the part of the Minister -(Laughter)- is this type of arrogance acceptable.  Two, is he in order to use unparliamentary language in this House and can he withdraw that expression, so that this House has dignity.

MR CHAIRMAN: The hon. Minister was put to explain at great length, and if he uses the word bickering, there is nothing unparliamentary about that.  

MR BASOGA NSAJU:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, I rise on a point of order to the Chair directly.  We do respect you, and we would really likely to respect your guidance, but if you do not make precise rulings, when a point of order comes, it kind of disorganises.  So, I would like to appeal to you to be firm, you have our support and make short precise rulings without being bias on any side, so that we can spear this House properly.  Thank you very much.

MR CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, of course, you know that if, it is anything to intimidate on the integrity of the Chair, and you know the normal process to follow.  I feel I am convinced, that I am being as impartial as possible to all of you.  Let me take this note to caution that, as much as possible, hon. Members you should try to retain from too many calls of order which may not necessarily be very useful to our Debate I would now like to call upon hon. Gasatura to please, wind up your - order, order, please, hon. Mwandha first take your Seat.  There is no way hon. Mwandha you can raise a point of order, when I have just ruled on one order, and there is nobody on the Floor.  Hon. Gasatura please go ahead.

CAPT. GASATURA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman, I was saying that in the long and winding information from hon. Kaijuka, there seems to be a stage indicating he wanted to catch up for the long time he has been away, but I want to point in the Ten Point Programme, I had been mentioning number five, the economy, independent, integrated, self-sustaining economy, we have learnt and we have taught, but from the exchange of different ministries, people referring indeed to the Speech by the His Excellency the President, the Prime Minister, there seems to be some disallocation which may render yourself sustaining into a self-destroying economy, whereby the issue of we are in fact exporting, is only academic, not less academic than the other old women, the other day in RC  whose goat had been poaching on somebody’s garden and she had only one, and they told her, you go and sell it and buy the rope, and she did, it seems we are selling all the food or most of it, just to academically say and record that we so export.  Mr Chairman, (Interruption)

MRS OPOTI:  Point of information. Thank you, Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the speaker on the Floor and our Minister of Trade and Industry, that it is high time I think we need a food authority just like the cotton, whatever is coming into place, the coffee development something, so that in the process, we shall have this body knowing how much food has been produced, knowing how much should be exported and how much should be kept in place for Uganda.  Thank you.

MR DRATRATRU: Point of information.  I would like to inform the former speaker of one important thing, what is bringing us to confusion is lack of policy.  I do agree with the Minister of Trade that the Government Policy is clear that that we liberalise and Ugandan that is productive is allowed to market what it produces, I think this is a clear policy of a Government, but the question is here, who is this one who is lacking food, and what arrangement are for him to be rescued when there is shortage?  This is what we are lacking, I am saying the Minister responsible is not the Minister of Agriculture nor for Trade, he should have been the Minister of Social Services.  

Provision has been made to monitor in all situation Uganda will be, is there famine, there is a whole Ministry and a body establish, I think it should be this House to provide a source to provide - to make a provision, so that when the country is monitored that there is emirate shortage of food.  Social Affairs should be provided a vote to buy food for the hungry nation.  This is only provision I think I see reliable, but otherwise, there is no Ministry, which we are persecuting for the false, which are forth coming.  Thank you very much.

CAPT. GASATURA:  Mr Chairman, you notice that for most of them, you are the one who graciously gave them room rather than I. So I prayed for my time.  I say the Government should come out with a policy of protecting our people on famine.  I say the academic issue of selling their goats and the ropes is not right.  Not any more than again quoting from the key economic indicators where in domestic credit now Government claims in January, 1994, top position had a net bit of it of Shs 6.5 billion and yet the government still owes our businessmen money outstanding for several years.  But for academic purposes, they have a net deposit and they clap for themselves.

I was taken back with several others when recently at Heroes Day, His Excellency the President and indeed Chairman of this House announced that it was our weakness the local leaders.  After saying they have put instructions in place and hon. Kisamba Mugerwa mentioned the Entandikwa and he got an immediate Shs6 billion assigned although we have not seen it here.  He complained that we have never articulated back.  But from 1989, we have mentioned the issue of an agricultural bank.  Because the present and previous interests can only work for traders not for a rancher or an agriculturalist.  We have been told, and I want to believe that we are growing rich.

MRS SSEKITOLEKO: Mr Chairman, I am going to continue giving this information until people acknowledge it.  Even if it is true that the agriculture bank is not yet in place, there is plenty of money, which is available for farmers to borrow. If I can just be allowed to give you this information - for the whole of South-Western, which in our Ministry means Kabale, Kisoro, Rukungiri, Ntungamo, Bushenyi and Mbarara.  We have got money in Mbarara, which is available for the farmers.  Anybody can borrow up Shs 3 million. There is no security, no nothing.  That is for South Western.  For mid-Western, Hoima, and Kibale, they have got 10 million dollars part of which is actually credit for those people. Because Masindi has been left out, right now the Ministry of Planning, Agriculture and Local Government are working on including Masindi and of course extending even this money to 15 million. 

Now, for those from Eastern Uganda, and as far as Ministry of Agriculture is concerned Uganda means it leaves out Busoga - it means Tororo, Pallisa, Kumi and Soroti.  Right now as I speak, we have got Shs 280 million, which is available for you to borrow.  On top of that we have got 15 million dollars under the small holder up project, which is available for you, and you also happen to fall under NARAP.  Now all that is available to those people of East.  These are facts.  Anybody who wants them can either get them from me or from Ministry of Finance because it is  -(Interruption) 

CAPT. GASATURA: Just permit me Mr Chairman, I have in my hand a brief from United Nations on Africa. Today Uganda’s per capita income is said to be -(interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, with the view of the fact, that the Minister of Agriculture has revealed to this House the amounts available to each region or district can she avail  this information to us so that we go and use it.

MRS SSEKITOLEKO: Point of information. Information always comes out with my Policy statement.  But because I suspect, because some people do not read the details, but now that I have warned you, my policy statement to come out, please be on the look out.  But let me say this, there are about 4 districts which are not covered and some of us, at least I for one, am arguing that this Entandikwa should cover those districts which are not yet covered.  As for those who are already in business and are not using the money there is no reason why we should put more money where it is not being used.  Thank you.

CAPT. GASATURA:  With our per capita income today at 170 dollars a head, and here in the African countries, which were circulated here, sometime back, in 1989, it was 250 US dollars.  I think that speaks for itself. We should not just see a building going up in Muyenga and clap. There are 1 million or so people in Kampala; in the villages our people are hurting.  

I want to call upon Government, to put their money where their mouth is.  It is an expression.  If we say our mercies, let us talk and look at the mercies, if we say, 90 per cent of our population live in the rural let us be with the rural.  If we say, 90 per cent of our exporters and producers are in the rural areas. Let us be in the rural area and deal with them.  Not in Kampala, Mbarara, and Mbale.  

The manufacturing sector has consumed every interest of Government, but we do not even put 10 per cent back into agriculture. (Interruption)

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA: Point of order. Mr Chairman, I have listened the whole afternoon, and people can make political speeches; people populist addresses; but we are addressing established matters.  Government has proposed a Budget, Government has indicated where the bulk of the money is going.  The bulk of the money is going into primary health and into agricultural research and extension services.  I would like the Members to propose how Government can reach and address the people - how does it reach them.  Does it reach them in public speeches or in NRC, as much as it has been all through the Budget, which has been calculated in details.  Details have been given, both Development Budget and Recurrent Budget. We should address the matter as given in the Budget.  

So, is it in order for Members to address themselves outside basically?  The contents of the Budget that has been circulated indicate areas of Government attachment on education, on FIDA Roads, on Primary healthy, on Agricultural Research.  Are they in order not to address the Budget?

CAPT. GASATURA:  Mr Chairman, I have quoted for more documents than he would dare to read, and I quote in response to that.  On page 22, ‘Background to the Budget’. It is on medicine; functional classification of Government Recurrent Expenditure. 71.9 per cent goes to administration, and the well being stored health takes 4.2 per cent.

I want to end with one regular subject.  Like hon. Ssekitoleko said, she will not tire giving the information.  I do now want to tire commenting on this either.  Item no. 7 on our Ten Point Programme - corruption and abuse of office.  I was greatly disheartened to hear my President once say,  ‘I am not responsible for corruption.’ Fortunately I believe in his wisdom he has revisited it, and he is looking for ways together with his advisers of how to address it.  Not that everybody accused of corruption is corrupt.  But politics being what it is takes more on perception than facts.  If somebody in a high office is accused of corruption, with no investigation and no satisfaction to explanation, it is very dangerous for our Government. History shall judge us.  

I said we are in the 8th and last Session of this Parliament. We want to put it on record that we have in various follow up called upon Government to give a satisfactory explanation of alleged corruption cases.  But one time, the Leader of Government Business, none of them but the Prime Minister himself stood up and said he has a list of 100 clearly studied cases we have never heard any more since then. We are going to leave this House, soon we end this Parliament, the people shall call us to account and those who knew will be asked why they never exposed if it not tantamount to protection and preventing the cause of justice.  Mr Chairman, I see your time is gone I thank you very much for the opportunity.

HAJI SERUNJOGI (Kawempe Division): Mr Chairman, I thank you for allowing me to speak. I want first of all to thank the Minister of Finance for his speech - Budget Speech of 1994/1995, and at the same time, for revealing to us that this year Grant alone is expected to be Shs193 billion whereas last year, it was 280 billion.  This is a step forward of the performance with Ministry of Finance.

Development Expenditure on 1994/1995 is expected to be 398 billion Uganda Shillings. Out of that, only 69 billion shillings is going to be funded locally.  This means that all our developments are going to be funded by external donors.  Are we not mortgaging our developments to outsiders since we are only able to fund or to finance it by only 69 billion shillings out of Shs 398 billion?

The current Budget is 125 billion shillings and 13.1 billion is to settle the domestic arrears.

Now, permit me here, to air the views of Ugandans. On many occasions last year we saw that, President, and not settled the bills of the suppliers. On many occasions last year we saw that, President, had not settled pledges totaling to 3.5 billion Uganda shillings. I am just wondering - I have just tried to find out from the Ministry of Finance if this amount will be able to cover all the arrears, which have been outstanding for years including the pledges with His Excellency The President, of 3.5 billion shillings.

Three; failure by Government to settle the outstanding East African Community Employees that has been settled up to now.  So, failure by the Government to settle the National Executive Corporation under the Ministry of Defence, people in my area, three companies were closed down with: Uganda Railway, Mukisa Biscuits, Super Mugati.  Those people have not been paid since the companies were closed and I have quite open spoken the Minister of State for Defence and he keeps on telling me that we are soon settling the money for these people.  Up to now, nothing has been done. Five; failure to pay salaries to retrenchees; many people have not been paid their salaries. And I just want to find out from the Minister whether 13.1 billion will cover all these expenses, which have been outside for years.  

Lastly, having elaborated on these points, I wish the Minister while making his final submission, to advise the House as to whether will these categories of non payments have already elaborated will be paid from the amount of 13.1 billion during 1993/94 Budget.

Economy; Economy 1993/94 indicated 4 per cent GDP, and 1994/95, is expected to be 5.5 GDP; allow me, as I speak now the term is about to close and many of school age children never went back to school last term, and I am - I wanted to find out whether this is an increase in the economy performance of Uganda.  Parents, who were brave and managed to send their children to school during first term 1994, never did so during second term of this year.  Is that an indication that Ugandans are getting richer; in my opinion, definitely, we are getting poorer and poorer.  

The Ministry of Finance should send officials to places in rural areas while keeping - taking statistics of the economic performance.  They should send their people to places like Ngoma, and Kikamulo but not places in the city, Kampala, Masaka, and Mbarara.  Remember that Ugandans living in rural areas number 92 per cent; so urban areas are able to accommodate only 8 per cent. So, you can - he is only enlarging the statistics on 8 per cent living in urban areas.  So, I would like them to go to rural areas and take statistics from the people in rural areas.

Taxation; He indicated in his submission that 443 billion Uganda Shillings is going to be collected from taxes, this includes the income tax, the sales tax, and so on and so forth.  But allow me here, Mr Chairman, to inform the house as well as the nation that taxpayers are facing problems, especially, in Kampala City.  We have a lot of street hawkers, if you go to Nakivubo right now as I speak, Nakivubo Mews, Market street, channel street, you will find that shopkeepers are not doing any business, hawkers stand just in front of the people and they transact business and in my view, these hawkers, do not pay rent; the shopkeepers pay rent, income tax, licence, and so on and so forth, and they own poll tax tickets.  But these hawkers do not pay anything but instead, they are permitted to stand on the street and sell a better business instead of the shopkeepers.  Shopkeepers are idle form morning until evening.  

Now, I am asking the Minister of Local Government because this is a City Council affairs.  Kampala City Council issues permits to these people, and Kampala City Council is being - under the Ministry of Local Government.  Now I am asking the Minister of Local Government, to look into the by laws governing street sellers because it is really damaging the business of the shop owners.

I now go to the unnecessary expenditure in 1993/94.  This House is well aware that His Excellency the Vice President made a tour of all the police station in Kampala and the purpose of that tour was for his to examine exactly the problems the policemen are facing.  I am representing Kawempe division and I have - there is a Police Station in the area.  Communication is very poor; we do not have communication at all; even accommodation; you will find three married couples in one uniport.  I have an experience, and I have gone through the area and I know how these people live. There are no desks, or chairs, nothing.  Salary and Allowances, those come in time, and the DPC of the area lives in Kampala because there is suitable accommodation for him at Kawempe.  I am asking the Minister - (Interruption)

MR CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, use the microphone, please.

MR SSERUNJOGI: The DPC of Kawempe lives in Kampala, the Minister of Internal Affairs is asked at this juncture to explain why His Excellency the Vice President made that tour?  On page 34 Item 84 (c), sales tax; was reduced on computer -(Interruption)

MR CHAIRMAN: You are time up hon. Member; one more minute, wind up. 

MR SSERUNJOGI: Before I wind up, Mr Chairman, I wanted to talk about commission of inquiries.  Uganda Government is entering a lot of expenses as far as commission of inquires are concerned.  You will understand that last year a lot of money was spent on inquiries; the report on the committee of inquiry on circumstances surrounding impounding of Uganda Air Craft Boeing 707. This report was given and government has not given any answer in due respect to that expense.  I want to find out how much was spent on that inquiry alone.  

Two; Ministry of Transport is giving an explanation to that effect. But the review committee, that is in 1987 September, Ministry of Health has not given any White Paper on that one.

The Human Rights Commission; that one took off a long time ago, and it has now stopped; we do not know the results, and we do not know whether the money is not there. We want to find out what government has got to say about that. (Interruption)

MR KAWANGA:  Point of information.  I want to inform the hon. Member that I am a member of human rights commission and the report of the human rights commission is being written and is coming out soon.

HON. MEMBERS: When?

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Since he is talking about expenditure, I want to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that poor as we see we are, even in the budget, we travel first class, and yet during the Obote days they used to travel in economy and, therefore, this business of expenses must come to briefs with government.

MR SSERUNJOGI:  On custodian Board, this continues with corruption. I have a paper here, Mr Chairman, for house No. 6 Kampala Bakuli Road which was repossessed by MITLAGI MASHELL on 30th October 1993, and I have a letter here, which was written on the 14th of June 1994 on the same property, written by the former owner. I read; “The Secretary General Uganda Moslem Supreme Council, Departed Asian Property, Patel Road Plot 16 Old Kampala.  A reverse to the above subject, I am happy to report to you as the above said property belongs me now I am leaving for London and I have given no power of Attorney to anybody.”  

As I was on official mission to Nairobi Kenya heading for Rwanda, I a bit stop over in Kampala I learnt that some Asians have taken an advantage claiming the Departed Asian Property on expense of those who have not returned to Uganda at all.  I would, therefore, warn you about this. Men who are busy forging documents in order to repossess the said the property.  Now the property was repossessed and the owner is refusing repossession.  I have a document here. (Interruption)

MR BUTAGIRA: Point of information.  This issue of repossession, the law is clear, it says that you have to be physically present in Uganda.  Mr Chairman, what is happening now in the custodian board we do not know because these people they are agents of Asians in town.  Who are busy, whose job it is to check repossession, and once they get them, some of them have to take powers of Attorney which they come in fringing, some of them have to take powers of administration, and it is all a mess. In fact, this issue of custodian board and repossession, maybe, should put a hold to the whole thing and implement the report of this House on the Custodian Board issue.

MRS APIU JULU:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I feel I should give the information on Custodian Board.  Normally and these lawyers must know it better than us.  When a document looks perfect on the face of it, there is no way you can refuse to give back the property.  If later on a fraud is discovered, the courts of law are there.  If all the documents are really proper, how do you really deny somebody the right to get his property, everybody wants it.  These Asians should not even complain because they are the ones to come and take their properties.  

Secondly, they found themselves into all sorts of organisations to chase these properties.  If do not really respect those organizations they have found, they are the same people again who come complaining. And the reasons - the information I am giving is that, everything that happened in Custodian Board and is done, it has no transparency, its a committee doing the work.  These allegations of corruption and so on, you just do not even listen to them, he is one of -(Laughter)

MR SSERUNJOGI: Mr Chairman, I want to -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, I would like inform the hon. Member holding the Floor and indeed the whole House that, the pleading of a certain Member of this House and whom I understand is the chairman of the Custodian Board is not acceptable because you cannot be accepted on the ground of the information give by hon. Butagira.  The law is very clear before you give out the property you must ascertain in a certain manner - in a conclusive manner that the property belongs to that person.  The house - the building currently owned by Ministry of Labour is now reclaimed by a certain Asian. But the Ministry of Labour has been occupying that building for many years since 60s, it has been there nobody ever claimed to be the owner of the building, but it is taken over now, and this building is categorised in those buildings, which the government should retain.  But surprisingly the chairman is now telling us that she does not know, she cannot ascertain the proper owner.  If the custodian board is not in position to ascertain the proper owners then they should be given out the work and hand it over to the proper person.

MISS WEKIA: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform the House that the committee that deals with repossession of properties has got some clear laid down precedence, among these is a requirement that the person who wants to repossess his property must produce a certified true copy of his title.  It is a requirement and it must be a recent satisfaction.  So, these people go to the Ministry of Land and give those certificates, whether they are photocopies of the certificates but they must be certified from Ministry of Lands.  That is one requirement.  

Another requirement is that is he is not the owner, if he is an owner he must produce a passport, which he had at the time he left Uganda it is one of the requirements.  He must produce evidence as the owner.  If you are not and you have the powers of Attorney, it has been authorised - if you have been authorised the powers of Attorney and that must have been done here in Uganda, and nowhere else. So, the problem is not with Custodian Board, but those people who are giving these people no authorised powers of Attorney are people who are giving certifying land tittles if the land title are faith, and therefore, you cannot blame the custodian board for something which is being done elsewhere.  Thank you very much.

MR KARUHANGA: Point of information. Mr Chairman, I thank the hon. Member for doing this.  I have been very encouraged by the statements from the two hon. Members, the lady Members who are members of Custodian Board that there is no corruption in custodian board, and that we should forget allegations about corruption in custodian board.  This is very happening as they assure you, only that we read a lot about the corruption in custodian board.  Also, when I was handling the affairs of another commission of inquiry, which completed its work incidentally, for mismanagement of criminal cases, one of the complaints that came to the commission was corruption in custodian board and there was a case of a man called MacKay, an American, who was seconded there by USAID to conduct the affairs in a transparent way but it was made impossible for him we even moved on inch to the extent that, he was asked to go and today I was reading in the papers that inspire of having had a directive from the President to go back, the man has finally been told, your time is overdue, board the plane and leave.  

What I am fearing is, what type of bad taste in his mouth has he gone with back to his office in USAID, and also the second point convince, is the amount of people that is one aspect, while I would like to be assured that this is the case there is no corruption there, and I am really happy because Members of Parliament here saying so, this is encouraging.  

What I do not know is how come then that Members of the Ugandan population who occupied these properties, who have now given them out because of the letters of the possession, how come that many of them would like to be compensated for the improvement which they put on those properties.  And they are having a lot of problems -(Applause)- and they are saying that there is no assistance or cooperation from the board.  How comes that these people keep on saying this is this situation is as Members of this House would like us to believe and I would like to believe them that could you only fortify us on those two points so that this House and the country can really know that from now on, we hold custodian board in the light they would like us to hold the same.

MR NDEGE: Further information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. Further, the information given by hon. Karuhanga, I would like to emphasize the very, very point where true owners of properties come to Uganda and are harassed and are told to go away from this country.  Now, we are giving these hon. directors of custodian board good information.  But they do not want it; as usual they do not want information.  

We are telling you there is something wrong in your house, go and investigate, I know two case, one was a Custodian, he was thrown out by some very strong Asians who had contacts here and there.  There is another lady who is fighting as her family, which has repossessed Fairway.  All these properties were held by so many families and they have allocated or repossessed by one family out of the others. The rest are being harassed because this man is a very strong man.  This lady has been to the Minister, to Custodian Board, to Finance, everywhere, she does not get any assistance and she is being harassed.  I have met her and she wanted me to assist her to bring this matter to the House. 

Unfortunately, I did not meet her on the second appointment, I did not make it but I am sure she is still here and she is still being harassed and her case cannot be listened to by all these organs.  Now, all we are saying is that whatever is wrong should be put right by these people and then we want to know why up to this day the Minister of State for Finance for Custodian Board Affairs has not presented the report formally to this House.  Is it a cabinet decision as usual to overlook the House or is it a personal responsibility.  Because we are really getting concerned.  If we give the executive a job to do and they do not report back but they go ahead and implement things their way then there is no use for this Parliament. (Interruption)

MR NKALUBO WASSWA: Mr Chairman, we have been advised that there is no corruption in the Custodian Board.  I wish to challenge the Members to stand on his feet and tell us whether the cost sharing they had in the Custodian Board, after cost sharing here the vehicles, was normal and that was not corruption.  About the Custodian Board, we had a Select Committee, which for the last three years we have been fighting that we should debate this report.  There has been a lot of resistance from that end.  Total resistance.  I think it is unfortunate that we have resistance as a word in NRC because, hon. Chairman, we took a lot of time, spent a lot of money but then all this has been resisted to the extent that there was a rising from our benefactors that if the report came in here, the Budget will not be supported.  So, this question of saying that everything is okay, I think it is high time the report was tabled that we get time and discuss it.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, there is no way the Uganda Budget is related to the Custodian Board because the Custodian Board is a series of assets and there is a Board there on which if you want to repossess these properties you go there according to the law and try to see what you can get.  Some lawyers here -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, the Budget involves monetary and fiscal policies in regulating all the sectors of the economy including agriculture, public infrastructure and all the Ministries.  Is it therefore, the Deputy Minister of Finance in order to misguide the House that the hon. Members discussing the general debate are in order to discuss issues to deal with the Custodian Board which is an institution of government and under the Ministry of Finance?

THE CHAIRMAN: The hon. Minister is out of order.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Point of order. Mr Chairman, is it not in order when the Chairman has already for him to pre-empt that order by continuing to argue? Is he in order?

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister you are not in order.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA: Okay, Sir, that was not in order but I want to correct the wrong impression given by hon. Nkalubo.  Hon. Nkalubo said, if you listened to him, that the reason why his report is not debated yet is because it was a condition that the Uganda Budget will not be supported by donors if that report is debated.  I stood up to give the information that when we prepare the Budget, we separate the issue of Custodian Board to say let the law of the land take its course as far as Custodian Board are concerned and these matters of Custodian Board have gone as an appeal involving the Government and by that time hon. Kanyeihamba was the Attorney General.  We lost up to the highest court on a case whether the government can put up a law now to interfere in the constitutional rights of people who have properties in Uganda. So, the government says that the property issues since it is provided for in the Constitution, it is provided for in the law, let the law of the land take its course and we are recommending to Members -(Interruption) 

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Point of information. Mr Chairman, I would like to give information to the House, Sir and to the Deputy Minister who is holding the Floor, that while he is right on the decisions of the court, the government of the day and I was then Attorney General, made proposals for the amendment of the law.  These Amendments would have cleared some of the issues raised by the hon. Members here.  A Bill was prepared by the office of the Attorney General but I have on who occasions asked what happened to that amendment and no answers have come from Ministers. Presumably as the Minister is holding the Floor he can tell us what has happened to the Amendment Bill that was supposed to be presented here answering some of the questions contained in the Nkalubo report.

MR KAFUMBA MUKASA:  Mr Chairman, some of the matters being raised by Members as I said have been taken over by time as far as court rulings are concerned.  For example, Mr Chairman, the High Court and the Court of Appeal have ruled that an Asian who was a Ugandan Asian never left and, therefore, his properties could not have been expropriated.  The High Court and the Court of Appeal have ruled that a company registered in Uganda is a Ugandan company.  If such a company had a property in Uganda that company never left.  Therefore, these properties could not have been expropriated.  

So, now the other matters which are left, the administrative matters which are causing problems which cannot be dealt with the court, the government feared to appear that the High Court and the Court of Appeal having given their ruling we are now retrospectively making laws to defeat the High Court ruling.  That is why we said that let the High Court rulings take their course but people who have administrative problems; the Minister of State responsible for Custodian Board handles those administrative probleMs This is what I wanted to clarify.  Therefore, this Budget, for example, which you are debating has nothing to do with any condition regarding the Custodian Board.

MR NASASIRA: Point of Procedure. Mr Chairman, I wanted to rise on a point of procedure and appeal to Members because personally I have watched a degree of impatience and a degree of intolerance when Members are contributing.  You may recall that hon. Serunjogi sat down on one point of information about ten minutes ago.  He is still down; we have lost his track of debate. You are giving us opportunity for most of the Members to contribute and I wanted to appeal to Members not to be impatient and give every Member who want to debate on the budget time to finish his contribution and when you get your time you can raise some issues that might still be burning.

THE CHAIRMAN: Your point is taken. Hon. Minister.  Hon. Serunjogi, please wind up your speech.

MR SERUNJOGI: Mr Chairman, I want to thank all Members of this House who have contributed information, which has been very valuable indeed.  Now, you can see, if the report had been brought in time all these problems would not have been caused.  But because the report was delayed now you can see the problems being cause by the non-availability of the report of the commission, which was set up by this committee.

Finally, allow me on behalf of my Division to advise this House that since NRM Government came to power, none of the heads of government ever visited Kawempe Division, even if the division is in Kampala.  On a very sad note, Mr Chairman, His Excellency the President, the Vice President, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, the First Deputy Prime Minister, the Second Deputy and Third Deputy, have never come to my division.  I requested the DA Kampala to get in touch with His Excellency the President so that he can come to my division, on all occasions I failed.  The Rt. hon. Prime Minister was requested to come and officiate a seminar in Mulago Para-Medical, and he turned down the offer.  The First Deputy Prime Minister was on two occasions invited to come as a guest of honour on two fund raising in my division he refused.  

So, what I want to find out, are we not Ugandans because I have heard on radio that the President has even gone to the extent of visiting RC I in some other parts of Uganda. Why does he not visit my division since he came to power?  Mr Chairman, on that note, I support the Motion.

MR BAKUBULINDI (Workers Representative):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I very much appreciate the opportunity you have given me to contribute on this Debate on behalf of the workers.

Allow me to express, first and foremost, my appreciation to the government for what they have done during the Financial Year 1993/1994, things like the rehabilitation of roads, security which has improved in most parts of the country, restoration of kingdoms where they are wanted.  We do appreciate that very much.

Coming back to the budget, on 15th June, 1994 it was a very important day to the Ugandans and most of our workers, peasants, teachers, to mention but a few, were very busy with their small radios listening to the Budget Speech. During the same occasion a statement was made of which I want to comment.  The statement was that we are getting richer rather than poorer and my query is that, that statement means that when the workers can go without a minimum living wage, is that what we call getting rich and not poor? When the teachers can spend about six months without getting salary and when they get it is just peanut, is that what we mean by getting richer and not poorer? When we are getting a lot of street kids, creating another sight of tourism in Kampala is that what we mean by getting rich and not poor?  I think whenever, we are making statements concerning Ugandan mostly -(Interruption)

MR AMANYA MUSHEGA:  Point of information. I would not like, Mr Chairman, thank you the representative of the workers, obviously those - delay payments of teachers’ salaries must be workers that is my point of information and I do not be a teacher of English and grammar.  In 1992, the primary teacher was getting from Government at the starting salary 3.100 in an impression on 240 per cent now the primary teacher 35,000 shilling in an impression of 16 per cent. For sure the teacher is richer than he was in 1992 in the matter of English that is a fact.  He is richer unless if my English is wrong but on the other hand really some of us who had been spending some time trying to improve the conditions of the workers it is - I would like to occasionally and my Friend the representatives of the workers substantiate these statements of teachers spending six months without pay.  Because, they are - they cause a different situation and yesterday I was consulting in the area I represent the teachers appreciated conditions we have improved although they want better improvement they appreciate the improvement that have taken place but they want further improvement.  So, substantiation will be useful, otherwise these statements, which are made for catching the Headlines, cause unnecessary concern when they are not substantiated.  Obviously 35,000 shillings is not enough but it is better than 4,000 and it will be better in this budget  -(Applause and Interruption)

MR BWANIKA BBALE:  Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to give addition to what hon. Minister has said.  The teachers in Katikamu County, which I happen to represent those of primary, are actually happy.  But, they say this is not enough yet they should be given more but for the time being they are happy. Now, the teachers in secondary schools those who are graduates are disappointed, because the primary teachers have over-taken them.  Now, they are asking what is the value of going to university and then you come out as a graduate and the primary teacher gets more.  Now, the situation is that the teachers in the secondary schools are now coming down to teacher in primary, which is going to up set our education system.  

Therefore, the Government should really balance the salaries so that each person is paid according to his education, if they give more money to primary teachers Government should equally give more money to secondary school teachers.  Thank you, very much.

MR MWANDHA:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, the hon. Minister for Education has requested the Member on the Floor to substantiate the fact that some teachers have not been paid for over six months -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, you will recall in April I stated in this House that I had received information from the District Educational Officer of Iganga District to the effect, that four hundred and forty nine teachers in Iganga District at the time when I went to see him on the 15th of March those teachers had not been paid a single penny since February, 1992 and if I also know arithmetic I think that exceeds six months.

MR AMANYA MUSHEGA: Mr Chairman, I have been looking for this opportunity. I challenge hon. Mwandha; you select three independent people I go with him and acting from this House tomorrow to Iganga and we come back with a report. I had been looking for this opportunity; I will transport him in my official car  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MR AMANYA MUSHEGA: Mr Chairman, hon. Mwandha what he is stating in April we are now in July, even the figure of 400 is true it is a fact that some head teachers were not paid some individual teachers for different reasons and I gave some of them here last time. One of the reasons is that when the payment was low in real income in 1992 the salary of a teacher would not even buy him two kilos of sugar.  

Today, in real terms the salary will buy more than half a sack of sugar that is a fact.  Some of the teachers had abandoned teaching because the payment was poor, some of them have come back but they do not admit that for the last two years they had shrieked away, they had been trying busy to collect their figures while - but I challenge hon. Mwandha now and I will challenge outside this House after here that we go together even -(Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MR AMANYA MUSHEGA:  What I mean by outside is that here I am under Parliament privilege outside I am not, that we go to Iganga and establish those facts so that we put an end to this situations of speculations and just making statements that are not substantiatable, I take his figure, I will go with him person with my staff and his people and we establish that fact.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR F. MUKASA: Point of information.  I want to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor and indeed the hon. Minister for Education that when the hon. Minister for Education presented his White Paper here which was debated at length and he proposed and he told this House that he was intending to give teachers a living wage.  Now, his statement that the salary of 35,000 to teachers has made them rich, is unfortunate statement because if the hon. Minister considers 35,000 as a yard-stick to a person who is rich, then and without considering -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MR MUKASA: Mr Chairman, on page 13, of the Minister’s  -(Interruption)

ADJOURNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please, hon. Members.  I now adjourn the House to 2.30 p.m. tomorrow afternoon.

(The Council rose at 5.10 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday 20 July, 1994 at 2.30 p.m.)




