Thursday, 15 July 2010

Parliament met at 2.42 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS 

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s meeting. I want to make a special appeal to the Members of Parliament in view of the tragedy that befell our country last week: I appeal to you to come up with a resolution to contribute some money to the victims of the gruesome tragedy at Kabalagala and Kyadondo. I know we have contributed to football, Kasubi and the Police; I do not know whether Members have an objection to us also showing solidarity with the families that have suffered? Even if Government has given, this is Parliament. I thought that apart from condemning what happened, we could do something. That is my main communication for today - just an appeal I am making to Members of the House.

2.44
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for your communication. As Parliament we did express our deep concern, sympathies and condolences upon what happened. It is not just Government but even political leaders go visit and take something to the people in hospital. I am told, for example, about the case of an Ethiopian man who was a refugee in this country and he has no relatives. I am told it is the Army looking after him in hospital. That kind of situation is really tragic.

I think that in moments like this it would be important that the face of Parliament is seen by the people so that they know that even when we restrict entry into Parliament, it is not because we do not consider Parliament as belonging to them but we are just being cautious. Therefore, I would very much support the proposal that we make contributions and give a figure that would be reasonable when we make our representation as Parliament. I believe that if we do that and the leadership of Parliament - the Speaker, Deputy Speaker and the leaders on both sides of the House including Members who would accompany them – took a day to go and visit those injured in hospital and provide some support to them on behalf of Parliament, it would be very good. 

In this regard, allow me to also report that we accompanied the Rt Hon. Speaker to Bulange late this morning where the Speaker presented to the Katikkiro of Buganda a cheque for Shs 42.5 million that we collected as Parliament to support the restoration of the Kasubi Tombs that caught fire. This would just continue the reflection of the fact that when something happens in our country, we as Parliament are concerned. 

I would support the proposal and maybe as Parliament a reasonable deduction could be made. I know times are tough. The pressure is also peeling out of us. Many of us are retiring some of the commitments that were putting us down. So, a request for Shs 100,000 per Member would be good. I thank you.

2.50
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, on our part as Government we were greatly saddened and hit by this most tragic event. The Minister for Disaster Preparedness yesterday announced a contribution of Government to the families of those who lost dear ones and those who have people to support in various health facilities in the country as a result of the bombing. It was also decided in Cabinet that we should have prayers this Friday for the Muslim faith, on Saturday for the Seventh Day Adventists and on Sunday for the Christians. This is in respect of those who have departed and to pray for peace and tranquillity for everybody in this country. 

It is a normal practice, as you have pointed out, that whenever any of us has a problem of this nature Members of Parliament have extended a hand of support. I will be communicating to Members on our side the need to extend a hand so that we can help out with the families that have lost dear ones and are looking after those who are in hospital. 

I would like to agree with the observations made by the Leader of the Opposition that much as many of us appear to be constrained one way or the other, this is the time to express our solidarity with those who have been hit terribly by this tragic development. A contribution of at least Shs 100,000 on the part of each Member of Parliament is, therefore, something we should consider. At an appropriate moment, the leadership of Parliament should announce the manner in which we shall be in a position to go out and present this. We support the proposal, which you have come up with in your Communication from the Chair. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I wanted to go there tomorrow at 10 O’clock but I realised that I had nothing in my hands. So, a resolution as I visit the ones who are in the hospital will really come in handy - if I could carry it and say that the Parliament is expressing solidarity. Other modalities can be worked out during the course of the proceedings. I thank you very much. 

2.53
MR ALEX ONZIMA (FDC, Maracha County, Arua): I thank you, Madam Speaker. When the Minister of Internal Affairs presented a statement on what happened last Sunday – the tragic bombs that went off and killed many people in this country - I raised something on the Government’s proposed, planned activities during the one week of national mourning. One of them was the issue of deciding to hold national prayers. I would like to thank the Government for supporting the proposal I made. 

I would like to say, however, that I am a bit uncomfortable with the dates set. My problem is that Government has chosen to hold the national prayers on the same days that the various religious people use to pray to God. To me it does not carry any essence when we pray for the lives of those who died and those still recovering in hospital on ordinary prayer days. National prayers should have been held on other days other than Fridays when Moslems go for prayers, Saturday or Sunday when Christians go for prayers. Otherwise, how shall we differentiate a Moslem or a Catholic who goes for normal Friday or Sunday prayers from that one who will have gone to pray for our dear loved ones who died in the bomb incidents? It should be outside a Saturday, Friday or Sunday so that those who will go there will have done so for that purpose. That is how this will carry meaning. That is my view.

Secondly, I would like to propose to Government that 11th July become a national public holiday that will always be observed every year for us to reflect on this incident that took the lives of our people. We should have the same activities that are going to be performed during this week of mourning performed every year. Otherwise, holding national prayers on the normal prayer days, hon. Minister, in my view does not carry weight and essence as we pray for our dear friends. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, the other problem I found is that other than the flags flying at half-mast, there are other activities we were supposed to do. We were supposed to have black arm bands on our left arms all these days until the mourning is over. Also, the radio stations are not supposed to be playing chamucation music, but I can see that some of the radio stations are just doing business as usual. I do not know whether anybody has actually instructed these radio stations on what a mourning period means. The radio stations are supposed to be playing martial music –(Interjection)- they are even playing vuvuzelas!

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, I have taken note of the views as aired by our brother, hon. Alex Onzima. However, I thought it wise that I also bring to the attention of Parliament the decision of Cabinet. You will fully agree with me that I cannot change the decision of Cabinet from here. The best I can do is to pass on these sentiments to the chair of Cabinet so that what you have brought out can be shared with other members of Cabinet, reflected on and maybe some other announcement is made. 

It is also true that when an incident of this nature takes place, it is normal that serious reflections through prayers are observed so that our commitment to the Almighty in regard to whatever has happened can be brought out in proper perspective. I would like to promise and pledge that I am going to communicate these views to the chair of Cabinet.

Regarding the manner in which radio stations and the media in general have handled this matter and the kind of instructions that have been relayed to various agencies and institutions, I would like to say that what I know is that the Minister for Information and National Guidance has been in constant touch with the various institutions. She has been providing the necessary guidance too. It is true that compliance does not appear to be in place as yet. However, in the Cabinet meeting she did detail the kind of instructions that she relayed to the various institutions and the media such that the mourning that we are supposed to be doing can come out clearly to everybody, for each one to understand that our country is in a state of mourning as a result of this heinous act by the terrorists. 

I will, however, confer with her. Fortunately, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister has also just walked in; we shall be in a position to interact over this matter. Where it becomes necessary, he will also issue the necessary instructions. Thank you.

3.01
MR AKBAR GODI (FDC, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. It is indeed a very painful and sad moment for all Ugandans. Just like hon. Onzima was suggesting, let us harmonise the Government position of having Moslems pray on Fridays, the Seventh Day Adventists on Saturday and Christians on Sunday. I would like to suggest that we take up a day when we will crown the week of mourning. That is my request. Thank you.

3.02
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I stand to say something on the same issue of mourning. Before I joined this august House, there was an infernal at Buddo Junior Primary School. I was shocked that after we lost those children and the memories of Namaganda who lost her life while she was trying to save the lives of other children, a few months later the leadership of this country went to Buddo and collected money to put up a building in the same place where the dormitory that burnt had been built. Instead of constructing a monument to remember the lives of those children who lost their lives in that infernal, they just built a building. I think you can see how we treat tragedies in this country. Now you can see UBC Radio just playing music as if we have not had any tragedy in this country.

I would like to agree with hon. Onzima that we should have come up with a day, not the days when we go to Church because we will not tell the difference. The other day we were praying in Kololo but we should set apart a day when we will remember the dead. We should always remember that this was a dark day in the lives of Ugandans; that day should always be remembered. The 11th of July should be marked as a black day in the history of this country. 

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, what I can do is to pass on the views of this House to Cabinet so that when we sit as Cabinet we can be in a position to reflect and deliberate on the proposals from here. Your observations are pertinent and we will be able to deliberate on them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we now have the numbers to make that important resolution of solidarity – (Interjection)– okay, I put the question that this House do show solidarity with the families and victims of 11 July 2010 at Kyadondo Rugby Club and Ethiopian Village Restaurant Kabalagala and do hereby resolve to contribute Shs 100,000 each towards the rehabilitation of the victims. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, hon. Betty Nambooze has lost a brother, Mr Lawrence Male. He will be buried tomorrow at Wakiso Town Council at 2.00 p.m. That is for your information. 

PERSONAL STATEMENT

3.07
MR ALEX ONZIMA (FDC, Maracha County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Members of the Eighth Parliament of Uganda. I rise to make a personal statement this Thursday, 15 July 2010 in accordance with rule 41(2) of our Rules of Procedure. 

On Tuesday, 08 December 2009 the Minister of Local Government, hon. Adolf Mwesige, moved a motion seeking a parliamentary resolution to create Maracha District in accordance with Article 179 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. The said motion was eventually upheld on Tuesday, 04 May 2010. One hundred and sixty-seven (167) hon. Members of Parliament voted in favour of the creation of Maracha District, just six votes above the minimum constitutional requirement of 161. 

The sole purpose of this personal statement is, therefore, for me, Alex Onzima, the Member of Parliament Maracha Constituency, now Maracha District, to go on record in the parliamentary Hansard to register Maracha’s unresolved gratitude to His Excellency Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the President of the Republic of Uganda, his Cabinet ministers and ministers of state for their unprecedented blessing and owning the said motion in December 2009. 

Allow me to single out His Excellency the President for hosting a 40-member delegation from Maracha at the two state houses at Nakasero and Entebbe on Wednesday, 02 September 2009. This is when we presented our memorandum for a district status, which he willingly okayed, promptly. 

Secondly, I must state here in no unclear terms that hon. Adolf Mwesige played a pivotal role in the creation of Maracha District. His legal brain, personal commitment and total determination propelled him and earned us the eventual resolution of Parliament in favour of the new district. 

Furthermore, Maracha conveys her same gratitude to the Eighth Parliament of Uganda for upholding the Cabinet motion hence voting in favour of a resolution of Parliament that enabled the creation of Maracha District. 

In the same spirit, Maracha also expresses her gratitude to the National Resistance Movement Parliamentary Caucus for their overwhelming endorsement of the said motion. This translated into a block approval with 162 solid votes, which exceeds the minimum 50 percent mark of all Members of Parliament voting rights. These 162 Members of Parliament are now celebrated pillars of Maracha District. 

Maracha further extends her heartfelt gratitude to four extraordinary Opposition Members of Parliament who exhibited exceptional independence, political maturity and stood their ground and voted in favour of Maracha District on the most memorable day in the political history of Maracha District. The Members are hon. Odit John of UPC and Member of Parliament of Erute County South in Lango region; hon. Akello Franca and hon. Akiror Agnes who belong to FDC and are women Members of Parliament for Pader and Kumi districts respectively; last but not least, hon. Amongi Betty who is an independent Woman Member of Parliament representing Apac District in Lango region. 

Madam Speaker, when I chaired the first ever Maracha District meeting in Maracha Town Council on Saturday, 08 May 2010, the people of Maracha named hon. Amongi, hon. Franca and hon. Akiror as their district heroines while hon. Odit is their district hero. 

Considering the legal and political intricacies under which Maracha was granted district status, the 166 Members of Parliament who caused the creation of Maracha District are the best examples of the famous biblical good Samaritans. This is because they came from far to rescue the people of Maracha. From my heart of hearts, I hereby do declare that the names of the four opposition Members of Parliament and the 162 NRM Members of Parliament are engraved, I emphasise, are engraved on my heart for all my life. These names will also be engraved on Maracha District administration block which will be constructed shortly.  

We, the people of the new district, are heavily indebted to these four objective Members of Parliament. Maracha has no way of appropriately thanking them except reward these national legislators with the greatest Christian gift, that is the Holy Bible, which is the word of God according to our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ who is the way, the truth and the life. To all Members who scratched the back of Maracha at their hour of greatest need, we can only entrust you into the divine hands of God Almighty. May He best reward all of you immensely - spiritually, politically, materially and otherwise - throughout your earthly lives!

As for the 162 NRM Members of Parliament, we are sorry we cannot afford to give each of you a copy of the Holy Bible. We shall give the NRM party one copy of the Holy Bible to be used collectively in their parliamentary caucus. (Laughter)  

I hereby wish to report to the honourable members of this august House that Maracha District has began taking the shape of a functional district. The Electoral Commission went to Maracha District and presided over the election of an interim chairman of the district local council. A week later, a magistrate in Arua officiated at the swearing in of the interim chairman and his executives. The Government promptly appointed a substantive chief administration officer for Maracha District and he has already reported. 

About three years ago, His Excellency President Yoweri Museveni appointed a resident district commissioner who has all along been a resident in Maracha. Other district officers already on ground include the District Police Commander, the District Internal Security Officer, and the Deputy District Internal Security Officer, among others. (Interjections)

Just yesterday, the 14th day of July 2010, the Commissioner in charge of Local Government in the Ministry of Local Government, Mr Patrick Mutabwire, officiated at the sharing of district assets between Arua and Maracha District. The vehicles that were allocated to Maracha District were flagged off to Maracha District headquarters this morning.

I, Alex Onzima, value my electorate in Maracha. No wonder, therefore, even in the august House I too value my fellow honourable members who stand by Maracha constituency. Therefore, I can assure you that you can never go wrong and regret it every time you scratch the back of Maracha. Allow me to present the Holy Bibles to our distinguished district hero, district heroines and the entire National Resistance Movement Members of Parliament -(Interjections)- who are the celebrated pillars of Maracha District -(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, please!

MR ONZIMA: Madam Speaker, may I now take this opportunity to present the Bibles? May I ask hon. John Odit to come forward and receive his Bible -(Laughter)- which is appropriately wrapped in red?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, hon. Member; hand them over to the clerk.

MR ONZIMA: Okay, no problem.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Lay them on the Table. The clerk will pass them on. (Laughter)

MR ONZIMA: Well obliged. In conclusion, during my two-hour meeting with His Excellency the President at State House Entebbe on Wednesday, 16 June 2010, the head of state confirmed to me that he will personally preside over the official inauguration of Maracha District on Friday, 30 July 2010. However, due to unforeseen urgent state duties, this date has shifted to Saturday, 31 July 2010. Invitation cards are already in the Members’ pigeon holes, so they should take note of this change. The launch will be on 31st not 30th and I pray that all invited Members honour our invitation without fail.

From the bottom of my heart, I thank all of you immensely for your kind audience. Thank you very much and God bless you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

 BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE PARLIAMENTARY PENSIONS (AMENDMENT NO. 2) BILL, 2010

3.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca B. Mbaguta Sezi): Madam Speaker and hon. Members - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, please join me in welcoming three delegations of pupils. First we have the pupils and teachers of Ecole Primaire Piaget Primary School in Mbizzinnya. You are welcome. (Applause) We also have pupils and teachers of All Saints Primary School in Lweza. (Applause) You are welcome. We also have students and teachers of Kakonge Senior Secondary School. (Applause) You are welcome. Thank you very much. 

MRS SEZI: Thank you for drawing our attention to these smart, beautiful young people in the gallery as I present the Bill. They are in very beautiful colours, very visible -(Interjections) 

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment No. 2) Bill, 2010 be read for the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Are the Cabinet members awake? Yes, it is seconded.

MRS SEZI: Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment No. 2) Bill, 2010 is to amend the Parliamentary Pensions Act, 2007 to specify the benefits for the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Parliament. 

Currently, the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker as Members of Parliament are entitled to benefits provided for Members of Parliament through the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme established by the Parliamentary Pensions Act No. 6 of 2007. In accordance with Act No.6 of 2007, the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker make monthly contributions to the scheme and upon retirement, they are entitled to receive their benefits in accordance with the scheme. However, the scheme does not cover the health, security, travel and funeral benefits for the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker. There is also nothing in the scheme to cater for the spouses or spouse of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker. 

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the Bill seeks to provide specific medical security and transport benefits to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker, which are commensurate with the offices of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker. 

The Bill also provides for the funeral arrangement of a person who dies while holding the Office of Speaker or Deputy Speaker. If the current Speaker and Deputy Speaker are already contributing to the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme, the Bill makes it possible for the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker to receive a refund from the scheme of their contribution upon the time of becoming Speaker or Deputy Speaker. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

3.26
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS (Mr Barnabas Tinkasiimire): Madam Speaker, the Committee on Presidential Affairs considered the Bill and we have come up with a report. I beg to report.

The Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment) Bill 2010 was read for the first time on Thursday, 13 May 2010. Pursuant to rule 113 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the Bill was forwarded to the Committee on Presidential Affairs, which has considered it. The committee has completed its work and is pleased to present its report for consideration to this august House. 

On Thursday, 05 March 2009 the Second Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Public Service presented to Parliament the Emoluments and Benefits of the President, Vice-President, President and Prime Minister Bill, 2009. The Bill was forwarded to the Committee on Presidential Affairs for consideration and subsequent reporting to the House. 

In its report to the plenary, the committee made observations. Among other observations, the committee was concerned that while the Speaker of Parliament is ranked third and the Deputy Speaker of Parliament is ranked fifth in terms of national hierarchy, their emoluments and benefits had not been granted in comparison to other leaders in that hierarchy of authority in Uganda and as proposed in the Emoluments and Benefits of the President, Vice-President and Prime Minister Bill, 2009.

The committee recommended that there was need to revise the relevant laws with respect to the emoluments and the benefits for the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Parliament given the importance attached to their offices, the roles they play in society and their hierarchy and authority in this country. 

The report was debated at length and among others, the House resolved that the minister presents to Parliament a Bill to enhance the benefits of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker to be considered by this House before the Bill could proceed to the committee stage. 

Madam Speaker, all these assignments have been done and the committee would like to thank the minister for responding in time to the recommendation of the committee and the resolution of Parliament. This is in line with the assurances Parliament intends to enhance under the proposed Government Assurances Bill. The Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment No. 2) Bill, 2010 is, therefore, intended to fulfil the recommendation of this House with respect to the enhancement of the benefits of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker.

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, our methodology to consider the presented Bill was such that we met the Minister for Public Service and also met officials from the Office of the Speaker. We also met the board of trustees of the Parliamentary Pensions Board. 

Objectives of the Bill 

The Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment No. 2) Bill, 2010 seeks to amend the Parliamentary Pensions Act, 2007 to provide for the benefits of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of Parliament upon retirement or death. 

It specifically seeks to:
a) 	Provide specific medical, security and transport benefits for the Speaker and Deputy Speaker, which are commensurate with their offices.
b) 	Provide for the funeral arrangements of a person who dies while holding the Office of the Speaker or Deputy Speaker. 
c) 	Grant a refund to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of their monthly contributions to the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme, as this would no longer be necessary under the arrangement proposed when this Bill is passed. 

Our committee made the following observations:

•	The committee observed that the Bill does not provide for the source of funding and management of the benefits of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker as provided in the Bill.

•	The committee observed that the Bill does not specify whether the retirement benefits of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker shall form part of the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme structure.

•	The committee also observed that the Bill does not specify whether a person who resigns or ceases to be a Speaker or a Deputy Speaker but remains a Member of Parliament should rejoin the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme.

•	The committee observed that the Bill does not specify whether a person who is a Speaker or Deputy Speaker can defer his or her contribution in the scheme. 

Recommendations 

•	The committee recommends that the funding should be provided from the Consolidated Fund and the management of the benefits should be done by the Parliamentary Commission. 

•	The committee recommends that the retirement benefits of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker should not form part of the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme structure since these are two different structures with different management and administration.

•	The committee recommends that the person who resigns or ceases to be Speaker or Deputy Speaker but remains a Member of Parliament should be entitled to rejoin the scheme.

•	The committee recommends that a person who becomes a Speaker or Deputy Speaker may defer his or her contribution in the scheme.

The committee believes that if this Bill is passed into law, it will secure the retirement benefits of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker upon ceasing to hold the office of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker. The committee, therefore, recommends that subject to the proposed amendments, the Parliamentary Pension (Amendment) Bill 2010 be passed by this House. 

I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. Several Members of Parliament were invited to a workshop to review the Parliamentary Pensions Act with the hope of coming with amendments. In that workshop, we agreed on several other amendments to the Parliamentary Pensions Act and not only those relating to the Speaker and Deputy Speaker. There were several others. The chairman will bear with me.

Are we just going to proceed today to partly amend this Parliamentary Pensions Act to handle the issue of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker yet there are other pertinent issues which were raised by members including the will of members to access some of these funds in lieu of the coming activities? There were several other amendments. So, I do not know how today we zeroed down to only two. I just seek procedural guidance on whether we shall amend this today and then next week we shall bring the other provisions that would directly touch on all the Members of Parliament.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am aware that the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Parliament are the heads of this institution of Parliament. I was just wondering whether it was by error or otherwise that this Bill had to be handled by the Committee on Presidential Affairs. I thought the right committee would have been Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. I was actually taken aback. I do not know whether the office of Speaker and that of the Deputy Speaker is now under the President’s.

MR OCULA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Without entering much into the debate of this Bill, the committee is giving mixed signals. On page 5 -(Interjections)- no not yet; I am bringing out an argument. 

The committee recommends that the retirement benefits of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker should not form part of the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme structure since these two have different management. On the other hand they are recommending that we should go ahead and pass this Bill. I wonder how it is going to work out because here they are recommending that the pensions scheme should not form part of the pension of Parliament because of the structural differences and you are going ahead to say that we should pass the Bill. I get confused. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, to the best of my knowledge there are two Bills. There is this Bill, which was brought by the Minister and then the Parliamentary Pensions Board, has got another Bill. Maybe the chair can explain further. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It was this House that resolved that before we can proceed with the Bill that was to provide for the emoluments and the benefits of the President, Vice-President and Prime Minister, the Minister of Public Service introduces a Bill, which would provide for the Speaker and Deputy Speaker. The Committee of Presidential Affairs was directed by this House to handle the matter. 

As far as I am concerned, I am aware of the Bill that my friend, hon. Odonga Otto, is talking about. I am certain that, as the Speaker has intimated, at a later stage it will come. In consultation with the Parliamentary Pensions Board chairperson, we agreed that we can proceed with this Bill and they will also bring their Bill. It will be debated and all those issues that you heard in the workshop will be recorded and will be brought to this august House. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Both Bills seek to amend the Parliamentary Pensions Act. The first Bill entitled, Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment) Bill, 2010, Uganda Gazette, No. 24 Vol. C (3) dated 30 April 2010 was the first one to be presented here. The second Bill has the same title, Uganda Gazette, No. 26 Vol. C (3) dated 07 May 2010. Both of them are seeking to amend the same law. Why should we separate them - do one today and next week we come to handle the same law? 

If we were to be fair and move separately, why don’t we start with the first one for Members of Parliament, which came here first? Let us finish that one and then we go to the second one. What is so burning about the second one? It does not look nice if we proceed in this manner. I think the committee should withdraw the report and go back and make one combined report, come here and we handle the two Bills together. I thank you.  

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Speaker, our mandate as the Committee on Presidential Affairs was clear and we are here to report accordingly. We have finished our work. The other Bill is before a different committee and they have not finished their work -(Interjections)- it is the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee. So, I would beg that we proceed with the debate of our report as we wait for another committee to bring their report to this august House. 

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is during such times like this that I wish that we had a system like the one our Kenyan neighbours have so that you have an ordinary Member of Parliament or somebody else taking charge of this session. I am sure it is going to be a challenging time. 

I have been part of this process almost through and through, being a co-opted member of the board of trustees. Some of the issues that are coming up here actually came up previously. The clarification I want from the Minister is: did she consider the other relevant laws that apply to privileges in Parliament? There is the Parliamentary Privileges Act and we also have the Administration of Parliament Act, the one which establishes the Parliamentary Commission. 

We thought very honestly that it is under the Remuneration and Privileges Act that you would have brought this amendment and it would have been rightly housed there. As we seem to be proceeding, we are actually going, for purposes of expediency, to house it in the pensions scheme. However, if you follow the report of the chair, which we have not discussed, we are saying it will be administered by the Commission; it will come from the Consolidated Fund. The proposed amendments negate completely from the spirit, the form and the structure of the pensions scheme because we are dealing with a contributory scheme.

I want the minister to help this House appreciate why she chose to amend the Parliamentary Pensions Act, which is not in its own tailored to administer privileges. Because here we are looking at drivers, we are looking at a health insurance and the parent Act we are amending is simply looking at your contribution as a Member of Parliament and the contribution of Government for you as a Member of Parliament. We have the other laws, which would look at drivers, health schemes and security guards. So, let the Minister tell us why she made this decision then we can proceed accordingly.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We shall hear from the Minister; she is the mover of the Bill. 

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for this opportunity. We are at a very critical time in the history of the Eighth Parliament. I am feeling exceedingly uncomfortable that this matter hinges on the office of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker. I would honestly propose that we save ourselves and request the chair to withdraw the Bill so that it can be clearly regularised for avoidance of further stampede. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us hear from the minister who moved the Bill.

MRS SEZI: Madam Speaker, the genesis was described when we brought the Emoluments and Benefits of the President, Vice-President and Prime Minister Bill here. We were advised by Parliament not to proceed unless we brought the retirement benefits of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker. That is the genesis. We consulted the office of the Attorney-General and the Solicitor-General and we were advised that we house the benefits of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker by amending the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme. We proceeded based on that advice to look into the benefits. 

In the Bill we are indicating that the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker cease to be members of the contributors’ scheme and we must note that the benefits that we have proposed are only for retirement. Once they have finished the debate, we shall respond to those suggestions that have been made by the committee. So, we are proceeding through legal advice to make that amendment. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us hear from the Attorney-General.

3.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I think we are having a very tricky position which we need to sort out. It is true the offices of the Attorney-General and the Solicitor-General were consulted at the beginning. You know, sometimes you need to bear with us in our offices of the Attorney-General and the way we receive instructions. Sometimes you receive instructions, which at a later stage change. When, for instance, the parliamentary committees do transact business, do they revert to the office of the First Parliamentary Counsel to inform them of the relevant other modifications and also to adjust and advise accordingly?

You will bear with me because we all belong to these committees in here or we transact through them. Now, you can see this element of bringing in the report of the committee, the element of getting the money from the Consolidated Fund and the administration by the Parliamentary Commission. I really do not think those were the original instructions to the office of the First Parliamentary Counsel.

Based on this, we all regret that we may have to get back a little bit and then harmonise this position and get back with a proper position. I say this bearing in mind that I would not like to put you, Madam Speaker, in a very difficult and challenging position as the person chairing this session and as an interested party. I would not like to put you in a very uncomfortable position, so I would rather that the chairperson of the committee and the sector minister consider getting back to this House shortly, maybe next Tuesday, when we should have harmonised our positions. Thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I hope that in getting back they will also address the issue of which law is relevant. Okay, it is deferred. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES ON THE PERFORMANCE OF THE HEALTH SECTOR

MR WILLIAM WOPUWA: Madam Speaker, we have been meeting as the Committee of Social Services up to 2.30 p.m. and I think my chairperson is working on modalities. She will be coming shortly but we worked very late in order to complete the policy statement. Probably, if you gave us up to next week, social services will be ready with their report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, if you are not ready, there is nothing I can do. It is just that my office did promise that we should debate health in general several months ago. I am trying to complete what we had agreed to do.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE COMPUTER MISUSE BILL, 2008

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we had moved for the second reading and received a report but there is a request we made – Members were wondering whether it would be possible to place all the three Bills in one law? I think that is what we are waiting for you to respond to, hon. Minister of ICT.

3.54
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Aggrey Awori): Thank you, Madam Speaker. May I start by apologising that I was not here in the first place when the Bill was presented due to other state duties elsewhere? I come in the middle of the Bill. I have a response to the request by honourable colleagues; justification for not dealing with an omnibus law, in other words, all the three cyber laws as one.

It is a yes and no. Let us start off with yes. Yes, they could come as one omnibus law but that has serious implications on the time of the august House and also business pending in the courts of law. 

If we have to go back to the drawing board and come up with an omnibus law, it would mean again re-examining some of the issues where conflict might arise and thereby costing us time. 

We say no because the three laws deal with different things as explained in the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law model. There are three different models and transactions especially regarding the signature. As for crime, there is the European Convention on Cyber Crime, which caters for that. If I may go a little bit into more detail, combining three would present a definite problem. The best practice internationally is to treat them separately, as it happens in the case of Mauritius. 

The Electronics Transactions Act, abbreviated as ETA, is basically a framework law that creates among other things an equivalent of an electronic transaction to a paper transaction.

Why I hasten to say that we should finish with these laws separately, and to save time, we have pending matters being investigated in this country regarding these cyber thefts or cyber robbery. 

In my own ministry, under the privilege of this House, we took on some interns - young fellows suitably qualified in electronics and cyber material. This young fellow – I sent him to one of the well known banks to work as a computer expert in the IT department. Within no time, the young person had on his accounts over Shs 6 billion. To arrest him became a problem; under which law? Secondly, to arrest him would have brought bad publicity –(Interruption) 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Sorry for interfering with those details which the honourable minister, Aggrey Awori, my former colleague, was delving into. I just want to inform you that the trend Law Reform Commission is taking is now making legislation easier. For example, very soon we will be bringing here the Insolvency Bill, which combines issues of winding up of companies and issues of bankruptcy. The Marriage and Divorce Bill is combining the Divorce Act and Marriage Act to make it one piece of legislation. So, you really have to persuade this Parliament that these three pieces of legislation have to be totally independent of each other as opposed to what the Law Reform Commission is doing, and this is the trend. 

Tanzania has done so and Kenya successfully did it. Now we have insolvency laws in other countries instead of having the Bankruptcy Act or having the Company Act; I think it is just a trend. So, I do not know which trend hon. Aggrey Awori, my former presidential candidate, is trying to explain again. (Laughter)

MR AWORI: I hope my honourable colleague is still available for further deployment. (Laughter) Thank you very much, my honourable colleague. Yes, indeed the information you are giving us is true but not applicable in the cyber world. It is applicable in ordinary situations such as you have explained. But you know technology has changed our situation, especially the legal environment, totally. We have to come up with a new situation to meet with these new challenges. 

It is true, Law Reform Commission can actually come up with the three bound together; that can be done. But I am simply saying, like I said at the beginning, that it will have two problems. The first problem is the time factor; we have to go back to the drawing board. Secondly, we should not waste the time of this august House on a matter, which can be handled by the Law Reform Commission.

I would like to accept partially the advice from my former associate, who I believe is still available, in a different format that this cannot be done in this case. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable minister for giving way. The clarification I am seeking is whether the separation of the Bill was based on the advice of the Attorney-General so that we proceed. If it is the position of the Attorney-General that the three laws should be separate, then there is nothing we can do. 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, these Bills, I confirm, were drafted, of course, by the Office of the Parliamentary Counsel and they must have advised, in my opinion, appropriately.

In my opinion, there is nothing wrong in having subject specific legislation. The examples, which hon. Odonga Otto is citing – he may be aware that we have actually long shifted from the omnibus Bill to the Domestic Relations Bill for instance. We shifted from that position of the omnibus nature and we are bringing two Bills, one is already before the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee: the Marriage and Divorce Bill. And there is going to be another one to take care of the operationalisation of Article 129 of the Constitution as far as the establishment of Khadi courts is concerned. 

The Bankruptcy Bill you are talking about, as you are aware, bankruptcy and winding up matters of companies, were all in one law but for the need to have specific legislation, we had to separate them. There are now two Bills before the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee on bankruptcy and formation and administration of companies. That is the position and I am informing you because I am aware. 

It is good to have legislation of the same subject bound together for referential purposes. It is good but this is a matter, which can be handled by the Law Reform Commission. 

For instance, you must have seen this big volume that I normally carry here, and I believe many of you have it; this book you see is the Compendium of Electoral Laws. It is available at Shs 150,000 in the Uganda Law Reform Commission. It has all the laws from the Constitution to all the subsidiary legislations bound together and it is good for reference purposes. If you were to put all this into one Bill and come here with it, you would need another five years to do that; I can assure you. 

Sending back these Bills for purposes of harmonisation and whatever you are talking about to bring one Bill, may take you another two years. This may be much easier. Let us have these separate Bills passed; we can do the harmonisation for each for ease of reference. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

MR WACHA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Attorney-General, I don’t think they are talking about binding together; they are taking about amalgamation. And if it is amalgamation, I want to draw the attention of the House to our rule 100(1) which says, “Matters with no proper relation to each other shall not be provided for in the same Bill.” I thought I would help you, my friend. 

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, you can trust some friends stick together regardless of the prevailing environment. (Laughter) I would like to thank hon. Ben Wacha for providing that information at the right time. Notwithstanding the heckling, I never mentioned the word “congress.” (Laughter) Maybe the nearest thing I could have said, “People of previously common political DNA.”

However, to continue with my argument and definitely picking up from where hon. Wacha left off, these are two different matters and to put them under one law –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Just continue. 

MR AWORI: Look here my hon. colleague, Otto you tried to derail me that is why I am trying to assist you in understanding that notwithstanding what you mentioned, it can be done. However, we would like to have these three laws handled separately.  

The last part of the concern by the honourable colleagues was whether cyber laws could come under the Penal Code. Again this is a totally different situation and environment. When we talk about the Penal Code, say theft, which is a common thing under the Penal Code it will involve moving objects from one place to another. In the area of cyber, nothing moves. 

I will give as an example a hacker, how do you prosecute a hacker? A hacker is a person who trespasses on your communications or storage of data for a particular purpose. It could be that he wants to use it for political gain, or to confuse the owner of the information. How do you prosecute him under the Penal Code? These are inane items. That is why we say we definitely need separate laws to handle this kind of situation but not under the Penal Code. 

I believe this is adequate information and explanations to allow us go to committee stage.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Members, as I recall, we had a vibrant debate on the substance of this matter; our problem was on the form. But I think we are now in agreement that the form is not a problem. So, I now put the question that this Bill be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE COMPUTER MISUSE BILL, 2008

Clause 1

MR NABETA: Madam Chair, clause 1, we would like to re-phrase the definition of the word “access” to read as follows: “Access means gaining entry into any electronic system or data held in an electronic system or causing –(Interruption)

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Chair, are we dealing with the Computer Misuse Bill?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: If we are dealing with it, then clause 1 is commencement and clause 2 is interpretation. The chair is dealing with clause 2 when you called for clause 1 to be sorted out. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR NABETA: Madam Chair, clause 2, I would like to rephrase the word “access” to read as follows: “Access means gaining entry into any electronic system or data held in an electronic system or causing the electronic system to perform any function to achieve that objective.”
  
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are you are deleting the existing one? 

MR NABETA: We are re-phrasing the word “access.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are you suggesting that the original does not apply to any form of access? 

MR NABETA: No, we thought that it limits what it is supposed to achieve. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are you deleting the existing provision and substituting it with yours or are you adding on? 

MR NABETA: Yeah, we are deleting what “access” is now and re-phrasing it. We are deleting the whole of it. The justification is for clarity. The one in the Bill is long but it is vague. Since we have already defined what a computer is and electronic systems, the definition as it is now, in-access will encompass everything.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Does the Minister agree? 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chair, I am just begging that you use your prerogative and they supply us with some copies of the committee reports. We don’t have even a single copy on this side and yet we are very interested. (Laughter) Even ten copies will do because it has been a while before they brought it back. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Members, they were distributed. 

MR AWORI: Madam Chair, the primary responsibility of bringing this material to this august House lies essentially with honourable colleagues. Our responsibility stopped when we gave you the first copy and thereafter you exercised your own discretion.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Chairperson, this Bill belongs to the Minister for ICT and our duty and responsibility as Parliament is to help him enact a good law. If the Members don’t have copies of the report of the committee, regardless of what their responsibility in its regard is, they are not going to be very useful to you as we transact this business.

We accept that what you said is correct but I can assure you, I don’t know how many people have a copy of the Bill. I have a copy of the Bill, it was debated when I was not here so I even thought the debate hadn’t commenced. I asked that I get a copy because I need to understand the thinking of the committee who had that interaction with you and many other technical people to be able to say, yes or no, otherwise we will say yes.

MR AWORI: Madam Chairperson, I don’t want to get into diversionary debate with my honourable colleague. We could continue while we look for additional copies. [HON. MEMBER: “Can you surrender your copy?”] Never, I gave you my copy.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can the clerk facilitate additional copies? Okay. Minister, I was asking whether you were okay with the deletion of your original formation.

MR AWORI: Yes, Madam Chair.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I put the question that clause 2 be amended as proposed by the Chair. Oh, but there are others. I think you better present all of them.

MR NABETA: Madam Chairperson, for clause 2(b) interpretation of the word “computer”, we propose to delete the words “other than” appearing at the end of line seven of the definition of a computer and paragraphs (a) to (d) as they are redundant in the definition of computer.

Then in the interpretation of computer output, insert the word “information” immediately after the word “statement” appearing in line one. This is to broaden the definition.

Also delete the words “whether similar or not purporting to be statement or representation of fact”, appearing in line three and four as the phrase is ambiguous.

In 2(d) introduce the interpretation of the word “content” immediately after the definition of computer service. Content is defined as “includes components of computer hardware and software.”

In the interpretation of the word “damage”, rephrase (a) of the interpretation of the word “damage” to read as follows; (a) “causes any loss”. The justification here is that it is difficult to measure the financial loss resulting from a computer crime and secondly, the full extent of the damage may not be clear straight away due to the lack of forensic capacity. However, this loss may become clearer later.

In 2(f), interpretation of the word “data”, we want to rephrase the word “data” to mean “data means electronic representations of information in any form”. That is for clarity.

In the interpretation of the phrase “data message”, we want to substitute for the word “electronic” appearing in line two, the words “a computer” because the word is broad enough for the definition.

In 2(h), interpretation of the words, “electronic, acoustic or other device”, we rephrase the phrase to read as “electronic device, acoustic device or other device means any device or apparatus that is used or capable of being used to intercept any function of a computer”. This is for clarity.

In the interpretation of the words, “electronic record” re-phrase the definition of “electronic record” to read as follows: “Electronic record means data, which is recorded or stored on any medium or by a computer or other similar device that can be read, perceived by a person or computer system or similar device and includes the display, print out or other output of data”. The justification is that it is more encompassing.

In the interpretation of the word “information” insert the definition of the word “information” immediately after definition of the word “function” as: “Information includes data, text, images, sound, code, computer programs, software and databases”. The justification here is the word is being used in the Bill and is in harmonisation with the Electronic Transactions Bill later.

In the interpretation of the words, “information system” we want to add the expression, “… or any other information sharing system”, at the end of the definition of the term “information system” to broaden the definition.

In 2(i), we seek to introduce a definition of the word “person” immediately after the definition of the word “minister”. It should be: “Person includes any company or association or other body of persons corporate or incorporate”. The word is used in the Bill.

Introduction of the definition of the words, “traffic data”, “Traffic data means any computer data relating to communication by means of a computer system generated by a computer system that formed a part in a chain of communication indicating the communication’s origin, destination, routine, route, time, date, size, duration or type of underlying service”. The justification is the phrase has been introduced in the Bill. Thank you.

MR AWORI: No objection, Madam Chair.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chair, on the definition of “damage”, the chair of the committee brought an amendment that we insert “any” between “cause” and “loss”. That is on page 5. I think if we are to insert “any”, it defeats the purpose of putting the currency points there because the original text was, “damage means causing loss aggregating at least 50 currency points in value”. Now you are saying we say, “Damage means causing any loss”. So if you are talking of any loss then the issue of currency points wouldn’t arise now. 

I would rather suggest if you are insisting on “any” then we delete “aggregating to at least 50 currency points” so that whatever loss you cause even if it is just one currency point it still amounts to damage.

MR NABETA: Madam Chair, later on there is a small addition in the amendments, which says that if you have caused any loss, you have to pay the amount of loss you have caused so there is an introduction later to cover that. It is covered. It is only amending damage in (a). The others (b) to (d) remain.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Chair, this definition could cause a very serious legal argument because you could have a programme, which is as cheap as ten currency points and yet that is the basic value. Now when you talk about the aggregate loss - is it loss in terms of the other effects or loss resulting from that modification directly because I had a problem also with the assignment of penalties. We really have to separate the loss that will arise from somebody and then using the consequence of that action rather than the actual loss as valued from the action.

MR NABETA: Madam Chairperson, later on when we amend the clause, we are saying that if you have caused a loss of say ten currency points, the judge will issue that you will have to be liable for what you have caused. That is why we are saying it is for any loss so that it is now up to the courts to look at the damage you have caused and later on they will have to see how much loss you have caused. 

If say, you have only caused damage of ten currency points but actually later on it turns out that the person has actually suffered 200 currency points loss; it is up to the courts to look at the aggregated loss that you have caused by your actions and, therefore, now determine your offence. That is why the amendment later on says, “You will be liable for the amount of loss you have caused …” in addition to the other offences highlighted in the Bill. 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Then “any” will not be appropriate. I do not know and maybe we will recommit if there is a need but there is a problem I see although I have still not grasped it very well. But let us wait for that amendment that he is proposing and then later see if we think that with the amendment the definition is still not good enough, then we will recommit.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, hon. Otto.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Other than thinking of recommitting – you know like a telephone call costs Shs 300. If you deprive me of that, it is already a loss on my side. So, as far as loss is concerned, I think we should take the minimum. We could stop at causing any loss other than saying, “Any loss aggregating to 50 currency points.” Because a loss is a loss even if it is one shilling because you did that intentionally to deprive me. So, instead of standing it over, we could probably just remove the currency points and then say, “Causing any loss of such a value.”

MR NABETA: I guess this is one of the problems because we do not have the report. In the amendments, we have removed everything. We have just said, “Any loss.” It is like that.

Later on when you look at page 18 on the compensation – for the clause I am talking about, our amendment says that, “Where a person is convicted under this Act, the court shall in addition to the punishment provided therein, order such a person to pay by way of compensation to the aggrieved party such sum as in the opinion of the court just having in regard to loss suffered by the aggrieved party and such order shall be a decree under the provisions of the Civil Procedure Act and shall be executed in a manner under that Act.” But for now, we have deleted everything and just said, “Any loss.” Yes, we have removed it.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Just for the record, the word, “Any” is in reference to impairment and not loss. So, whatever you do, whether you modify it or you made the computer unusable will be any impairment, which is okay.  But if you have provided that in terms of aggregating - because there are going to be consequential losses beyond the Act. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. I now put the question that clause 2 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 3 do stand part of the Bill.

MR NABETA: Actually, we had proposed that clause 3 is deleted. The entire provision is redundant and so we had proposed that the entire clause is deleted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The Minister?

MR AWORI: No objection.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I put the question that clause 3 be deleted as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, deleted.

Clause 4

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 4 do stand part of the Bill. 

MR NABETA: On clause 4, rephrase the entire provision to read as follows, “A person who secures access to any programme or data held in a computer if that person: 
(a) 	Views, alters or erases the programme or data; 
(b) 	Copies or moves it to any storage medium other than that in which it is held or to a different location in the storage medium in which it is held; 
(c) 	Uses or destroys it; or 
(d) 	Causes it to be output from the computer in which it is held whether by having it displayed or in any other manner.” 

The justification is to avoid ambiguity and broaden the provision.

MR ODONGA OTTO: It looks like they are defining what securing access means. So why would it be a separate provision other than joining the definition section because virtually what is the impact of this section 4? It is just defining what securing access is. So why can it not join the definition action? I am trying to say it is defining what securing access is. So, instead of having it as a separate clause, it could probably also join the interpretation section.

MR NABETA: It is clearer because here we are laying the ground later on how it is that we are misusing a computer. So, we are actually highlighting how do you secure access to a computer? If you just put in the definition, then it is just a small thing but actually it is important because you must know how someone secures access to a computer.

MS BETTY AMONGI: On the same amendment, if you look at the definition of access and what is enumerated here, the last word under (d), “or in any other manner,” would be redundant because which other way would you secure access which is otherwise not defined under access and not enumerated under (a), (b), (c) and (d)? So this sentence, “or in any other manner,” would be redundant and I think it should be deleted.

MR NABETA: It is because technology changes so much that we actually had to make sure that the Bill is a bit neutral to technology. So, in case someone tomorrow invents other ways of making computer print output, then we do not have to go and amend the law. You have not created a lacuna for someone else to be able to use it in future purposes.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that clause 4 be amended as proposed by the chair.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5

MR NABETA: In clause 5, insert a comma immediately after the word, “programme” just to correct a grammatical error.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Where?

MR NABETA: In clause 5, the first sentence that says, “A person uses a programme, if the function he or she uses causes the computer to perform.”

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: The sentence as it is perfectly okay. There is no cause for a comma because you are making on single, straight statement.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do you really need the comma? I put the question that clause 5 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 6 do stand part of the Bill – yes, hon. Amongi?

MS BETTY AMONGI: On clause 6, I want the minister and the chair to consider adding (c) to say it is done according to any other law. 

This is because there are other laws like the Anti Terrorism Act and other security related laws that authorise access in the interest of national security. So, if it is left the way it is, they would be accessing programmes and data when they are not authorised to do so –(Interruption)

MR NABETA: Clause 6 is actually about those who have authorised access and it is specifically those people we are talking about. It is about those in monitoring centres – those are the people who have the access codes to listen to your telephone calls and so on. But they have to have rules of engagement to follow. And if they deviate from the rules of engagement in accessing what they are authorised to access, that becomes a problem. So, here we are only highlighting those people who have authority to access those programmes.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Chair, the provisions that hon. Betty Amongi is referring to are about interception. You know that interception and access are two different things. The Act may mean reaching the data or information, but what you do to reach there is the access, which is different from interception.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: This is dealing with authorised access. So, I put the question that clause 6 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that –

MR NABETA: Madam Chair, on clause 8, the committee proposes that the clause be re-phrased to read as follows: “A modification of the contents of any computer takes place if, by the operation of any function of the computer concerned or any other computer connected to it results into:  a programme data or data message held in the computer concerned being altered or erased or a programme data or data message being added to its content.” The justification is for clarity and to broaden the provision.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Minister – okay, I put the question that clause 8 be amended as proposed by the chair.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 10 do stand part of the Bill – yes, Chair?

MR NABETA: Madam Chair, on clause 10(2) I would like to propose that we rephrase it to read as follows: “A person who intentionally and without authority to do so, interferes with the data in a manner that causes the data to be modified, damaged, destroyed or rendered ineffective, commits an offence.” 

The justification is to broaden the definition because it is possible to modify or destroy data without rendering ineffective. 

MR KYANJO: Madam Chair, I would like to seek a clarification from the committee chairperson on clause 10(2) because a person who intentionally and without authority – that a person can have the intention with authority – it is difficult to know.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Then you consider that under clause 6.

MR KYANJO: What I am trying to drive at is: you have the authority, but you have the intentions to destroy data – I am just seeking clarification.

Two, the person can have the authority, but has no intentions because it has happened many times – if you get to the computer you have the authority and you have no intentions, but during the operations the computer itself hits a snag and you start having problems with the data. So, how do you get catered for under this?

MR NABETA: If the computer itself has a problem and you have not caused it, then that is not an issue. But here is what this clause covers – the person you are referring to actually is covered by clause 6. Therefore, he has authorised access – that is what we have covered in clause 6. In clause 10(2), we are saying that a person who intentionally - but they do not have the authority - they have now interfered with the data. That is what we are covering here.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Chair, if you have contracted a computer firm to service your computer or you have taken your computer for repair – the person repairing could actually interfere – this is what this provision stands for – it is to ensure that if you take your computer for service, somebody should not hack into it and claim that he was merely repairing when actually he was accessing your data. So, the provision as put is okay and it is important. 

But just for the committee chairperson to sort all this out – in part III we are assigning or ascribing offences – modification of content talks about a programme or data, but when you come to un-authorised access in clause 10, programme is left out. Clause 10(1) only talks about data. In (2) programme is left out and it is only in reference to data. We should amend it to include programme. If you read clause 4, you realise that it talks about access with programme or data. In clause 8, it is about programme or data and now you are assigning offences – I think it would be important to include both programme and data.

MR NABETA: We had assumed that when you are using a computer, you are already using a programme and so you will have qualified in terms of entering because if you see the definition of programme it is all about a set of commands. Actually it means data representing instructions or statements that when executed in a computer causes it to perform a function. It is already taken care of because you are now using a programme to do either authorised or un-authorised access. But we can add it in.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: When you look at that definition – for a programme, it will still be a set of data but there are two different sets of data. If you install a programme, then one knows that you are dealing with a programme itself and with data, you are dealing with data – this ambiguity can put the court to a halt for a week when we could insert the words without any contradictions and make ourselves clearer.

MR SEBUNYA: I am just calling upon my colleague to accept – if you use data, there is what we call customized programmes for specific organisations. The programme can also be pirated so you can include it. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question –

MR NABETA: on 10(3), we want to delete the phrase: “With the intent to utilise unlawfully that item to contravene this section …” appearing in line six and seven that in clause 10(3). We are proposing to delete the last sentence. And in 10(4) interchange the words, “overcome” and “unlawfully”. 

In 10(5) we propose to re-phrase by deleting the words “Commits an act specified under this section with intent to interfere with …” appearing in the first line of the provision to read as follows, “A person who gets access to any information system so as to constitute a denial including a partial denial of service to legitimate users commits an offence.” 

The justification is the use of the phrase causes confusion since several acts are referred to under this Act. 

And then in 10(7), substitute the word, “Twelve” appearing in line two with the words “Two hundred and forty” and the word, “Six months” with the word “Ten years” respectively to make the sentence more deterrent. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I put the question that clause 10 be amended as proposed.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: I do hope that the clause as amended includes the inclusion of programmes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes. I put the question that clause 10 as amended be made part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 11

MR NABETA: In 11(1), we propose to re-phrase the entire sub-clause 11(1) to read as follows: “A person who commits any act specified under Section 10 with intent to: 
1)	Commit any other offence or to facilitate the commission of any other offence commits an offence. The justification in the current provision is confusing and does not clearly bring out the elements of the offence and thus likely to cause a challenge during prosecution.” 

In clause 11(3), substitute for the word “offence” appearing in the second line of the provision, with the word “act”. The justification is: for clarity. 

In clause 11(4), delete the entire sub-clause (4) of clause 11. The justification is: to establish the legal principles of attempt which is covered under clause 19. 

In clause 11(5), substitute for the word “seventy-two” appearing in line two with the words, “two hundred and forty”, and for the word “three” appearing in line three, with the word “ten” respectively to make the sentence more deterrent. 

In clause 11(6), delete the entire sub-clause. The provisions for the sub-clause have been catered for by the amendments under this clause. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: In 11(1), I think the suggestion by the committee chairman would be bad drafting because he is saying, on page 9 of the report, No. 7: “A person who commits any act specified under Section 10, with intent to commit another offence or to facilitate the commission of another offence, commits an offence.” I think that is tautology. I would rather suggest that from the chairman’s draft we would say, “A person who commits or facilitates the commission of any act specified under Section 10 commits an offence.” 

MR NABETA: Madam Chairperson, Section 10 talks about unauthorised access; what we are looking at in Section 11 is that you can actually be able to gain unauthorised access but you want to facilitate another crime; you enter into a programme and then you want to transfer money. So we are saying that in 11(1), “A person who commits any act specified under 10”, if you are entering a computer without authority to commit any other offence or to facilitate anyone else to commit an offence then you are committing an offence. If maybe entering a programme or rendering some security doors open for someone to commit a crime - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There are two offences; the first one is unauthorised entry and the second one is facilitating another person.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Then instead of saying, “Commit an offence”, we should say, “You are facilitating someone to commit an unlawful act”. So we should say, (a) Commit an unlawful act (b) Facilitate commission of that unlawful act. So that it is those acts that amount to the offence because it ends with commits an offence. So it will read, “A person who commits any act specified under Section 10 with intent to: (a) Commit any unlawful act (b) Facilitate the commission of an unlawful act commits an offence.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It depends on the severity of the sentence –(Interjections)– the Attorney-General is not here but the sentences may be different. 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Chairperson, when you look at 5, you are now prescribing a sentence that may be totally unrelated in what you will have done in facilitating an offence. Yet if it is read the way it is, that is the only liability that the person holds. I think we have to craft something notwithstanding this one; “Any liability or offence …” so that it is clear that this is not the final sentence; this person can still be pursued on any other matter. 

For example, if I give a password of a computer to someone who transferred money, and the loss is us $10 million, the only offence is this one. If you read it simply, the only offence would be in 5, which is to access. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think the chairperson is trying to attach a sanction to the word “offence”. It may be an unlawful act but may not attract any sentence. But if it is an offence, I think that judge will be on notice that this is an offence, which should be punished; but for unlawful act – so what?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chairperson, the chairman’s draft ends with, “commits an offence”, that is the last phrase. Those unlawful acts are what results into commission of the offence. What we need here is being specific. If you say, “A person who commits the offence in “a”, commits an offence”, you must be specific which offence you mean at this stage. So, let us just say the unlawful acts in “a” and “b” are what would amount to the offence at the end; that is what we call specificity – you must state the offence meant. 

MR NABETA: Madam Chairperson, we accept that since anyway at the end we say, “… commits an offence” it will make it broader. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Anything else on 11?

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Chairperson, I suggest that we stand –(Interjections)– let me clarify. Let me read 5 for you. Yes, 11(5) says: “A person who commits an offence under this section is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 70 [MR ODONGA OTTO: “That one has been amended.”] No, even with the amendment - now, if these other offences, which you have committed are valued as I said at US $10 million and yet you have committed it under this; you are liable on conviction to a fine, a very small fine -(Interruption)

MR NABETA: That is why in the other compensation clause we are saying it is covering the whole Act that whatever loss, it is the offence plus whatever loss you have caused the organisation, the person or whatever. So, the other clause that I read covers the entire Bill. As I said, clause 20; let me read it again. It says -(Interruption)

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: I think this calls for a provision of “notwithstanding” so that it is clear in law that you will still be pursued for any and if it came under this then this penalty read with it, it would be much clearer because it means you have provided for that one but it has to come immediately under this “notwithstanding”. So if you add it somewhere, it would be good to bring it here because this is where offences and penalties are being exacted.

MR NABETA: Madam Chair, actually, that was the analysis when we were doing the amendments. We kept putting it after every clause then we said in the end, “Let us just put it to cover the whole Bill because for every offence, the loss is not really known at the time”. That is why we put it. The amendment we have made at the end covers the entire Bill. For every clause, it says that actually. That is why we say it is compensation.

MS ALASO: Madam Chair, sorry for taking you back to 11(4) and yet we have been on (5). It reads, “A person may commit an offence under this section even though the facts are such that the commission of the offence under this section is impossible.” I have been trying to understand this. I kindly got lost -(Interjections)- You deleted? Okay. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 11 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 12 do stand part of the Bill.

MR NABETA: Clause 12, rephrase 12(1) paragraph (b) to read as follows, “… has the requisite intent and knowledge at the time when he or she does the act.” This is for clarity.

And 12(5), delete the words “or is” appearing before the word “intended” in line three. It is a typographical error. 

And 12(6), substitute the word, “one hundred and twenty” appearing in line two with the word, “three hundred and sixty” and for the word, “five” appearing in line three with the word, “fifteen,” respectively to make the sentence more deterrent. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chair, I do not see anything wrong with modifying a computer that we should make it an offence -(Interjections)- unauthorised but like people down town, they are modifying computers produced by Microsoft to increase the RAM. They have not sought authorisation from the manufacturers of the computer, but they are doing it as day follows night. So, why are we criminalising these local initiatives?

MR NABETA: Madam Chair, we are not curbing innovation. Innovation is destiny. Actually, this is one of the key protectors of innovation because once you create something, it should be protected. That is the issue. You give incentives for people to be innovative. What we are looking at more here is in any case of a computer programme or content – let us say you are in medicine and you are using a laser and you have programmed a laser to do a certain incision and somebody modifies it and instead of cutting off the hand, it cuts off the head. You have modified a programme to cause – that is why the sentence has to be higher to be more deterrent.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Anything else on 12? 

MR NABETA: I actually read all of it. 12(1) and (5)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I put the question that clause 12 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 13

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 13 do stand part of the Bill.

MR NABETA: Clause 13, unauthorised use of interception of computer service. Clause 13(1)(a), interchange the words “without authority” and “to any other computer” for clarity. The penalty, to re-phrase the penalty in 13(1) to read as follows, “…commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 240 currency points or to imprisonment not exceeding 10 years or both and in the case of a subsequent conviction, to a fine not exceeding 360 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding 15 years or both” to make it more deterrent.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, Minister? No objection? I put the question that clause 13 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 14

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 14 do stand part of the Bill.

MR NABETA: Clause 14, the penalty phrase to read as follows, “… commits an offence  and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 240 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding 10 years or both and in the case of subsequent conviction to a fine not exceeding 360 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding 15 years or both.” 

In clause 14(2), delete the entire sub-clause to avoid double prosecution. The essence of the provision is catered for under the compensation clause introduced in the Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Any objection? I put the question that clause 14 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 15

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 15 do stand part of the Bill.

MR NABETA: Clause 15(1), re-phrase the entire sub-clause and delete paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) and re-phrase it as, “A person who unlawfully or without authority discloses any passwords, access code or any other means of gaining access to any programme or data held in any computer knowing or having reason to believe that it is likely to cause loss, damage or injury to any person or property commits an offence.” For clarity, the provisions of paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) are catered for under the rephrased sub-clause (1) of 15.

In clause 15(2) re-phrase the entire sub-clause to read as follows, “… commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 240 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding 10 years or both and in the case of a subsequent conviction to a fine not exceeding 360 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding 15 years or both.”

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Chair, my concern is that the word “knowingly” has been left out. If “unlawfully” was added and the word “knowingly” left - sometimes if you say without authority means that you have to have authorisation; sometimes, you do not have to have authorisation but you knowingly do it. So, I think it will be important to add the word “unlawfully” but retain “knowingly.” We retain the word “knowingly” but also add the word “unlawfully” as suggested by the committee.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But then “without authority” is also “unlawful”. You are actually repeating. I do not know why you actually amended.

MR NABETA: Madam Chair, the problem was that when we were looking at it, we thought when it is unlawful and you also do not have authority, then if you leave “knowingly,” then of course it does not seem to carry more weight anymore because you already have “unlawfully” and you do not even have the authority. So, you can’t say that you unlawfully and without authority accessed or disclosed the password. We thought that would give people leeway to say that. 

So, the issue was if it is unlawful and you do not have the authority to disclose the password, then of course you are already committing an offence. Because if you insert “knowingly” then people will start using it as an excuse; but if you unlawfully give access and you do not have the authority, then definitely, you must have an idea of what you were doing.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Suppose I work in a bank and I know a code to access funds and although I don’t get authority from my boss to pass it on and I knowingly still pass it on; isn’t that knowingly?

MR NABETA: Madam Chairperson, we are already saying that once you do it, you have already committed the offence. We are saying whether knowingly or not, you shouldn’t pass it on. Once you pass it on, you have committed an offence. Once you do, you have then opened the flood gates. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam chairperson of the committee, what they are trying to say is, suppose I work in the bank and I know the code, and I also think that I have the powers to pass it on and I pass it on and after some few hours, I am notified that I do not have the powers; - the issue of “knowingly” still becomes relevant because I thought I had the powers to pass it on and I have only realised that I don’t have the powers. So, why should it be an offence? Probably, they just changed job descriptions that very morning - 

MR NABETA: Madam Chairperson, now that is an issue of administration. If you work in the bank and you think you have the authority but somehow you no longer have the authority, it is the system administrator who should have made sure you no longer have the authority. So, actually, it is no longer your issue because it is them to make sure that you no longer have access to the password.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: By “knowingly” imports the mens rea and it is a major element in improving a commission of an offence. If that is your intention, it proves you are through with your intention – 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Actually, the “knowingly” is so important that I would even suggest they leave out the “unlawful” because without the authority, it would be unlawful but “knowingly” is very important. 

MR NABETA: Madam Chairperson, I then propose that we add “unlawful knowingly,” so that we can accommodate “knowingly.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is repetition.

MS RWAKIMARI: I am just wondering about the word “knowingly”. How measurable is it? Why don’t we use the word “deliberately” because I can claim that I did not know? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think if we could revert to the other formulation – 

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, I was just thinking if we insert, “a person who knowingly and or without authority” would it not capture both situations?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: And then we do not need to have unlawful again. To me, “knowingly” is stronger than “unlawful.”

MR NABETA: I accept hon. Alaso’s proposal. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 15 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 16

MR NABETA: Madam Chairperson, in clause 16 sub-clause (1), insert the word “or” between the words “law” and “in” appearing in the second line of the provision –(Interjection)- and in sub-clause (2), substitute the word “seventy two” appearing in line 2 with the words “two hundred and forty” and for the word “three” appearing in line 3 with the word “ten” respectively to make it more deterrent. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay? I put the question that clause 16 be amended as proposed.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Chairperson, I seek clarification from the committee. They have a data record book and I wonder whether they are referring to two separate things or they are referring to a record book.

I seek clarification because for documents, if you include books, you will then have journals and all kinds of written materials and yet they will all be in data form. So I don’t know why they specifically singled out books because we have electronic journals and all kinds of things. I am asking whether you need to specifically spell out books in this particular case.

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, these days people are coming up with all sorts of computer packages. So, they designed this one to sort this accounting system and the other one and so forth. I am wondering whether these that have been stipulated in this provision capture those packages as they apply. People design computer packages, data packages and so forth. So, I am wondering whether this provision in this sub-section captures that possibility; that you can access what is not originally yours; that you can modify it into what you want or into a package. Would that be considered information, a document or a register or just a software package? 

MR NABETA: Yes, in clause 16, it is that when a person who accesses any electronic data or electronic record or electronic book is - actually the clause was broad enough to accommodate any sort of available electronic data that someone can be able to dispose off. So, that is why they had highlighted all of those because sometimes you can have a book and it is electronic and you actually don’t have to buy the hard copy. 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: I asked that question because that is one of the biggest problems with the unauthorised disclosure of information as put here. When you look at the kind of things that we have listed, for example music, you could have music, which you are transmitting to a publisher and somebody intercepts it and gives it to another musician who then quickly comes out and uses it. That would be an offence. 

So, if you spell out books, then you probably have to include music because it is a very huge element in these electronic things. So, I would suggest that you include music as an element and then look at your concluding sentence. So you have to insert, “… any other material…” or “… any other content ….”

MR NABETA: So, you are proposing that we add electronic music? Ok. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But clause 16 is, “unauthorised disclosure of information”. How does music come in? In the marginal note it is unauthorised disclosure of information. 

MR NABETA: Because when you look at unauthorised information we are looking at critical information for organisations, those mostly information -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is infringement of copyrights -

MR NABETA: Exactly. So, I thought music would actually be in intellectual property rights/infringement of copyrights and not to be catered for. We are talking about information stored in computers and computer systems, which can be accessed by someone who maybe does not have the authority to do so. So, we had thought those ones - and that is why maybe some people had actually talked about bringing the IPR law as well because it covers the issues of YouTube and these music sharing issues that are actually going on now. 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Chairperson, on the question you raised, you see when you look at the list of things listed, in line four, the fifth last word is “information” which is in the side note. So, it would be the intention - something is in the mind of the drafters which is not just information up there. They may have to change the marginal note because information is repeated down here and the content of what you have is more than just information because that data could be data related to programmes which is not even information.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chairperson, leaving it the way the chairman of the committee is suggesting would cause no harm because after information, we go to documents and any other material. So the list even gets broader. We are not only stopping at information but “… any other material …” because of the nature of the changing cyber world. 

So, I would think that the idea of adding music should be abandoned because what is remitted - like if you go with a flash disk they give you electronic data and not necessarily music. So it can still be accommodated in data other than becoming specific and saying “music”. When you go with a flash disk what they give you is electronic data. That data only transforms into music. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Maybe can you read out what it says, “… except for the purposes of this Act or for any prosecution for an offence under any written law in accordance with an order of court, a person who has access to any electronic data, record, book, register, correspondence, information, document or any other material shall not disclose to any other person or use for any other propose other than that for which he or she obtained access, the contents of that data, record, book et cetera.”

MR NABETA: Actually, if you look at our amendment on information we are saying that information includes data, text, images, sounds, codes, computer programmes, software and databases. So, that is the amendment we had made on definition of information.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: If that is the case then what is this information? 

MR NABETA: Unauthorised disclosure of information as it reads except it says, “With an order of court.” A person who has access to any electronic data, record, book, register or correspondence ….” If you look at the definition of information we are saying it includes data, text, images, sounds, codes, computer programmes, software and databases. If you have access to that you should not be able to disclose it to any other person except for the purposes of which you are authorised to do that. Even if you sent it and someone else intercepts it then of course they are not authorised to actually access it and actually give it to someone else. So, it covers your concern. 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: I am actually dealing with what would be an editorial contradiction. If the side note is of unauthorised disclosure of information - (Interjection)- yeah, fine, and information includes data. Now if you list electronic data and you again list information there is something wrong -(Interjections)– Madam Chairperson, you have just come; we have been on this Bill for a long time. Please, we are trying to help but this is not the usual thing.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chair, clause 16 is that if for court purposes you obtain this data, you must not remit it to any other person for further use. That is the mischief we are trying to address with clause 16. So, if that is the intention then the heading would still remain - I would only suggest - these things of “… except for purposes of prosecution…” would remain redundant and we would start from the third line and say, “a person who gains lawful access to any electronic data, record, book, register, correspondence, information, document or any material shall not disclose it to any other person or use it for any other purpose other than that for which it was obtained,” and we leave it at that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think the intention was to create the exceptions whereby you can disclose. That is for purposes of prosecution. For instance, if you have somebody’s will and it is an electronic will and then you are ordered by the court to disclose – yes, they were creating those areas where you can disclose. 

MR NABETA: Actually it is if you have access to it and then you unlawfully show it to somebody who is - but if you are lawfully allowed to show it then you can show it. That is what we are trying to cure. If you have access to that information, data, books, records, anything, you are only supposed to use it only where you are allowed to. If you use it outside, you commit an offence. So, it is looking at that and -(Interruption) 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you for that. So, if that is the intention, we can maintain all that you have put but we stop on “access”. “… the material … shall not disclose to any other person or use for any other purpose other than for which it was obtained … access”, and we stopped there because adding the content of electronic data is a reputation of what we had mentioned earlier on and so we could stop at access to avoid reputation just in a space of three lines. 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Chair, the elements are already clearly stated. I think repeating it is redundant and actually it makes the sentence incomplete if we continue. So, I would rather agree with hon. Odonga Otto that we stop at “access” because –(Interruption)

MR NABETA: Madam Chair, we accept that. We shall stop at “access”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, hon. Members, I put the question that clause 16 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 17

MR NABETA: Madam Chair, substitute for the words “One hundred and sixty eight” appearing in lines 2 and 3, with the words, “Three hundred and sixty” and the word “seven” appearing in line 4, with the word “fifteen” to make it more deterrent.

Clause 17(2), move the definition of electronic fraud to the interpretation section and insert it immediately after the definition of “electronic acoustic” for easy reference.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I have not understood the rational for removing this from here to -

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Chair, probably the proposal to move this to general definition is not necessary because it appeals only to this section and therefore if it remains [MR ODONGA OTTO: “Where are we?”] clause 17, because we dealt with electronic fraud only in clause 17. Nowhere else in the Bill is it referred to. So, I think for the purpose of its use, it is better to remain as it is.

MR ODONGA OTTO: I would suggest then (2) comes in the place of (1) so that (1) is defining electronic fraud and then (2)is putting the penalties that would come with electronic fraud other than the results.

MR RUHINDI: I think Madam Chairperson the order is okay because you cannot start by a definition. The definition is defining for purposes of that section, so it should actually come after clause 1.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 17 do stand part of the Bill - did you say you had amended?

MR NABETA: We amended clause 17(1) and we had said we move to clause 17(2). We amended the penalty but we have now left clause 17(2) where it is.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 17(1) be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 18

MR NABETA: Madam Chair, in clause 18(10) substitute for the words “A fine not exceeding two hundred and forty currency points or imprisonment not exceeding ten years or both” appearing immediately after the word “to” in line 4, with the words, “imprisonment for life” to make it more deterrent.

In clause 18(3), re-phrase it to read as follows: “For purposes of any prosecution under this section, it shall be presumed, until the contrary is proved, that the accused had the requisite knowledge referred to in subsection 2”, to avoid ambiguity.

MR ODONGA OTTO: In clause 18(3), which the chairman is proposing, you will be presumed to be having knowledge until the contrary is proved. I do not know what value it adds because the burden still remains on the prosecution to prove that you had knowledge. So, stating in law that - like if you arrest me, you presume that I had knowledge until the contrary is proved. It looks like it is changing a constitutional principle. The burden would still remain on the prosecution to prove that I had knowledge which is already a constitutional provision. We do not have to again say you are presumed to know. I think we could just delete it and be silent on it. The Constitution speaks on presumptions.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Supposing I work in the Ministry of Defence, I am a very powerful officer in the Ministry of Defence managing the security information of this country, then I disclose that information, really wouldn’t I be someone who is expected to know that what I am dealing with is sensitive.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Chair, the presumption of innocence that hon. Odonga Otto referred to is about the crime, it is not the activity that leads to a crime. If we took his argument, then you completely defeat this law because somebody can stand up and say, “I actually do not know anything to do with computers.” [MR ODONGA OTTO: “It does not shift the burden of proof.”] Wait, let me finish.

He could argue and you spend all your life proving that he has knowledge. It is very diversionary litigation. This is to make it abundantly clear that you, who has been working in that sensitive place, cannot plead ignorance until - the burden of proof will be yours. The offence is there and we will pursue the offence rather than this diversion. This sub-clause (3) is very important to the law.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, both submissions are correct; of hon. Odonga Otto and hon. Ogenga-Latigo. Really hon. Odonga Otto, you cannot read (3) in isolation of (2). In any case, the reference is made to clause 2 because in clause 2, the same section or clause says, “For the purposes of sub-section (1), the computer is treated as a protected computer if the person committing the offence knows or ought to reasonably have known that the computer or programme or data is used directly in connection with or necessary for the following”.

So, it is a question of evidence. Evidence must be adduced to show that the person knowingly or reasonably ought to have known. It is a question of evidence. I do not see any presumption. We are actually looking at your knowledge as a specific ingredient in establishing the offence.

Unless you say there are some other provisions within the same text. I have not internalised the whole of it carefully; this is not a case of strict liability. I don’t see any inference of strict liability in this matter. As far as the offence in Section 18 is concerned, there is no strict liability. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Just a clarification. I am wondering what presuming that I had knowledge would add. Assuming I have been arrested and I am for a bail application, we are giving an automatic ground to the prosecution to say this person had knowledge. There is a clearly set presumption in the law and it can be used as a ground, for example, to deny me bail because my innocence is now being questioned by a written law. My innocence is already being questioned; because the law specifically states, before Nabeta is arrested, you are presumed to have knowledge on how those protected computers work. 

So, I really do not see the value of leaving it here other than being silent on it because you are going to give grounds. I am now lesser innocent because before I was arrested they presumed I had knowledge. I am just seeing the dangers of it. It has advantages but it may also be subject to misuse by opposing counsel.

MR NABETA: Yes, we understand from the analysis of some of the people we met but the issue was that these people are handling critical and sensitive material. They should be handled differently because they are handling critical things that can bring the whole nation down. So, this is a very delicate issue. People managing radar systems; people managing airports; nerve centres of defence forces; these are people who have access to very delicate information that actually should be handled very delicately and separately.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: First of all, I would like to protest the solidarity of the lawyers. Hon. Attorney-General got up and said we were both correct. And his submission clearly showed that I did not have a problem but hon. Odonga Otto had a problem. But because they are both lawyers, they covered their backs very nicely. 

But (3) is really about enhanced punishment. It is not about conviction. In other words, they are going to give you extraordinary conviction on account of the fact that these are very sensitive matters and you have to only protect it by making that clear in the law and applying it to the letter. 

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, I am even asking a totally different question with regard to this section. My concern is this whole element of protected computers in regard to access to information. If you look at issues like infrastructure and banking and stuff like that at one point or the other we would need some of this information. Doesn’t this attempt to classify all the information in this country and therefore officers involved will say these are protected computers; because we are no longer keeping our information in books. All information is going to be in these computers. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I want you to recall that in 1994 when the President of Rwanda and Burundi were flying into Kigali, how did the information that they were arriving get out? And as a result of which they were hit out of the air. Someone had access to their movements; intercepted them and the rest is history.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chairperson, since we are talking of protected computers, those who are in charge of protected computers, defence, security, radars, they are few. I would imagine like the CIA or FBI - those who are in the inner core. The standards of judgement against them should be higher. So, if those are the categories we are targeting, then I think it would be unfair to arrest someone in charge of the national radar and then he says I do not have enough knowledge on how to operate radar. But we should also not forget people who employ their relatives hoping they can learn on the job. (Laughter) These provisions will put them in a very difficult situation. But I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 18 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 19

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 19 do stand part of the Bill.

MR NABETA: Clause 19, re-phrase the entire sub-clause to read as follows: “(1) A person who aids or abets another person in committing an offence under this Act commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a punishment prescribed for the offence. Any person who attempts to commit any offence under this Act commits an offence and is liable on conviction to the punishment prescribed for the offence. 

“Attempt” is defined as: “When a person intending to commit an offence begins to put his or her intentions into execution by means adapted to its fulfilment and manifests his or her intentions by some overt act but does not fulfil his or her intentions to such an extent as to commit the offence, he or she is deemed to attempt to commit the offence.” 

2. It is immaterial, “(a) Except so far as regards punishment, whether the offender does all that is necessary on his or her part for completing the commission of the offence or whether the complete fulfilment of his or her intention is prevented by circumstances independent of his or her will or whether the offender desists of his or her own motion from further prosecution of his or her intention;

(b) That by reason of circumstances not known to the offender it is impossible in fact to commit the offence.”

Justification: for clarity.

In clause 19(2), we should delete the entire sub-clause. Justification: The clause introduces matters of jurisdiction, which is adequately covered under clause 23.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Maybe the marginal note - you know, “abetment” here means to abet. So, I think you needed to address your amendment because yours is correct but what is in the Bill, this “abetment”, means something has abetted; that it has expired. Yours is correct but the one which is here has a problem.

MR RUHINDI: I must plead guilty. I have not internalised this report. I do not know whether the committee really had the services of our counsel in Parliament because there is a whole chapter in the Penal Code on “aiding”, “abetting”, “attempts”, definitions thereof. Even if you were to just pluck out one bit like they have done and put it in here, I really don’t know what justice they would be doing to this subject. Unless the chairman assures me – for instance the definition of “attempt” that they are putting here is different from the definition of “attempt” in the Penal Code or whether by adding in “aiding” because “aiding” and “abetting” under the Interpretation Act means the same thing. If there is no difference, I would be constrained to leave the provision as it is so that we take definitions of these expressions the way they are in the Penal Code. 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Chairperson, when I looked at the proposed amendments, I became completely lost as to what they want to achieve. But if you remove the typographical mistake, which is in this clause 19(1) where that offence ends, that follows the act, if it is removed, and you re-read that particular clause 19(1) and I read: “A person who abets the commission of or who attempts to commit or does any act preparatory to or in furtherance of the commission of any offence under this Act is liable on conviction to the punishment prescribed for the offence.” 

In other words you don’t want the prescription of the punishment to depend on the practices related to abetment etcetera; you are being specific as to the kind of punishment that the person should face. And I believe it is okay. Is it okay to –(Interruption)

MR NABETA: Madam Chair, actually this was one of the issues we were discussing with the DPP on why some of these young people who use computers to transfer money have actually failed to be prosecuted is because of the lacunas in the Penal Code specifically with Section 244 where it has to be a “thing” and in data it cannot be a “thing”. So, there were some things that they were trying to heal in this particular one. And sometimes someone will try to hack into a bank to steal money; the system may finally fail them but they actually attempt to hack into banks to transfer money, which is also a crime. Therefore, it is to heal some of the lacunas which are in the Penal Code.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: But shall we leave it as it is?

MR NABETA: No, we have redrafted it. That one is accommodated by the re-drafting in the amendment. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But, honourable chair, I have a problem with your deletion of clause 19(2). You know, I can be sitting in New Zealand and I am abetting with someone here in Kampala. This provision is enabling me to be caught even although I am in New Zealand to be capture by this law. 

MR NABETA: We are accommodating that in clause 23. Later on we are accommodating cross jurisdictions where if somebody is here and commits an offence in the UK, or someone is in UK and commits an offence here, we are accommodating it in clause 23. So, it is later covered so that if you commit an offence here while using a computer, you are extradited and prosecuted. 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I have had the benefit of looking through the drafted proposed amendment by the committee and I have been assured that these were actually proposals by the DPP. I am aware that the Directorate of Public Prosecutions has undertaken specialised training of specialised staff in these particular areas. So, I think that we should respect the proposals of the DPP unless there are some maybe minor changes to make it flow. Otherwise, we could go with the substance. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Attorney-General, I don’t know whether these would then be statutory offences where we would charge them or we shall still charge someone under the Penal Code? Because in the absence of that, if they are charged under then Penal Code, then the definition of “attempts” in the Penal Code would prevail; I still think it would be very risky to adopt this definition of “attempts” by the committee because it has not been tested. At least the one of the Penal Code, case law has prevailed in certain circumstances. It would not be very advisable. 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: I don’t know, law is a funny thing but logic is always consistent. If I have only attempted, how do you declare that I have committed that offence?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Because you have committed an overt act. 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: I have committed an offence of attempting. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes. 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: But I will not have done it.   

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: And I think it is punishable. (Laughter)

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Yeah. You see, Madam Chair, I am saying this very deliberately because what is in the Bill is far clearer, it has no controversy if you compared it to what is being proposed; and they achieve the same goal. Therefore, I would go with something which is clearer. 

Hon. Attorney-General, there is a mistake in what is in the Bill; after hacks, you just remove that offence; delete them and read it again and you find that, as it is, it is actually clear. 

In clause 19(1), there are three words that you need to delete, “that offence and …” line three. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can you read it again? 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: If you delete the three words after the act, “that offence and ….” Once you have deleted that, and then you read what is provided, it is very clear and what is being proposed doesn’t add to that clarity. So, I propose that the amendment should be just to delete those three words and leave clause 19(1) as it is.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Members, is the punishment for attempt the same as the punishment for the actual offence? 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: This is what this is prescribing. Without going into the debate whether attempting is actually the same as doing it. It says that if you attempt, you will be punished as if you did it. This is what this is saying.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Was that the intention?

MR NABETA: Madam Chair, the explanation is that if you attempt - and if you have our report, we are defining attempt whereby if a person intends to commit an offence, he begins to put his or her attempt into execution by means adopted to its fulfilment. That means now you have intended, you are working it; you are hacking it and moving into. You want to hack into a computer so that you can disable the security network of a building and enter. 

You do that but somehow or somewhere the security system on the other side detects you and arrests you. So, actually what you wanted to do if it were not that the means were beyond you, you should have actually committed the offence. Therefore, you should be treated like a person who has committed the offence. That is why we are making sure that we are doing the same thing but removing the lacunas which are there so that it is clear. 

MS BETTY AMONGI: Can the Attorney-General help us in other laws whether attempting, commissioning, furtherance and the actual crime attract the same penalties? Like if I attempted to murder and I didn’t or I helped someone to further the cause of murder, do they attract the same penalties under other laws? I am asking for clarification from the Attorney-General.

MR NABETA: Let me start and then the learned Attorney-General will come in. The issue was that we have to look at computer issues differently from the Penal Code, which was done before the technology advances, which we are in. If you looked at the definitions in the Penal Code, Section 244, you would see that they will say theft. In 289, if it is burglary, you have to physically force yourself into something.

With computer systems, it is different because you are actually in cyber space and are trying to hack into something; so, it is not physical. It is not there as it is physically in burglary. It is not physical that actually you are stealing a thing or taking property or trespassing. In trespassing, you must trespass in someone’s physical space and here you are trespassing in cyber space. So, this is actually enhancing the Penal Code.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Members, an attempt is an attempt. Either you have completed or not completed. They cannot be the same thing.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I think the information hon. Betty Amongi is seeking is straight forward. Abetting or attempting cannot attract the same punishment like that punishment where a person commits the actual offence; they cannot. But I am a bit persuaded to go with this proposal and I am also persuaded by the fact that it came from the DPP because in the proposal by the committee, it clearly spells out aiding and abetting as one offence and attempting as another. It goes further to make a definition of attempt and does away with clause 19(2) in the present Bill, which confuses matters of jurisdiction. So, I really think we can go with the proposal.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Chairperson, I really do not want to be presumptuous but I still do not see the point that is being brought out. Hon. Betty Amongi used a good word. If we substitute murder in the first part - if you abetted a murder –(Interjections)- no, what your sentence says is that you commit murder. You attempted murder and you are charged for murder. The point, which is in 19(1) is that even when you have not killed, your intention was to kill. So, you will suffer the same punishment as someone who has killed.

It is much clearer than you suggesting that attempted murder becomes murder because you said, “commit that offence.” When you have not committed murder but you tried to murder, it will not make real sense whether in the computer world or in the human world. As it is in 19 (1) whether you tried - in fact, if you say that, then we have to modify what we have here and say, “… under this Act, commits an offence and is liable upon conviction to a punishment prescribed for ….” It will not even come. I give up and leave it for the lawyers.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Madam Chairperson, I think what the chairperson is advancing is different from what the Attorney-General is advancing. The argument the chairperson is advancing is that they want aiding and abetting to attract similar penalty with the actual punishment because they feel that in the case of computers, there is a very thin line between the actual offence and attempting. 

But the Attorney-General is insinuating that the new amendment is restricting the offence to aiding and abetting but there is no specific offence in this law, which we have passed previously that prescribes a specific offence for aiding and abetting; it is not there. So, if you want this amendment to include aiding and abetting as a different crime with its own penalty, then here under the amendment it should read, “A person who aids or abets another person in committing an offence under this Act commits that offence …”, presuming it is that offence of aiding and abetting “… and is liable, on conviction, to punishment …” and you put the punishment here. 

But if you continue to say, “… to the punishment prescribed for the offence”, this provision is saying aiding and abetting will attract the same offence as the actual offence and for me, I do not agree that aiding and abetting in computer should attract – because, you can find me trying to copy the document or altering but I have not yet copied it to my UPS. I am attempting to delete but you found when I had not yet deleted. Maybe I am a spy and attempting to transfer data from ESO, maybe to another security agency but I have not yet succeeded in transferring that information. So, I am still attempting. You cannot make me -(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Madam Chairperson, computers are funny. An attempt on a document - if you went with the description of hon. Betty Amongi, you have a document of 80 pages. She has been attempting up to 43 pages and already she has that data with her. She has not succeeded with the entire document. What happens?

MR ODONGA OTTO: I think when a charge sheet is drawn, probably the Attorney-General will advise. You could be charged for smuggling information but the prosecution fails to prove all the ingredients. Automatically, attempting could become a minor and cognate offence of the actual offence. So, we do not have to state - I do not know whether we have to state the offence for attempting because the magnitude would vary; but the moment the court tries to see whether I committed murder, in an event that they fail, for example, in our law, they could pass a conviction for manslaughter because they would have failed to meet that test.

So, in this case, if they are prosecuting you for having done something and they fail and only establish that you attempted, we could leave it to court’s discretion because the degree of attempt would vary. However, if we say attempting is liable to five years then we are adding more people on the bandwagon because you could be charged for attempting as opposed to doing the actual thing.

Therefore, I would still think that the definition - I have read through the definition, which the committee is proposing and it is more self contained than the one in the old text.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Members, even when you are convicted of a minor and cognate offence like murder and manslaughter, manslaughter does not carry the same sentence as murder and it is provided for; it is life imprisonment. That is the ultimate. It can even be one year. An attempt really is an attempt because you have not completed.

MR NABETA: Maybe, just one example. You are trying to get some information from one system to another. You actually send the information but somehow the system fails to deliver that information but actually you have sent it. You have attempted to send information in an e-mail, you have tried to attach it to an e-mail to send some delicate information somewhere but somehow the system fails to deliver that information, but you have attempted to send it and so you have actually done the act.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But you have not succeeded in delivering it where you wanted it to go.

MR NABETA: Because the system has failed to deliver but you have actually done the act; you have sent it.

MR KYANJO: What the chairman is advancing is quite critical. There are sets of data that do not go straight away, say in the case of a message; you send and you have succeeded but there has not been any message of delivery or success of delivery. Then, the next day, the message is received. So, by the time you are caught, there is no evidence that you succeeded but a day after, the message is received. Actually, you succeeded but the machines had not delivered through the system. What do we do under such circumstances?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You could be caught by unauthorised access and we have provided for it.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Chairperson, it was I who raised the question and I would like to concede. 

I have looked at it again and it is very difficult to measure the scale of what happens inside a computer in court. I think, stated as it is, it allows for somebody not to find room to escape in terms of, “show me the scale of what I have done.” I have read it again and I think this is emphatic and I would support the amendment as proposed by the committee.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 19 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 20

MR NABETA: Under clause 20(i), insert the word, “unlawfully,” immediately after the word “person”. The justification is that the current provision makes the offence of child pornography one of strict liability and yet there may be lawful situations where one may possess the same, for example, law enforcement, research and genuine scientific purposes. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Pardon me? Read that again.

MR NABETA: It is clause 20(i): “A person who unlawfully ….” It is actually after “who” - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Pornography is pornography.

MR AMURIAT: I would like to make an amendment to this particular clause by deleting the word, “child” wherever it appears under this clause with exception of clause 2(a) where I would want the word, “person” to replace “child”. The justification for this -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: He has not yet responded.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: He has not responded.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Mr Chairman, please respond.

MR NABETA: The issue of why a person who unlawfully – because there are some people either maybe they are investigating and they are collecting that data – there are those law enforcement people who are allowed to have it just for purposes of what they are doing and then after that case is closed, they should not have it. 

So, the stakeholders we were discussing with said if we actually leave it as it is, even law enforcement officers who are dealing with such an issue will be doing it illegally, and they can now be prosecuted under this Act. So, that is why we put, “unlawfully,” because even the law enforcement person has only limited time when he or she has access to lawfully have that information. After that, it is then definitely unlawful.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, but is he the one producing it? The key words are, “producing,” and “pornography”. 

MS ALASO: Like you said, Madam Chairperson, the key words here are, “production,” “transmission,” and “distribution”. Really, is the person who is holding evidence the one producing or transmitting pornography? 

I think the person who is holding evidence is evidence about this and not that the person is the one who owns or who has been in possession of it. He is just holding it as proof that somebody was found in possession of this type of stuff. But also, that the committee should propose that for purposes of research, pornography - children for research purposes? Really! I think that this is providing a lee way for people to have excuses to have child pornography on their computers. I do not think there should be any research that allows people to abuse children in a pornographic way.  

MS BETTY AMONGI: I see the point the committee wants to make because the person who may be doing research or a law enforcement officer might print or even photocopy, which will tantamount to producing – but, I think what would happen if they could just bring a sub-clause, which would be to the effect that “for avoidance of doubt, a person who uses it for research, this section will not apply.” The issue of adding “unlawful” will presume that there is some lawful pornography. That is the problem with it.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: If you look at the structure of this clause, it spells out those conditions under which you would be committing an offence. If the worry is that we need to protect lawful possession, then we go to (e) and amend just (e): “Possesses child pornography on a computer system or on a computer data storage medium without lawful … -(Interjections)- Yes, that will now cater for those people who will -(Interjections)– please! Then you can put, “without lawful purpose,” together with, “commits an offence.” So, because you cannot have unlawful or lawful pornography, it is not possible and so you cannot insert the word there. You can only insert it -(Interjections)– but not unlawful pornography.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let us finish that, “A person who without lawful ….” 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: “… without lawful authority.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: And then (a), (b), (c) and (d) and (e).

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think that will – is that the same one?

MR KYANJO: I do not know whether I am not attempting to understand this because when you read (e), you realise it has child pornography on a computer system. But if I am on my system and I can access the web and, therefore, I can find pornography all embedded there, what is the fate of the situation? Is this specifically for the child?

MR AMURIAT: Madam Chairperson, as I had submitted, I am a bit uncomfortable with limiting pornography just to the child. I know that there is pornography where adults are portrayed and if this law is made the way it is, we will as well have condoned adult pornography. The danger with this is that whereas we may argue that it is okay for adults to watch sexual activities on a computer or any other media, we must realise that computers are shared equipment. There is no way you are going to stop your son or daughter who is a minor from accessing such pictures on the internet.

By deleting the word “child” and maintaining pornography as a stand alone word, we are saying we do not want any kind of pornography in our system. That way, we are going to protect children who may have unlimited access to the computer from pornography. The import of this particular clause, in my understanding, is to prevent and protect young people from engaging in pornography. This will curtail them from being lured into having sex at an early age, which is so damaging to them – (Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Thank you, hon. Member for giving way. The way this one has been structured simply means that if one was produced and distributed adult pornography to children, there would be no crime. Where is it? -(Interjections)– where is the law? The way this has been structured means that we are only talking about child pornography, which means that if I produced adult pornography, that would run to children without any case.

MR NABETA: Madam Chair, I did not read clause 20 in totality with the amendments we had made, but if you look at it, you realise that there is a provision, which says that a person who makes available pornographic material to a child, commits an offence. We have catered for that.

MS ALASO: Madam Chair, I am following up from where the chairperson of the committee stopped – so, if you make it available to me as an adult and I do not want it, but I find it on my e-mail, what is the penalty? The truth be told, two or three years back you would get into the library and find horrible stuff in your email in-box. Whether you wanted to watch it or not, it was there for you. So, if I am an adult not interested in consuming this pornographic stuff, but it follows me into the parliamentary library, what do I do?

MR AMURIAT: Madam Chair, I want to challenge my colleague to tell what is good about pornography whether you watch it as adult or your child watches it. As an adult, you have access to live things. Why do you have to watch a simulation yet you can see something in real life? Is this some form of entertainment?

MR NABETA: Madam Chair, we were looking at a law of misusing a computer; I think we are now going into a different territory. For us it was just simple, to look at the misuse of a computer; only looking at the parameters of how a computer is misused. So, why should people want – that is not our business. The business is about misusing a computer. And we are trying to make sure that the guidelines in the law are protective of the children either from being exploited or from being exposed to pornography. Adults can choose what they want because that is not our job here. Our business is about protecting the children from being exposed to pornography via the computer. That was the essence of this law.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Chair, if you went to the United States of America or any of these developed countries or if you went to the Scandinavia countries, there are even beaches where adults go, leave their clothes somewhere and do whatever they want as adults. Even here in Uganda we have places where things, which are worse than looking at a nude picture published in a magazine, happen. The fundamental principle is that in doing that you should not be in breach of any law. If as it is occurring in the world particularly in regard to peadophilia, which has even affected Churches. The point is that this provision is to ensure that we do not leave room for that to happen. But to pretend that there are people, who probably watch pornographic movies before they can satisfy their mates, is totally unfair. Let us deal with the children who have to be protected. Let those adults deal with their problems in their own way. If the country decides that they are going to censor, we still have a censorship board in existence, which can screen the kind of movies to be watched and the kind of pictures to be published in the magazines. That can be dealt with under the censorship board, but not this law.

MR AWORI: Madam Chair, I just want to correct one wrong impression before I come up with a summary. I would like to support the position presented by the hon. Leader of the Opposition. This particular aspect we are looking at is the most powerful instrument for the peadophilia - adults who abuse children for their sexual satisfaction.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Members, the chairperson of the committee had said that he also had a provision dealing with adult pornography. Let us finish with the children.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Chair, that notwithstanding, I sort of have an impression of what the chairperson of the committee wants to bring up. In fact, he mentioned it here that restricting distribution of what adults can see to children as a step up measure to prevent children from watching what is meant for adults to see. Some of these might not be intensive, and besides what the Minister has just told this House, we do not want children to be attacked by rapists. But it exposes adults to this kind of behaviour and it could cause humiliation among adults and results in what you want to prevent. 

So, my position is that the scope of this should be widened beyond child pornography and this way we are not going to see careless parents who share laptops or PCs – pornographic materials with their children – (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: The clarification I am seeking before we get absorbed in hon. Amuriat’s good suggestion – forget about child pornography; does the law allow pornography? 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I have not properly addressed my mind to that particular issue. Depending on who introduced you to the law, at Makerere University, there is always a common phrase when being introduced to the law, that “a good lawyer is not necessarily one who knows the law in his head but the one who knows where to find it”. 

But to the best of my knowledge, pornography is prohibited under the Penal Code; we only need to find the appropriate provisions in the Penal Code. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Now that the Attorney-General has said it is prohibited under the Penal Code, there is nothing wrong with hon. Amuriat’s suggestion that we legislate for pornography comprehensively, children or not. I think we are prohibiting someone from sitting on a computer to produce a blue movie for children or adults. We are prohibiting that abuse. Since pornography is not allowed in our laws, hon. Amuriat’s suggestion is right. We should just delete the word “child” so that we can legislate comprehensively for pornography until such a time when we can get those liberal views. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, wouldn’t the issue of the child affect the severity of the sentence? Wouldn’t we say we have a bigger sentence for child pornography and maybe a different sentence where adults are concerned? I do not what to remove the focus on children.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Madam Chairperson, I still would want this provision to be confined to the children because at this moment there are very many of us who use our computers instead of the TV. If you subscribe to DSTV, I am sure many of you subscribe to DSTV; I want to ask a question: if a subscribe to DSTV and I use my computer to watch the programmes, and most of the movies on DSTV are pornographic –(Interjections)– there are movies you watch beyond a certain time; yes, they put age limit. That is why I am saying that we confine it to children because as an adult, I can consent on what programme I want to watch from those. 

The scenarios here would be that even DSTV is producing and distributing pornography to us who subscribe to it and so the law would also catch DSTV for distributing pornography to me. 

MR SEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, I want to concur with hon. Amongi; let us confine ourselves to child pornography, because in this cyber world, you have to make choices on a computer. So once we widen it, we are going to pass a law where which is impossible to enforce. Pornography is just imported rather than manufactured here in Uganda. So we should make a provision to protect the innocent who have no control over what they see.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Members, what if I watch it here and dispatch it to Buddo Junior School - if I just send out adult pornography to Buddo Junior School? 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Chairperson, as much as we may accept the concerns of hon. Amuriat about pornography, we do not have any definition that will allow us to state the extent to which something becomes pornographic in the context of adult pornography. But with child pornography, it is not permissible anywhere. And, therefore, when you legislate for it you do not run any legal disputes or contradictions. But with adult pornography, I know there are XXX rated movies, which they show late at night. They are more pornographic than you can imagine. Those can be dealt with without bogging us down because that concern will not go away; but let us first deal with this concern. The worst is on TV and this law is not about TVs. 

It will mean that you cannot legislate for TVs – it will be a coherent law. But that must be through a process that addresses pornography where submissions should be made. I do not know to what extent submissions were made to the committee on adult pornography. How can we then make a decision?

MR NABETA: Madam Chairperson that was also a very big issue in the stakeholders’ meeting. But overall, the commits were that we should not overstep the boundaries of what we are trying to do, because you will get into bogging down. 

So, we are saying that we only limit this to children and then if the penal code is amended and enhanced, it can cover everything to do with pornography in every area of interest. So in order not to do more damage on this, they told us to only deal with the children; that is from the experts. But you should know also that 65 per cent of internet traffic is pornography. So, if you make things that you cannot really implement, you are wasting time. So, can I read the amendments?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: First read the amendments -(Interjections)- Let him first read these amendments; they may solve the problem. 

MR NABETA: For 20, Madam Chairperson, we have amended 20(1) to read as, “A person who without lawful authority ….” 

In 20(1)(a), (b), (c) and (d), delete the word “system” wherever it appears in each of the paragraphs. The word computer is defined and is well-encompassing for any medium as far as the computer is concerned.

In 20(1)(e), the word “system” or “computer data storage medium”, delete it because already, we have said computer, the word “computer” is defined and broad enough. Insert a new provision as sub-clause 2 to read as follows, “a person who makes available pornographic material to a child commits an offence,” to make the section more encompassing.

In clause 20(2), which should now be 20(3), delete the word, “visually,” appearing in line 2 because it is restrictive. Any display is an offence.

In clause 20(2)(a), (b) and (c), substitute for the word, “and” the word “or” in each of the paragraphs. The justification is that the conduct may be sexually suggestive and yet not explicit. 

The provision in (a), (b) and (c) requires both conduct to exist thereby making it restrictive.

In clause 20(3), rephrase the entire sub-clause to read as follows: “A person who commits an offence under this action is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 360 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding 15 years.” This is to cater for a new sub-clause and of course to make the penalty more deterrent. 

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, the amendment that has been moved by the chair, clause 20, “A person who” and then he added there “lawfully,” was not meant to apply there if I followed the debate well. This is because we cannot lawfully produce child pornography or offer to make available child pornography lawfully. It was meant to apply to sub-section (e) where you are in possession. That is the case for law enforcement as was argued but the question of production, I think you do not even need permission. There will be no authority granted to you whatever the case, to produce child pornography. You cannot have lawful production of child pornography really.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, supposing I am an investigating officer and I am investigating somebody who says he has not done anything; then using my means, I extract pornographic material from his computer and I produce it for the courts as evidence?

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, in that case, you are not the one producing child pornography. You are just in possession of materials, which you extracted. That is why (e) would be the only case where the lawful application would apply. In the first instances, it does not apply. Actually, if we look at (a), we are saying that in this country, there is a law that allows somebody to bring children and subject them to child abuse lawfully. It cannot work like that because there is no provision. I thought lawful application should be shifted to (e) only. 

Then, I want to move an amendment on sub-section 2(a) where it says, “a child engaged in sexually-suggestive and explicit conduct.” I think this framing for (a), (b) and (c) is not child-friendly. It presupposes that the children have the ability to choose to be engaged, involved or whatever. I think wherever this word “engaged” appears, we should delete it and substitute it with “portrayal.” “A child portrayed in a sexually…” I also want to add there “abusive, suggestive and explicit conduct.” I do not think children below 18 have the ability to choose to get engaged in these types of things.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is why they use the word, “depict.” Hon. Members, I do not know. Why don’t we defer this issue of pornography? At first I was convinced by the proposal that we add something at the top but now it has disappeared.

MR RUHINDI: It disappeared? Madam Chairperson, I am sympathetic to the submission of hon. Alaso, but in a very dynamic society and when it comes to giving evidence in court, the process is intricate. Many things happen. For as long as we have categorically stated that the person doing whatever does it without lawful authority, then you have committed an offence. That covers it. Why can’t we be broad? When you are making a law – for instance, if you restrict it to (e), “possession,” you are very restrictive. You are not envisaging. Here, we are thinking. But if we get out of this House and then you say, “I wish we had broadened it.” So many things will come to your attention. As long as the person is doing it with lawful authority, he is covered. If it is without lawful authority, he is not covered. That covers it.

MS ALASO: My discomfort is the insinuation that in this country, lawful authority can be granted for the production of child pornography. Is such an instance likely to happen in this country? I want to be convinced.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is why I was talking about an investigating officer hacking into Awori’s computer, producing that pornography and sending it to the judges to use as evidence. Maybe there are three judges -(Interjections)- that is lawful.

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, in that case, it is not the investigating officer who produced the pornography.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, as an accused, I can say the man is the one who produced it. I did not do it. He is the one who did it; but he is an investigating offer and has got authority to assist the courts - 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Chairperson, I urge hon. Alaso to go back to the element she referred to for consideration in (2) because “engaged” I agree with her is hostile to the child. If it is visually depicting the child in a sexually-suggestive and explicit conduct, that child is not really - the word, “engaged,” is a bit strong. Sometimes, it is a negative suggestion yet when it depicts a child in a sexually suggestive and explicit conduct, a person appearing to be a child engaged in sexually -(Interjections)- yes. We can delete the word, “engaged.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I think you are aware that we are not talking about children who are in your homes. There are children who are trafficked as sex slaves and can be photographed and told, “You do this. Put your leg like this.” Yes, and then those materials are published. You know. 

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, the reason we are running away from the word “engaged”, seems like this person we are calling a child – I think by our Uganda situation, we have a definition of who a child is. Once somebody is a child, they do not consent. I think this engagement brings in an insinuation that the child is a willing partner in the commission of whatever is happening. That is why we are thinking that it is only the depiction of this child in a sexually suggestive and explicit conduct, whether you want to argue that the child is willing or not willing, the moment you depict a child in such a situation, you are dealing in child pornography. But if we carry the word “engaged”, it will seem like we are suggesting something else. The use of that word is not child friendly. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But this provision actually protects the child. It is saying “for the purpose of this section, child pornography includes pornographic materials that visually depicts a) a child …” it is protecting the child. 

MR AMURIAT: But Madam Chairperson, I think the arguments that are being advanced make me think of reviving my earlier proposal. When you say that child pornography includes pornographic materials that visually depict a child engaged, that means there is nothing wrong with a child looking at pornography that depicts an adult engaged in sexually suggestive and exploitative conduct. Sex is sex whether done by an adult or a child; the operation is the same. And so, I would like to seek the indulgence of this House. I know, of course, that the element of experience comes into play when we talk about adults. I would like to implore this House to rethink child pornography vis-à-vis pornography and if some Members are not happy about it, I would rather be defeated on votes than concede. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: This is a computer misuse Bill. We are not engaging in whether we are going to prohibit pornography or not. If that is the situation, then why should we allow someone to go to Kampala, get a video camera and film adults having sex? That video camera is a computer and so, we are prohibiting that activity with any computer. We are prohibiting the misuse of the computer in relation to pornography. So, hon. Amuriat’s argument still stands. Whether the moralists decide later under the Pornography Act that we should allow pornography in Uganda, it makes this provision redundant. I do not want us to pass a law on child pornography and then tomorrow we make pornography illegal in Uganda and then we run back to amend this particular law that we are passing. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Members, I want to suggest that we stand over this particular area so that we think about it, so we balance the arguments on both sides. I put the question that clause 20 be stood over.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20, stood over.

Clause 21

MR NABETA: We had a proposal to insert clauses 21, 22, 23 and 24 immediately after clause 20, which would now be cyber harassment: 

(a) “A person who commits cyber harassment is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 72 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding three years. For purposes of this section, cyber harassment is the use of a computer for any of the following purposes:

i)	Making any request, suggestion or proposal which is obscene, rude, pervertious or indecent;

ii)	Threatening to inflict injury or physical harm to a person or property of any person or knowingly permits any electronic communication device to be used for any of the purposes mentioned in this section.

iii)	Offensive communication: any person who willfully and repeatedly uses electronic communication to disturb or attempt to disturb the peace, quiet or right of privacy of any person with no purpose of legitimate communication, whether or not a conversation ensues commits a misdemeanor and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 24 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding one year or both. 

iv)	Cyber stalking: any person who willfully, maliciously and repeatedly uses electronic communication to harass another person and makes a threat with the intent to place that person in reasonable fear for his or her safety or to a member of that person’s immediate family commits the crime of cyber stalking and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 120 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding five years or both. 

The justification is to broaden the Bill to cater for crimes like cyber harassment, cyber stalking and offensive communication, through emails. 

(b) Compensation: this clause talks about compensation. Where a person is convicted under this Act, the court shall, in addition to the punishment provided therein, order such persons to pay by way of compensation to the aggrieved parties, such sum as in the opinion of the court having regard to the law suffered by the aggrieved party, and such order shall be a decree under the provisions of the Civil Procedure Act and shall be executed in a manner provided under the Act.”

The justification is that compensation will help the aggrieved party recover the loss or damage incurred as a result of the accused acts or missions. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the proposal is for the new offences. Does anybody have proposals for these, that is, cyber harassment, offensive communication, cyber stalking, and compensation? I put the question that those new clauses be introduced as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NABETA: In clause 21(5), insert immediately after sub-clause 5, paragraph (d) of clause 21, the following:
“Compel a service provider within its existing technical capability to collect or record through the application of technical means or to cooperate and assist the competent authorities in collection of recording of traffic data in real time associated with specific communications transmitted by means of a computer system”, to broaden the provisions of 21(5). 

In clause 21(6), we delete the entire sub-clause. It is speculative and may lead to abuse.

In clause 21(7), delete the words “whether by virtue of search warrant or under section 6”, appearing in lines 3 and 4. Having deleted sub-clause 6, the words are redundant. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 21 be amended as proposed.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 22

MR NABETA: Madam Chairperson, insert the word “set” between the words “any” and “standards” in the third line to ensure that the provision is not abused. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 22 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22, as amended, agreed to.

MR NABETA: Re-phrase clause 23(i) to read as follows: “Subject to sub-section 2, this Act shall have effect in relation to any person whatever his or her nationality or citizenship and whether he or she is within or outside Uganda,” for clarity. 

MR AMURIAT: Madam Chairperson, I would like some clarification from the chairperson, especially in relation to clause 23(2) where “an offence under this Act is committed by any person in any place outside Uganda, he or she may be dealt with as if the offence has been committed within Uganda.” And then under (3) you say, “For purposes of this Act, this section applies if for the offence in question; the accused was in Uganda at the material time.” 

This seems to be some kind of contradiction. How do we reconcile this?

MR NABETA: Madam Chair, the two are different. You were looking at 23(2) where an offence under this Act is committed by any person in any place outside Uganda and he or she may be dealt with as if the offence had been committed within Uganda. That is saying that if any person is in any place outside of Uganda and he or she commits a crime within Uganda - because you might be outside and you go into a computer system, you come into Uganda, and you go into a bank and take money. That is being accommodated. You will be treated as if it has been committed in Uganda under this Act. Depending on where you are, where the computer is, where you are committing the crime.

In 23(3) “For purposes of this Act, this section applies if for the offence in question; the accused was in Uganda at the material time.” You may be in Uganda at the time and the computer programme or data was in Uganda at the time. You do not have to be in Uganda but if the material time the money is stolen from the bank – “… at the material time”, that is the effect. So, it does not matter whether you are within Uganda at the material time, but if the act is done to a computer in Uganda, it is still the same. It applies.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You might be sitting in Washington and hacking into the computers of the Bank of Uganda.

MR NABETA: So, it will still be -(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: I do not know the jurisdiction of this law after it has been passed. You are going into other people’s territories. Somebody is manufacturing pornography in Germany somewhere in his house and you want to apply this law? Supposed the country does not have such a law, what happens? How effective is this law going to be?  

MS AMONGI: I do not have major problems with this. The only clarification I want the chair to give us is the question of extradition because it is clear (3) is saying the accused was in Uganda and the computer programme or data was in Uganda. So, assuming someone is a Chinese and he was in Uganda at the time of the crime or the computer that committed the crime was in Uganda, if Uganda does not have - because there are always international treaties that people sign to extradite criminals and Uganda does not have those treaties with all the countries in the world. In circumstances where this particular person is in a country where Uganda does not have a treaty to extradite this person, how will you implement this provision?

MR KYANJO: Madam Chair, I am still interested in 3(a) and (b) because 3(a) is talking about the accused being in Uganda at the material time or the computer or the programme being in Uganda. I want to reverse this trend. The person is away and the computer is away but he is capable of infiltrating Standard Chartered Bank Uganda. What happens -(Interjections)– yes, he is capable of infiltrating the databank of Standard Chartered Bank Uganda and gets the money from here. So, according to this specification he has no case to answer.

MR NABETA: Madam Chair, that does not arise. You must either be in Uganda or the computer system must be in Uganda; otherwise, then you are not in Uganda. I mean if the money is in Standard Chartered Bank, unless you are going to the headquarters of Standard Chartered Bank, then the law of Standard Bank, wherever you are, will apply. So, you either must be here or the computer programme you are accessing must be here. If the money you are stealing - you understand. So, either you must be here or the computer must be here or both can be in Uganda. But at least one must be here for this Act made in Uganda to apply.

For international jurisdictions, there are actually three major international conventions after we have passed this law. Most of the investors have been afraid to come to Uganda because they said we did not have this law in place. After this we are going to be able to sign on three international conventions like the European International Convention on Cyber Crimes. All those will be able to cater for all the extraditions. You can cooperate with Interpol or Police in London and they will go after someone who has entered a Ugandan computer in London as if actually you were there. So, this is what facilitates international collaborations in terms of going after those hackers. That is actually what they use the international conventions for. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But how? You are saying there will be a fourth law, which will be supervising these others? That is what you are saying? (Laughter) After the signing; isn’t it?

MR NABETA: Actually, the most important law is the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law. That is the model law we have used to come up with these cyber laws. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPESON: How do you import it into this?

MR NABETA: We have. What they say is that after this we have to be signatories. There are actually three books -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, this is how you become a signatory?

MR NABETA: Yes. Once you have passed this in your country, you can be able to sign because you have put a framework in your country which can actually help them to deal with criminals in your particular country. You cannot be a signatory to those international conventions if you do not have a domesticated law to address the issues in your country and that is why we follow them so that we have a law here which is similar to theirs. So, if anything happens then it is easy for collaboration. 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Just to help with clarity. Computer crime does not have a physical boundary and therefore, the other element of defining in physical terms becomes very difficult and dealing with the crime in terms of boundaries becomes very difficult. The boundary is the connectivity that you would have and, therefore, it became imperative that there is international collaboration in fighting computer-based crime and this is part of the process of us becoming part of that international network to fight computer crime.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 23 be amended as proposed.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 24, agreed to.

Clause 25, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the Bill be renumbered consequentially.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NABETA: Madam Chairperson, we are proposing the insertion of a new part III in the Bill, the computer misuse offences; and part IV, miscellaneous, become parts IV and V respectively and the new part III is inserted to read as follows: 

“Investigation and procedures:
The preservation order: any investigative officer may apply to court for an order for expeditious preservation of data that has been stored or processed by means of a computer system or any other information or communication technologies where there are reasonable grounds to believe that such data is vulnerable to loss or modification. For purposes of subsection 1 data includes traffic data and subscriber information. An order made under sub-sections (1) shall remain in force:
(a) Until such a time as may reasonably be required for the investigation of an offence;
(b) Where prosecution is instituted, until the final determination of the case until such time as the court deems fit. 

Disclosure of preserved order: the investigative officer may, for the purpose of a criminal investigation or the prosecution of an offence, apply to court for an order for the disclosure of:
(a) 	All preserved data irrespective of whether one or more service providers were involved in the transmission of such data;
(b) 	Sufficient data to identify the service providers and the path through which the data was transmitted or electronic key enabling access to or the interpretation of data.

Production Order:
1.	Where the disclosure of data is required for the purposes of a criminal investigation or the prosecution of an offence, an investigative officer may apply to court for an order compelling;
(a) Any person to submit specified data in that person’s possession or control which is stored in a computer and;
(b) Any service provider offering its services to submit subscriber information in relation to such services in that service provider’s possession or control.
2. 	Where any material to which an investigation relates, consists of data stored in a computer, computer system or preserved by any mechanical or electronic device, the request shall be deemed to require the person to produce or give access to it in a form in which it can be taken away and in which it is visible and legible.”

This is for clarity in the investigative procedures and protection of data.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that a new part III dealing with investigations and procedures be introduced.

MR ODONGA OTTO: In line with the law we passed yesterday, I think we should come out clearly on the form in which an investigative officer can make this application; whether it is oral or whether the minister has to design a standard form. Because yesterday, we encountered the same thing and we agreed that the application needs to be standardised. That you state the grounds in which you feel such data maybe lost other than leaving it open-ended. We could add 1, the form in which the application would take; that the minister may be by statutory instrument, may design the form in which those investigative officers just fill other than leaving it open because we cannot make an oral application, we may need something formal in court.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But doesn’t the Civil Procedure Act apply to this law?

MR RUHINDI: I think there are relevant procedures of court. If you are applying to court, either you look at the procedural rules or the criminal procedural rules and then you make an application accordingly. In any case, if there is any lacuna that needs to be filled, then the minister is given powers under the last clause 25 to make regulations to fill the gaps.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that part III on investigations and procedures be introduced into the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Part III, agreed to.

The Schedule, agreed to.

Clause 2

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We consider it together with the pornography. Please, Minister first move for resumption of the House.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Chair, we have worked very dedicatedly over this Bill and the matter that hon. Amuriat introduced that caused us to stand over clause 20 is a matter that even if we came back on Tuesday, we cannot resolve because it is more fundamental than the object of this Bill. My appeal is that rather than bogging this Bill down and pushing it to next week; I would like to appeal to my colleague hon. Amuriat: the moral issues related to how you deal with those things can be debated in many ways. Let us resolve this Bill and allow the minister to proceed with preparing for the next one. Otherwise, we put it to question.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chair, we were developing a consensus and I would not want us to end on a question of voting. First of all, there is no question to vote on. The law does not allow pornography whether for elders or for children. There is no way we are going to selectively legislate on pornography for children; it can be challenged in any court. So, instead of hurrying and pushing something down hon. Amuriat’s throat, pornography is illegal in Uganda; so, we should legislate for it comprehensively because the law is about computer misuse. It has nothing to do with pornography. It is about using computers for the purpose of -

HON. MEMBERS: Delete 20.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We delete 20?

MR KYANJO: Madam Chairperson, with due respect to my senior brother and Leader of the Opposition, I think your guidance was most appropriate. Let us go and consult so that when we come back, we have comprehensive knowledge about our own selves and the views of others. It is not that we want to go and consolidate a fighting mood and bring it back here -(Interjections)- yes, we are going to do it through this night and even if Parliament were sitting tomorrow morning, we would have done it. I beg that we go by that ruling.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You know the Attorney-General indicated that he had not actually addressed his mind to this issue and we shall prefer to give him an opportunity to go back and consult his books. It is only two clauses.

Minister, move for the resumption of the House. Please, hon. Leader of the Opposition, you could see the arguments.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.11
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Aggrey Awori): Madam Chair, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.12
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Aggrey Awori): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled Computer Misuse Bill and stood over two clauses: 2 and 20.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.12
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Aggrey Awori): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the report of the committee be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I really want to thank you for this very elaborate and comprehensive debate. The House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 7.13 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 20 July 2010 at 2.00 p.m.)


