Thursday, 16 July 2009

Parliament met at 2.47 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s meeting and I apologise for the late start of our proceedings. We had an Appointments Committee meeting which overflowed into this business, but we shall try to catch up. 

In the public gallery, we have students from the Uganda School for the Deaf. You are welcome. (Applause). Oh, there they are! They are using sign language. We also have women leaders from Gayaza Sub-County in Kiboga District. You are welcome. We have Kisalaza Primary School also from Kiboga District represented by hon. Nankabirwa and they have come to watch our proceedings. (Applause)

Secondly, hon. Members, two matters have been prominent in our debates this session. One is on NAADS and the other is on the debt burden of the country. So, I indicated to you that on Tuesday 20th, the Ministry of Agriculture has organised a meeting to discuss the NAADS programme. I invite you to attend the morning session for NAADS, but we have also agreed with the Minister of Finance to discuss the issue of the debt burden in the afternoon. So, we shall use the whole of Tuesday to deal with those two issues which have been pressing and for which Members want answers to, in the Conference Hall.

MR MIGEREKO:  20th is Monday.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, on Monday 20th. So, I encourage you to make use of that time to get the answers that you have been asking for. 

2.51 
MS MARGARET MUHANGA (NRM, Woman Representative Kabarole): Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of national importance. The issue is about tenants of Bugolobi Blocks 31 and 32, who are about to be evicted by the National Housing and Construction Company under very dubious circumstances. 

When the National Housing and Construction Company was divested, they started selling these apartments in 2006 in Bugolobi. In 2006, a three-bedroomed apartment went for Shs 43 million. This year alone in February, a three-bedroomed apartment was sold at Shs 47 million. The only two blocks which have remained have been given on offer for Shs 90 million. 

We have written several petitions to the President, to the Prime Minister, to the Minister of Finance, some of them endorsed by our area MP, hon. Ruhindi, who is also the Deputy Attorney General. But to our surprise, National Housing and Construction Company has ignored all authorities and defied even a directive from the Minister of Lands and a letter which I will lay on Table, to stay the sale; they have continued writing to us and intimidating us. As I talk, we have been given two weeks which will expire on Monday, and they will come to evict us.

Most people who live in these flats are humble civil servants who cannot raise Shs 90 million easily. When we went into negotiations with National Housing and Construction Company - I think it happened as a coincidence that the Budget was read after we were given offers - the budget speech scrapped the five percent tax on property. National Housing and Construction Company had given us over Shs 89 million, which is really Shs 90 million, and they reduced it to Shs 84 million; not because they wanted to reduce the price of these apartments, but just because the Budget was read after the first offer. When we wrote a petition to the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises, we begged that let there be a government valuer to value these apartments because as you are aware, we found these flats as shells. We invested our money, made them look good and it was on that premise that National Housing and Construction Company gave a value.

Now, the poor Ugandans will not be able to raise this Shs 84 million. We have already been in touch with bankers, who have actually been sent by National Housing and Construction Company to intimidate us; that we need to pay 30 percent upfront, which will be about Shs 25 million, and then pay Shs 1.3 million per month.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think your issue is that you do not want to be evicted by Monday. No one will address the issue of policy today. I think what we should be asking for is whether the minister is going to protect you from eviction on Monday. The policy issues can be sorted out later because I do not know what you agreed. 

MS MUHANGA: Alright, Madam Speaker. But before I leave the Floor, I want to lay on Table the following papers, which shall guide the minister and all other authorities and the committee. We have written and we have met H.E. the President and he has said he is going to look into this matter. But before the petitions are disposed, these people are saying that they have to evict us.

We have also been assured by the chief executive officer of National Housing and Construction Company, and the chairperson of the board that they are the Alpha and Omega - the beginning and the end of National Housing and Construction Company – and that wherever we go, they will not listen to us. So, here are the papers. The first is a petition to His Excellency the President, which was forwarded by our MP. The second is to the Rt hon. Prime Minister – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please come down and lay them from here. 

MS MUHANGA: Madam Speaker, the first one is a petition we wrote to H.E the President on 26 April 2009, and it was forwarded to him by our MP. The second one is to the Rt hon. Prime Minister and I have met him and we have discussed this matter at length. The third is to the Minister Of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Syda Bbumba. The fourth is to the Committee on Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises.

The fifth is also to the Ministry of Finance; the sixth is to the chief executive officer of National Housing and Construction Company, to first of all tell us what we are buying, because we did not know what exactly would go on with the piece of land that we were buying. Some people had been cheated and after buying the apartments, the land around it was not theirs. The others are newspaper cuttings from what we have been negotiating with National Housing, and the other is to the Company Secretary of National Housing. The other is the tragic letter giving us 14 days to quit, and the threats from National Housing using banks to come and give us offers at 17 percent per annum well aware that a public servant cannot raise Shs 1.3 million per month for these apartments. Thank you and I beg to lay the papers on Table.

2.57
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Madam Speaker, today hon. Margaret Muhanga has been to my Office and she has brought a letter to me. I have rung hon. Omach to stay the selling of the flats until I resolve this matter. I direct hon. Kajara to ensure that my order is –(Applause)- complied with because it has been verbal and I shall be writing. 

However, I would like to point out that when you write to the President, it is improper now to write to the Prime Minister. You wait for an answer from the President, and if the President delays to answer you, you can prompt me to ask him to expedite it. That is the way we run modern matters.

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I am seeking is whether the directive the minister has issued is applicable to all government houses which are on sale like Buganda Road Flats residents who are facing the same problem. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are they going to be evicted on Monday?

MR LUKWAGO: They are going to be evicted on Monday because as we talk right now, they have got similar notices like the one hon. Muhanga has laid on Table here. I am wondering whether the directive is applicable to those tenants as well.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: I am not privy to what you have said and I do not want to speculate. I am afraid I am unable to handle that matter on Buganda Road. But regarding hon. Margaret Muhanga, she has written to me and I have read the letter and that is how I handle my matters. I am a technocratic Prime Minister, as you know.

3.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INVESTMENT (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, as the Prime Minister said, at times it is very difficult to handle a matter when there are so many people involved. First of all, there is a petition before the President; there is another petition before the Prime Minister. Now, another petition to the Ministry of Finance and before Parliament, and so we do not know which way to take. But I would like to state that as per the directive of the Prime Minister, hon. Omach did inform me that this matter was going to be raised on the Floor of the House, and we as Ministry of Finance will abide by the directive of the Prime Minister. We shall talk to the National Housing Corporation to stay eviction until this matter is solved amicably. I thank you. 

3.01
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Those who were watching Sky News yesterday and today would recognise the fact that for much of yesterday, Sky News was broadcasting a very solemn ceremony taking place in the United Kingdom, and even this morning, and up to now, they are doing the same. Some time last week, eight British soldiers were killed in Afghanistan plus one senior officer, a lieutenant colonel, and the British are according these people a very dignified welcome home and send off to their final place of rest. 

We have been reading in the newspapers of the unfortunate death of three Ugandans who were killed in an attack that took place in the Presidential Palace in Mogadishu, Somalia. 

Yesterday, unfortunately, I came late when the Minister of Defence was making a statement on Karamoja and I also thought that he would take the opportunity for his final response, since the issue of Somalia came in the President’s address, to formally inform the country of this tragic death and the processes that the ministry was undertaking to receive the bodies home as has been reported in the papers. I, therefore, sought your indulgence to bring this matter to the attention of the House and government. 

It was this House that unanimously accepted that our soldiers go to Somalia. Even when we were not in Parliament then, we made it known in writing that we supported that move. We also expressed at that time our deep concern about the risk that they were facing, and when they have faced those risks and fallen in the line of duty, the best that we would expect is that their loss is recognised and that we as Parliament who sent them there accord them the respect they deserve. 

I would, therefore, wish to bring this matter formerly before this House. We have read in the papers; one person lost was from Kasese, another person was from Lira, Otuke and another one was from Katakwi. I believe that recognition of the services they did on behalf of this country by this Parliament would console them, and it would also be very appropriate that we recognise their loss and express our sorrow for what happened. That is why I requested that I rise, Madam Speaker.

3.06
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Leader of the Opposition for raising this important matter. It is true we lost three of our soldiers and we also had some injured. I have held consultations with the Prime Minister who has indicated that the Ministry of Defence is gathering more information, because in this matter it is not just an issue of that incident where we have lost people, but there are also other corrective measures that are supposed to be taken. 

The Minister of Defence will be coming up with a message to the country over these losses and other measures that are meant to be put in place to ensure that the risk is minimised as our soldiers operate in that area. On Tuesday, a statement will be issued but our condolences go to the families and to all the Ugandans over these losses of committed soldiers. Thank you.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Speaker, I thank the Government Chief Whip for the statement. Since a commitment on a formal statement has been made for Tuesday, it would also be important in that statement for the Minister of Defence to clarify two matters that have come up in the press and that I did not want to mix with the death of these soldiers.

One is the issue of our army in Somalia being the conduit for passing on arms to the Somali Government, because if you bring a statement, it will have to be discussed. If it is not true, you - (Interjection)– hon. Kabakumba everyday you deteriorate actually -(Laughter)

I will justify my statement. Hon. Kabakumba cannot say that I go and write a statement and bring it for them to read. It is not fair -(Interruption)

MR MUSUMBA:  Madam Speaker, I have been forced to rise on a point of order against a statement that has been made by a distinguished Member of this House, the Leader of the Opposition, when he referred to another distinguished Member of this House, contrary to decorum and the rules that govern debate in this House that, “Hon. Kabakumba, everyday you are deteriorating.”  

Is the hon. Leader of the Opposition in order to refer to a Member of the Frontbench in a manner that is derogatory and unbecoming of parliamentary language? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The hon. Member has actually been sitting there quietly and smiling. She has not deteriorated. (Laughter)

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Princess, the Speaker has ruled. The second matter that we would wish to see explained to this country is the statement that we got in the papers in which the army spokesman said that Uganda has requested that its mandate be amended to include taking of offensive action against the Somali fundamentalists or that group. We would like to know whether a shift in mandate to an offensive position would not also require further parliamentary clearance because the authority we gave was to expressly deploy for peacekeeping and not offensive action. That was the request in Parliament. 

If the minister would bring all those so that he is not confronted with issues that obviously will come up in that debate, he would have the answers for the House so that we do not again ask him to come back to explain.

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The hon. Leader of the Opposition has raised issues to do with a story that appeared in the papers regarding arms deliveries to Somalia. He has also raised the issue of the mandate of our forces in Somalia. I will bring these to the attention of the Minister of Defence.

I would also like to reiterate what I stated yesterday that on issues of such a nature, it at times does no harm for the Leader of the Opposition to interact with the government side so that detailed and in-depth discussions on such critical issues can take place. I would like to maintain, and I would actually like to propose, that maybe we discuss some of these issues and then we can come up with a statement. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the young people who died in Somalia were deployed with the authority of this House, and they died in the service of this House. Let me request the House to stand for one minute of silence in their honour. 

(Members stood and observed a minute of silence.)

PETITION BY THE UGANDA RAILWAYS PENSIONERS’ 
ASSOCIATION LIMITED

3.14
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This petition is to be tabled under Rule 27 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. 

This humble petition of Uganda Railways Pensioners Association Limited is presented by I, Kaps Hassan, Member of Parliament for Obongi County, Moyo District. 

The subject matter in this petition is the arbitrary treatment of the pensioners of Uganda Railways Corporation and the indefinite suspension of the monthly payments of their pension entitlements.

The petitioners are former employees of the Uganda Railways Corporation who were entitled to pension in accordance with Article 257 of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and the Pensions Act, Cap 281.

On the 12 and 19 December –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What are their prayers? Now that you have identified them and stated their case, please go to the prayers.

MR FUNGAROO: “The petitioners pray that Parliament resolves that Uganda Railways Corporation complies with the law provisions relating to their pensions.

Secondly, they also pray that Parliament resolves that Uganda Railways Corporation reinstates the payments in respect of their pensions forthwith.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray and hereto humbly append their signatures.” 

I would like to, in that regard, lay the petition on Table, Madam Speaker. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will commit the petition to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWERS

Question No. 71/1/08 to the Attorney-General/
Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs

3.17
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to pose question No. 71/1/08 and reads thus: 

“(i) Would the minister inform the House whether the government had settled all the valid and/or legitimate Luweero Triangle War debts/claims? And if not, why? 

(ii) Would the minister explain why his ministry irregularly effected payments amounting to Shs 3,000,000,000/- (Three billion) out of the Luweero Triangle Compensation Vote to illegitimate claimants to wit; Rwanda Petro Gas, Haithar H, Adbi, Kigezi Growers Cooperative Union, Emmanuel Kayondo and a one Babu Singh? 

(iii) What action has the minister taken to recover the above irregularly effected payments? 

(iv) Would the minister also explain why government has failed or refused to settle the terminal benefits for the 920 former employees of the defunct Uganda Commercial Bank as decreed by the High Court vide H.C.C.S No. 1070 of 2000, which has accumulated to a sum of Shs 6,555,674,668/- as of December 2007?”

3.17
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL/MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS. (Prof. Edward Khiddu Makubuya): Madam Speaker, the question is divided into four parts. 

My response to part one of the question is as follows: The government has not settled all the legitimate Luweero war debts, but it is committed to doing so. Before payments are made, there must be verification. The process of verifying claims by its very nature tends to take time. The last verification report was received in April 2005.

Secondly, war debts are supposed to be paid from the Compensation Vote. This vote tends to be modest, while there is a huge stock of unpaid compensation and court award claims. Currently, these stand as follows: compensation – Shs 10, 944,511,649; court awards – Shs 54,230,798,648; the total is Shs 64,175,310,297. The government policy is to have bona fide Luweero Triangle debts settled in the near future, but subject to the two constraints outlined above.

In respect of part two of the question, I would like to say that my answer is in four parts: The first part being the background information. I would like to inform the House that the decision to compensate individuals and organisations in Luweero Triangle, who either offered assistance to NRA/NRM during the struggle, or those whose property was inevitably used, lost and destroyed, was taken by government in the 1980s.

To implement this decision, a compensation committee was created in the Ministry of Defence. The main duties of this committee included: Receiving the war claims, verifying them, investigating them, where it is found necessary and making appropriate recommendations to the permanent secretary of the Ministry of Defence.

Additionally, a compensation item for war claims was also created under that vote of the Ministry of Defence from which payments used to be effected right from 1986 to the end of the financial year 1993/94.

Part two of my response relates to verification of Luweero Triangle war claims and claimants. The verification of Luweero Triangle war claims and claimants at the start rested with the commander of NRA who used to authenticate the claims of the claimants. Later on this role spread to the various Luweero Triangle verification committees that government created under the offices of the President and the Prime Minister respectively.

The verification exercise took into account claims of nationals, residents and foreigners whose properties were utilised in the liberation struggle, either voluntarily or involuntarily, within the confines of Luweero Triangle. 

Next are the alleged legitimate claimants, i.e. Rwanda Petrol Gas, Haithar H. Abdi, Kigezi Growers Cooperative Union, Emmanuel Kayondo and Babu Singh.

I answer as follows: Rwanda Petrol Gas and Haithar H. Abdi are among the foreign firms that sought compensations from Government of Uganda as a result of their merchandise which were compulsorily used or destroyed while in transit to other countries. These claims were accordingly authenticated by some senior NRA/UPDF commander who either used or gave instruction for the use of the merchandise that were later claimed. 

The authentication of these claims by the senior NRA/UPDF officers clarified these claims to be part and parcel of the national debt for Luweero Triangle. Arising from the above verification exercise, the said claims together with others were paid over time. The attached payment schedule highlights who the cited claimants were.

The fourth relates to the role of the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs in the payment of compensation claims. I have said already that the compensation vote item for Luweero War Triangle was created under Ministry of Defence in the 1990s. This vote item remained under the Ministry of Defence until the end of the financial year 1993/94.

Effective from the financial year 1994/95, this compensation vote item got transferred from the Ministry of Defence to the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, in the management of compensation cases, which include: receipt and verification of compensation claims forwarded by the Ministry of Defence for payment, and those forwarded by the Office of the Prime Minister. Tendering legal advice and effecting payments for ascertained and verified claims. 

Then, what action has the minister taken to recover the above irregularly effected payments? Madam Speaker, payments totalling to, Shs 3,061,263,987 as contained in the attached payment schedule were effected legitimately at different times to the said claimants. 

My view is that these payments were not irregular and, therefore, the question of taking steps to recover the money is not and does not arise.

I am also required to explain why government has failed or refused to settle the terminal benefits of 920 former employees of the defunct Uganda Commercial Bank as decreed by the High Court Civil Suit No.1070 of 2000 which has accumulated to a sum of Ugshs 6,555,674,668 as of December 2007. 

Hon. Lukwago referred to the High Court Civil Suit No.1070 of 2000; the citation is incomplete because he does not include the names of the parties. This made it difficult for my office to follow up the matter. After extensive research, I landed on one relevant case, namely, Lugenya Samuel and another Vs UCB limited. It is High Court Civil Suit No.1017 of 2000. This was a representative suit on behalf of former employee of UCB. 

Further research revealed that the decreetal sum under this suit had already been paid. I regret that I have so far not been able to trace the records of High Court Civil Suit No.1070 of 2000. So, at this point in time, I cannot comment on whether and how it has been resolved. Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I thank you for your patience. 

3.29
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Minister for the response. I have a few supplementary questions. First, I wonder if the minister is aware that the Seventh Parliament probed this matter under the Committee of Government Assurances and a report came up and was adopted here. The report was to the effect that the Shs 3 billion was illegally effected. 

Secondly, if the minister is aware that there were recommendations made by Parliament then, which included recovery of this money. I do not know whether the minister took trouble to go through the report of the Government Assurances Committee of the Seventh Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was that report debated and adopted by this House?

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Speaker, I can be guided by this honourable House. I have a copy of that report and the Hansard can guide us on this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have a bit of institutional memory. I think one of the committees that performed badly in the Seventh Parliament was the Committee on Government Assurances. I doubt whether they actually ever presented a report in the House, and that I know. As presiding officer, I can tell you that.

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Speaker, I wish I had enough time, because I would have carried a copy of the report and laid it on the Table. I have a copy of a report of the Committee on Government Assurances in my office, which – (Interruption) 

MR OCULA: Madam Speaker, what hon. Lukwago is saying is correct. Actually, the only report that was presented by the Committee on Government Assurances on the Floor of this House in the last Parliament was that report, but its debate did not take place. That is what I know. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That means it was not adopted and, therefore, it is not in possession of the Parliament.

MR LUKWAGO: Most obliged. Madam Speaker, allow me to proceed to the next question. The minister, on page 5, talks about the UShs 3 billion claimed by Rwanda Petrol Gas and Haithar Abdi as having been authenticated by some senior NRA/UPDF commander who could have used the merchandise. I would wish to know whether there was no verification committee to authenticate this claim or whether it should have been the NRA commander. 

Secondly, who is this commander or general who authenticated this claim? Finally, why was priority given to Rwanda Petrol Gas, Haithar Abdi and not these other claimants? Why? I ask because this is a modest vote with very little money and you gave priority to those claimants.

The honourable minister is also saying that in the near future they are going to finalise the process. What does that mean? When? Can the Minister be specific as to when this exercise will be complete? This war ended way back in 1986. What is it that is holding Government back from assessing the valid claims and settling them once and for all and we close the chapter? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.34
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am not a lawyer- (Interruption)

MR LUKWAGO: Is it in order for hon. General Otafiire to take a rest as we deliberate on serious matters?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know we have guests in the gallery; I think hon. Otafiire was actually watching the children upstairs. (Laughter)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was saying that I am not a lawyer but my little knowledge tells me that when NRA was in Luweero, it had no legal capacity to enter into a contract with anybody. I wonder whether a legal basis was established to pay this contract, which they signed when they were rebels. I think that would help us.

Secondly, it is 23 years after the Luweero war ended and we are still talking about assessment, not even completing compensation, but still carrying on with the assessment. Is the Minister really sure that we are assessing the people who lost their property 23 years later? Are we sure?

Three – (Hon. Otafiire rose_) - I am just asking questions; the Minister will answer. You are a minister of something else. Please, I am asking questions. (Interruption)

MAJ. GEN OTAFIIRE: Madam Speaker, I was the chairman of the Compensation Committee and I was the commissar who wrote the names of those from whom we took debts. Twenty-three years down the road, I am still here so why do you doubt the authenticity of the minister? I am here. I am the encyclopaedia of all the debts contracted in Luweero. Why do you doubt the minister when I am still around? Why don’t you wait after I die then you can-

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Madam Speaker, this is exactly where my fear is. If hon. Otafiire is the encyclopaedia on this matter, then I am very worried. (Laughter) This is because he was not even paying attention. 

My last question is: Can the minister give us a timeframe so that we put this matter behind us? I thank you.

3.38
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Prof Khiddu Makubuya): Madam Speaker and honourable members, when I started to answer, I was reading out the question and you rightly guided that the question was on the Order Paper and, therefore, I did not have to read it out. 

This question does not mention the Committee on Government Assurances or the report of the Committee on Government Assurances. If you wanted me to deal with the report of the Committee on Government Assurances and you did not want me to answer the question as framed here, you should have raised that in the question –(Ms Amongi rose_)- No, what supplementary? Now I must follow up on the report of the Committee on Government Assurances. What supplementary, hon. Amongi?

We are dealing with a special war situation in which those who commandeered these articles or authorised the commandeering are the best evidence, if they are there. I am not a verifier, but those who verify can inquire and they come with their findings. 

There is a very important point being raised by hon. Okello-Okello. He says that he is not a lawyer but he is bothered by some legal consideration - under what legal framework are you proceeding to compensate when these people were illegal/irregulars. In the language of the day, they were rebels. (Interjection) Okay, bandits. I did not know that. They were bandits. 

Legal theory has advanced and among other things, you can base a claim on contract or the state can effect compensation on ex gratia basis. The doctrine of ex gratia is very well known in law, and so it is possible to approach on the basis of contract or on purely ex gratia basis.

There will obviously be a cut-off point, but the cut-off point is a matter of policy. It is a new issue, which was not part of the original question. I am sure that the appropriate government authorities will address it and finally find a cut-off point. I thank you once again for your patience. 

QUESTION 73/1/08 TO THE MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

3.43
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I ask on behalf of hon. Wadri, who has gone out for committee work:

“(i) Would the Minister inform the House whether Uganda has signed and ratified the African Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance?

(ii) If not, when shall Uganda sign and ratify the said Charter?

(iii) If yes, in line with provisions of the said Charter, when shall Government overhaul the Electoral Commission and constitute an independent, all inclusive Electoral Commission?”

3.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (REGIONAL COOPERATION) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, Uganda signed the African Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance on the 16th day of December 2008. The next step is to have the Charter ratified. This signifies Government’s commitment to the ideals and principles enshrined in the Charter and Uganda’s willingness to ratify and implement the Charter.

Uganda has not yet ratified the Charter. Ratification is a process governed by the Ratifications of Treaties Act, CAP 03. The ratification of the Charter means that there has to be Cabinet approval. Cabinet approval will have to be sought by the Attorney-General, who is the minister in charge of implementing the Charter. 

Once the Attorney-General gets such approval, this approval is communicated to the Minister of Foreign Affairs through a Cabinet minute. This minute instructs the Minister for Foreign Affairs to prepare, execute and deposit the instrument of ratification of the African Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance. The above process is still on-going. Honourable members and you, Madam Speaker, will be informed when the process is complete. 

Let me take this opportunity to assure the honourable Members of Parliament of Uganda’s commitment to promote democracy and good governance. I thank you.

3.45
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Central, Kampala): Madam Speaker, I have two questions. I have here with me a copy of this Charter, which is well detailed and it was executed way back in 2007. I am wondering why the minister has taken that long to ratify the Charter. He is saying the process is still on-going, well knowing that the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is already working on electoral laws, as we have been told. I sit on the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, so I know this. 

The ministry is working on the electoral laws to regulate the 2011 elections. So, I am wondering, first, why the minister has taken too long. Secondly, is there a specific timeframe we can be given? Thirdly, is the Minister liaising with his colleague, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, to incorporate the provisions in this Charter into the electoral laws? I wonder whether you are doing that. Thank you.

3.47
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you. I also wish to thank the Minister for his statement. 

As a supplementary, I would like to know whether, in promotion of good governance or commitment to promote good governance and democracy, the Minister thinks about the people who have been held in Luzira for very many years, especially those who were granted amnesty by the Amnesty Commission, but continue being held. I am referring particularly to the people that were charged as rebels of ADF and were granted amnesty between 2004 and 2006, but continue to be held in Luzira prison. How do those fit in with government’s commitment to promote democracy and good governance?

Would the Minister not think, as I think, that some of these treaties are more of PR exercises, to look good but not to be applied at home? Does the Minister not feel that the relatives of those people feel that this is a mere PR exercise? Thank you.

3.48
MR JOHN BAPTIST KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): I also want to find out from the Minister why he has not found it necessary to answer the third part of the question - “If yes, in line with the provisions of the said Charter, when shall government overhaul the Electoral Commission and constitute an independent all inclusive Electoral Commission?” 

3.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (REGIONAL COOPERATION) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Lukwago asked why the Minister has taken so long to complete the process. I have told this House that the process has began because we signed the treaty. What is remaining is to complete the process of ratification through Cabinet, and it is ongoing. 

The member asked whether we are liaising with the Ministry of Justice. I have just explained in my statement that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is not the implementing ministry. It is the ministry that will be able to complete the process of ratification when the appropriate instruments are handed to it. The implementing ministry will be able to implement when the process is complete.  

As for people in Luzira who were given amnesty; in my capacity as Minister of Foreign Affairs, I have no knowledge about these matters. 

The member asked whether the treaties are for show. The treaties are not for show. We signed these treaties and we are bound by them as soon as we domesticate them. 

On the last question, again, as minister responsible for foreign affairs, we do not deal with Electoral Commission issues. This question is, therefore, outside the mandate of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. I thank you.

QUESTION 74/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR NORTHERN UGANDA

3.51
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): “The Commonwealth in partnership with the Government of Uganda undertook to and has constructed the Northern Uganda Youth Development Centre (NUYDC) in Labora, Gulu District.

(i) Would the Minister inform the House about the policy, legal, administrative and institutional framework and guidelines that Government has put in place to ensure that the centre benefits the youth from all the sub-regions in Northern Uganda, namely, Acholi, Lango, West Nile, Karamoja and Teso?

(ii) When does the centre intend to recruit youth from the sub-regions on the basis of quotas?

(iii) What plans are in place to address the challenges currently facing the centre namely, funding, transport, machinery and electricity?” 

3.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (NORTHERN UGANDA) (Mr David Wakikona): Thank you. This question has about six answers but I will combine the reply because I have made many copies for members to read through. 

The Northern Uganda Youth Development Centre is an initiative by the Government of Uganda to empower young Northern Ugandans who have been greatly affected by the conflict in the region. 

His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda requested for the help of the Commonwealth to accommodate the needs of the youth who have missed out on education and have no marketable skills that they can offer in the job market. Because they do not have these skills, their morale is low and they are marginalised, often finding themselves resorting to delinquent activities. 

The Commonwealth contributed £500,000 for three years and a memorandum of understanding was signed with the Government of Uganda. The project was also mandated to mobilise resources from other stakeholders. 

The Government of Uganda, that is, the Office of the Prime Minister, has since 2005 been implementing the Northern Uganda Youth Development Project, initially through a pilot project based in the vicinity of Laipainat Koro Sub-county in Gulu District. The project’s long term goal was to assist the reconstruction of sustainable livelihood through skills, demonstrating the development potential of communities in the vicinity of a basic youth development centre. It was also to roll over to other sub-regions in Northern Uganda and later other parts of the country. The centre’s activities would also serve as a model in youth affairs, which can be shared with other Commonwealth members and partner agencies. 

The objectives are listed on page 2; they are six. Since you have copies, Members can go through them. We have the institutional framework on page 3. It says that besides the memorandum of understanding which clearly outlines the objectives of the project, the roles and the responsibilities of stakeholders, Office of the Prime Minister has played a link and coordination role for the Centre’s activities with the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, the Ministry of Education and Sports and other appropriate agencies. The Office of the Prime Minister has also extended financial and logistical support to the project. 

The project has a programme management team presently comprising of a programme manager, a project officer, an accountant, instructors and other supporting staff. A local project steering group – committee, has been established. The group is a collection of key stakeholders representing a range of constituencies. It is responsible for consensus building, planning and the long term sustainability of the project. 

The steering committee meets periodically to review, troubleshoot and provide advice. I have told you that it is chaired by the Chief Administrative Officer, Gulu District. It comprises of the following: members from the Office of the Prime Minister; the project manager himself; district officials from education; youth representatives; the District Police Commander, Gulu; civil military liaison officer in the North; representatives of Gulu University, including its students’ union; local council of Koro sub-county; and the Director, Community Reconciliation and Conflict Management of NUSAF. We also have somebody from World Vision, Uganda.

Recruitment of the Youth at the Centre 

The centre was commissioned on 17 November 2007 by the Secretary-General of the Commonwealth Secretariat. The infrastructure at the site comprised the following: Classroom blocks (2), laboratory block, workshop buildings, office block, staff houses, toilets, ablutions and four agricultural units. This building constitutes the first phase of the infrastructure development plan for the centre. The funding was provided by the Government of Uganda, that is, Office of the Prime Minister, and the Commonwealth Secretariat. 

The Office of the Prime Minister purchased additional 45 acres of land on top of the 14.5 acres donated by the local leaders. 

Recruits are identified by the districts and sent to the centre for training. Currently, many recruits are from Acholi. Recruitment of youth from other regions will entirely depend on additional infrastructure, especially dormitories and dining facilities. That is phase two of the infrastructure development. Priority is being given to construction of the buildings that I have mentioned. 

To reduce on congestion and high administrative costs, and in order to further enhance partnerships and synergies with other agencies already involved in similar youth programmes, satellite centres will be identified and designated to undertake the relevant youth training activities. This alternative is expected to fast track participation of youth from other regions that will not make it to Gulu. 

The funding of the centre so far has come from two sources, namely, Uganda Government through the Office of the Prime Minister, and the Commonwealth Secretariat. The Secretariat has given Shs 600 million towards the construction. The Office of the Prime Minister has disbursed Shs 1.3 billion towards construction and operational costs of the centre, and also provided two vehicles - a station wagon and a tipper lorry. In addition, it has also paid Shs 200 million for the supply of electricity, which is now about to be completed, and another Shs 200 million for the water supply system. 

I am happy to report that work to extend power to the centre has begun. The contractor hopes to complete this by the end of August. There is a running water system in operation and World Vision Uganda has also donated 40 electric machines, which is an addition to the machines that we had before the launch. 

In the framework of the Peace, Recovery and Development Plan (PRDP), as I have said, the Office of the Prime Minister will mainly focus on critical infrastructure development such as dormitories for both girls and boys, and dinning facilities. In this respect, the Office of the Prime Minister has allocated Shs 500 million to make sure that this work is done this financial year. 

The Commonwealth Secretariat has so far remitted £50,000 for the purchase of the equipment for the centre. The Secretariat has also committed itself to continue paying salaries for the programme staff up to December 2009. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

3.51
MR DENNIS OBUA (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern):  Madam Speaker, I have two supplementary questions to ask the hon. Minister:

1.	Hon. Minister,  upon completion of this centre, which is expected to be a centre of excellence and the biggest centre in the whole of the Africa region under the Commonwealth, who in Uganda  will be responsible for the day-to-day management of the centre activities? Will it still be the Office of the Prime Minister or the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, or Ministry of Education and Sports? 

2.	The issue of construction seems to be endless. When is construction work and equipping of this centre expected to end so that we start with comprehensive youth training at the centre? Thank you so much. 

4.02 
MR STEPHEN BAKKA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri):  Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. From what I can read here, this is a very good programme and it has already started benefiting the youth. Does Government have any plan to expand these services, first of all to the other sub-regions in the North and also to the other regions in Uganda, so that other youth throughout the country can have such facilities in their regions? Thank you.

4.02
MR ROBERT KASULE SSEBUNYA (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank you, hon. Minister, but the youth of Luweero Triangle are also crying out for such a big venture for their youth. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I also have one small question. Who is responsible for post trauma counselling services? In the line-up you have here, I do not see anybody dealing with post trauma counselling. You can now answer. 

4.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (NORTHERN UGANDA REHABILITATION) (Mr David Wakikona): Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Mr Obua asked: Upon completion of this magnificent centre, who will be responsible? 

I want to say that we have had meetings with the Minister of Education and Sports and the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development. As we speak now, the Ministry of Gender has come up with a five-year development project, and I have it here. They have also assigned somebody to work with the Office of the Prime Minister. 

The Office of the Prime Minister wanted to hand over the centre to the Ministry of Gender this financial year, but because of some problems with budgeting, we have delayed it slightly by one year. We are also continuing with some donor agencies, which are still passing through the PRDP arrangement, to make sure that we develop the three phases of the youth centre so that when we hand it over, it is fully complete, constructed and able to run. 

When does the construction work end? 

This centre has three phases of construction. We have dealt with the first phase, which I have just mentioned today. We are going to deal with the second phase, and then the third phase. That is why there is a five-year development plan. We go step by step. The moment we end it within the five-year development plan, we shall hand it over. 

Obviously, it will be run by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. We have had a discussion with them. I have talked to hon. Opio and hon. Alupo and they have all agreed to work together and run the centre. About a month ago, we went with people from the Ministry of Education to have – (Interruption)

MR TOSKIN: Thank you, Mr Minister, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I just wanted to get some clarification. I know this is a youth training programme. However, I think as far as the policy of government now is concerned, all training functions like these ones fall under the Ministry of Education. I just wanted to find out whether it is really proper that it goes to the Ministry of Gender. Shouldn’t it go to the Ministry of Education, which is actually doing the same functions, so that it is in line with all the others? 

MR WAKIKONA: Madam Speaker, at the beginning I defined what the centre was meant to do, and there is nothing like, “he will get a diploma or a certificate”; it is just skills. 

In future, probably under the Ministry of Gender in collaboration with the Ministry of Education, we shall have a system which will work for them. Right now, however, we are getting people who have been in those areas of conflict and we are giving them skills. Actually, after giving skills to the first group, which we trained in Koro Secondary School - we even equipped them with machines - we said, “You are qualified; here is a working machine” and they went home with these machines. We told them not to leave their parishes, but to continue working there. It was a morale booster. 

You have also talked about counselling. This is one of the areas where we feel –(Interjection)- but within that centre, there is a section, except that it now deals with those psychological problems. I understand instructors in that field are a bit expensive. When we were in Agako Primary School in Gulu, just on the way to Kitgum, we found it very difficult to keep specialised instructors of that kind there. 

The areas of instruction and the courses to be held are very many, but we have not employed it fully because of the accommodation and dining facilities. We hope to introduce it and then have people helped in the way you have described, Madam Speaker. Thank you very much. 

QUESTION 75/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES

4.08
MR HENRY BALIKOWA (NRM, Budiope County, Kamuli): “i)	 Could the minister inform the House whether it is the plan of Government to relocate the ice plant under the ADB Fisheries Project from Bukungu Landing site to Kamuli Town?

ii) If yes, is Government trying to deny, provoke and marginalise the people of Budiope Constituency well aware that this project was earmarked for Bukungu Landing Site?

iii) If not, can the Minister inform the House when the construction of the ice plant and Bukungu Landing Site will commence?”

4.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Maj. Bright Rwamirama): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I wish to respond as follows: It is true that on the basis of submission by the Fisheries Development Project consultant, the ministry considered the location of the ice plant in Kamuli town area to support Bukungu Fish Landing Site and other small fish landing sites in the area. 

However, the leadership in Kamuli, including Budiope County, raised their concerns which were considered by the Ministry Of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. They demanded a specific location of the ice plant at Bukungu Landing Site. As a result, it was agreed that the ice plant and the Fisheries Development Project were to be located at Bukungu Landing Site. 

There was never any reason or action to treat any stakeholders under the Fisheries Development Project inequitably. It would be unacceptable for such to happen under MAAIF. The people of Budiope County are direct beneficiaries of the Fisheries Development Project, and it was agreed that the ice plant be located at Bukungu Landing Site. According to the work plan, the ice plant at Bukungu will be installed, tested and commissioned by close of 2009. Thank you very much for listening to me. 

MR BALIKOWA: Madam Speaker, I have one supplementary question to the minister. Why has the ministry allowed the contractor, dembe - Liberty, not to provide external access roads to this project, and yet these roads were provided for in the entire contract for which the Government is spending Shs 2.5 billion? 

4.11
MS RUTH NVUMETTA (NRM, Woman Representative Kalangala): Thank You, Madam Speaker. This is a very good question because I have also learnt from Kalangala, the Ssese Islands that the ice plant that was supposed to be at Kitobo Landing Site is going to be put at Mweena. I would also like to know when these ice plants will actually be constructed. 

I also want to point out the last question that was asked, which we said would go to the minister in charge of fisheries. This was in regard to the substandard quality of the construction of these sites, which I am sure will happen to the ice plants as well. Madam Speaker, you ruled that the question was to go to the minister in charge of fisheries and not to the Minister of Works. Well, could the minister in charge of fisheries answer it? Spencon has done very substandard work on so many other landing sites as well. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as you recall, hon. Okupa asked a question in two parts and we agreed that since the Auditor-General had conducted a special audit in respect of all those landing sites, we would hold on with that debate until the report is brought here from the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. We shall then debate it comprehensively. 

4.13
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (FDC, Madi-Okollo County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister is promising to commission these plants by the end of this year. I have been to Bukungu and I have not seen any sign of electricity in this area. How is this plant going to be operated? 

4.14 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Maj. Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Balikowa is asking about the infrastructure. To the best of my knowledge, I am not aware that we have changed design. I think even when I discussed it with some of the stakeholders sometime back, the issue was to do with allocation, but not to cut off infrastructure. I want to assure hon. Balikowa that we have not changed the project design and therefore the infrastructure will have to be developed. 

Hon. Ruth Kavuma is concerned about when they will get that ice plant, and especially where it will be located. It is the policy of this government that we bring services nearer to the people, and wherever we want to put a local facility, we agree with the local leadership. A case in point is this Budiope Ice Plant which was originally supposed to be located in Kamuli area on consideration of many factors including availability of electricity and also for use by other stakeholders. But when we agreed with the leadership, we took it back to where the services were needed. Likewise, in your area, hon. Kavuma, we shall agree with you on where this ice plant will be. 

As for substandard work, Madam Speaker, you have already ruled; there is an audit going on and a report underway. We shall debate when it comes. However, I want to inform the House that this project has got an independent consultant and we also depend on this consultant. Therefore, we shall discuss this matter and provide answers when the report is out.

Hon. Arumadri has just asked a question and run away before I answer it that, where shall the ice plant get electricity from? Electricity is extended and it can be generated on site. You can get a generator and run an ice plant. We are running milk coolers and so many facilities not by hydro power but also thermal. Whichever way we find appropriate, we shall have to put the ice plant at Bukungu; provide a generator or extend electricity. I thank you.

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY H.E. THE PRESIDENT ON THURSDAY, THE 4TH JUNE 2009

4.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I want to register my appreciation and thanks to the President for being focussed, down-to-earth and for guiding this country for this long period of time. 

There was not much that was raised about my ministry. The only point that I would like to react to is the one by the Leader of the Opposition where he states as follows, on page 15, and let me quote:”Should we even be bitter about the brutality of the Police when this previously civil force has been transformed through coercion, fear, neglect and sectarianism into an insensitive, dispassionate torture machine the way any oppressive regime does?”

Hon. Latigo, true, Police may not have done an angelic job, but I think they are doing a fairly good job in the circumstances that are prevailing. Really, it hurts me and I think the Police also get hurt. The Police are supposed to serve us all. There is no deliberate policy by the ministry that Police becomes brutal. Never! If anything, for any police officer that acts out of the law and misbehaves, we take very stern action. 

We are training and retraining, and to say that we have turned them into a brutal force through coercion, fear – I thought every police officer that joins the Police joins on free will. On this matter, I disagree totally. [Prof. Latigo: “Can you take this as evidence of what I am talking about?”] No. I will not take that unless you can bring me authentic evidence. 

If you look at the Police Act, the manner of arrest depends on the way the suspect carries himself or herself. The law gives Police authority to use what is called “reasonable force.” For example, is this House not aware that Police have been shot, killed or stoned by errant Ugandans? If you carry yourself as a gentleman, we treat you as a gentleman. If you behave as a rogue, we shall use what is called “reasonable force.”

My second point, and again I quote the Leader of the Opposition: “The only major discontent then (that is during the UPC days) was the bitterness of the Baganda...” – then perhaps let me quote the whole thing just to satisfy my friend, hon. Prof. Ogenga-Latigo. 

“You see, hon. Members, during the UPC Obote I reign in the 1960s, Uganda was largely a very united country. Our economic performance was at the same level as that of the Asian Tigers - Malaysia, Singapore, Taiwan, etc; our government was non-corrupt, focused and non-sectarian. We had the best civil service, best education system, best health services and the best road infrastructure in Sub-Saharan Africa. We had prosperity across communities and our people were vibrant, caring, honest, patriotic, generally united and very optimistic of the future. 

Hon. Members, the only major discontents then were the bitterness of the Baganda and other royalists on account of the abolition of their kingdoms that naturally generated some degree of ethnic hatred, and the suppression of political opposition, the DP and KY.”

Now, this is what I want to emphasise, “But even then, the ordinary Police were civil and generally neutral and did not take joy in breaking up opposition heads, limbs and rallies; there were no safe houses and arrests and detention procedures were followed.”

Again I want to take the exception that the current Police takes pleasure in breaking people’s heads, limbs and rallies. What message are we sending to these very dedicated, very hardworking and very disadvantaged workers of this state? Can I remind this House - because I have lived long enough, hon. Prof. Ogenga-Latigo! We may be the same age, but I think I could be slightly older than you. I was here in 1962 when Independence was declared in Kololo. I was one of the biggest dancers there. I saw Obote I, Amin and the other governments. There was a police force called the Special Force. If you brought matata before the Special Force, you had trouble because I tasted their wrath at one stage in the so-called lost counties!

So, really, hon. colleagues, whereas I agree, as I said, and I have said this before, that some elements within the Police may not be doing a good job, we are not seated down enjoying seeing the people of Uganda being tortured by the Police. The Police are supposed to be there to protect and feel proud of it. We are doing everything. But when the Leader of the Opposition says that the Police now take pleasure in breaking people’s heads, limbs and rallies, I take exception. 

In conclusion, regarding our future, especially with these elections that are coming up - normally that is when the temperatures of the population tend to rise - we have in the offing, a legislation which we have titled, “Public Order Management Bill, 2009”. We shall soon table it to Cabinet and eventually it will end up here in this House. 

This Bill shows the responsibilities of all parties that will wish to organise a public rally, a demonstration and a procession. You will look at these. We have copied good practices from South Africa, Britain, France, Germany, and Kenya and Rwanda, our neighbours. If this legislation is passed, the Police will be facilitated to handle things in accordance with agreed - all of us agreed; the problem is that we have not agreed as a nation and even as Parliament here. When I want to hold a public rally, for example - Madam Speaker, yesterday my colleague and my namesake did raise the question of the DP rallies that were dispersed. These rallies were being held in the middle of the road, near a market and near a bank. Now, really, ladies and gentlemen - (Hon. Kamya rose_) I will take your clarification.

MS KAMYA: Thank you, hon. Minister, for giving way. Well, I do not want to go into a debate on the conduct of Police in dispersing or handling of rallies. 

I would like the minister to clarify on a matter that I have been involved in several times, where whenever you wish to hold a public gathering anywhere in the country, any party is advised to seek the authority of the Inspector General of Police; whether it is in Mayuge, Karamoja or in Rakai or even here in Owino. Recently, I went there with my group to sell cards in a market. I assumed a marketplace is where people go to buy and sell but we were advised to go, and yet we had got permission - but you are advised to seek the authority of the Inspector General of Police. 

This is not a simple matter Mr Minister, because if everybody is going to seek the authority of the Inspector General of Police, does he have the capacity to handle everybody? Don’t other Police officers at the rank of DPC and OC have the ability or do they need the training to be equipped with the capacity to make a decision to allow a public gathering since everything in this country is referred to the Inspector General of Police? 

And Mr Minister when-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you wanted a clarification about the power of the Inspector General of Police and who else can exercise those powers. Please, answer minister.

MR KASAIJA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In reply to what hon. Beti Kamya has asked, the Inspector General of Police is everywhere in the country. Anywhere there is a DPC, the Inspector General of Police is there. You do not expect the Inspector General of Police to be in Arua. You do not expect a man in the name of Kale Kayihura to be in Kisoro. 

In any case, according to the current law, you do not have to seek permission from the Police. You need to inform the Police so that they give you appropriate protection. Now, if you go and hold your public rally and you get lumpens who come and disrupt your function, who do you blame? You need to give the Police ample time and you need to tell them the circumstances under which you are going to hold that rally. You also need to tell them the venue so that they know where the venue is then the police will be there to ensure that law and order is maintained.

My appeal to this House is that, when this law eventually comes here, it should be given the justice it needs; let it pass at least before the coming elections. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us hear from the Minister for Gender, after which we will have the Minister of Energy.

4.33
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Gabriel Opio): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion as moved by hon. Rosemary Najjemba and seconded by hon. Alex Ndeezi, thanking H.E. the President, for delivering the State of the Nation Address to this Parliament on Thursday, 14 June 2009.

There are about four issues that were raised on the Floor by Members of Parliament. The first one is the issue of the Equal Opportunities Commission, which was raised by hon. Kawooya. I would like to state that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has done a lot to put the commission in place. The names of the commissioners were identified and vetted before being presenting to Cabinet. The Cabinet approved them and the Ministry has presented those names to H.E the President, who will later send them to Parliament for further vetting. We are almost getting to the end of the process.

Madam Speaker, I would like to say that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has provided funds, some of which have been used to purchase vehicles. We are also negotiating the purchase of a building to house the Equal Opportunities Commission. Once we get the vetted names from Parliament, we shall issue statutory instruments for the President to sign so that the commissioners can start work. 

I know it has taken sometime, but I think, though there are five members of the commission, the Act is very specific – you must have a person who is disabled; at least two women, a youth and an older person. I think you can now see that the area of manoeuvrability is very small. Furthermore, you must represent regions and religions; we did a lot of permutations to fulfil these conditions. I am happy to report that out of the five commissioners - actually three, if the President approves - are going to be women. The other two will be men.

The other issue that was raised by hon. Kawooya was about the Industrial Court. I would like to say that there was an amendment of the Act, which put in place the Industrial Court. This court must have a chief judge and a deputy, but the title “Chief Judge” has not been happily received by the legal fraternity, because when abbreviated, it becomes CJ, which is the common abbreviation for Chief Justice. Whereas we passed it here, we are only going to use it for sometime until we amend the law to have another title. 

I would like, however, to report that that is not going to stop us from implementing this law. We have already requested the Chief Justice to appoint a judge, which he has already done, though on interim basis, effective this July. We have also already seconded one of our officers to work there as the registrar, so that work can start, and the Ministry of Finance has already allocated money to enable us operationalise this law.

Madam Speaker, there was also the issue relating to the treatment of older persons by government. The comment was that as government, we are not providing for the older persons. I would like to say that the older persons who were working with either government or the private sector are catered for under the Social Security Fund. However, for the older persons who may have not been working before, the ministry is looking for ways of taking care of them. For example, we have already secured funds from DFID to enable us pilot eight districts to get ways of assisting older persons.

Madam Speaker, I was in Gulu – the Acholis are very proud people - the older persons who were staying in the camps are having it hard to start life out side. Most of them keep moving from shop to shop looking for what to eat. Although some people have argued that the African culture is still protecting our older persons, that is not the case. Actually, things have moved away from that. That is why government had to put in place a policy on older persons. I signed that policy last week and it will be analysed so that we can come out with an action plan on how to handle issues of older persons.

Another area that came into the light sometime back was by you, Madam Speaker. Your concern was about the Community Mobilisation Bill. I am glad to say that we now have a Bill in place and we shall be presenting it to Cabinet for discussion, to see how to move to the next stage.

Another area where you have showed a lot of concern is FGM. I would like to say that we had a meeting today in the committee chaired by hon. Kawooya, who is the chairperson of that committee, and hon. Otto is a Member on that committee. What we have had is that Hon. Dr Baryomunsi started working on a Private Member’s Bill, and government is also working on –(Interjections)– you just hold on. 

In our meeting, we decided that there is no need for two parties preparing two different Bills. We requested our chairperson to request hon. Baryomunsi to present his Bill to the Parliamentary –(Interjections)– no, sometimes the intentions may be good but it might not be operationalised like the one of PWDs, which, when we tried to write the regulations - actually even the Solicitor-General wrote back and said that you cannot write regulations for that Act, because it was more or less recommendations as if they had a conference.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I disagree with you; our Rules of Procedure are very clear. Once we agree that a Private Member’s Bill should be moved, the rules say that the ministry responsible should take over to assist. So, it is not a question of discussing with hon. Kawooya; it is your duty and you have delayed. 

MR OPIO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I know that it is our duty, but when the Bill is read here for the first time, you send it to the committee and you require us to participate. But it would be better if the first –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No; you begin helping, as soon as we approve, in the production and gazetting, to help the private Member. Please, you are my friend, but check our rules.

MR OPIO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me stop arguing, otherwise I may not win. So, I would like to say that we have agreed not to have two parallel Bills. We must solve this problem as mature people regardless of who moves the Bill; it is still going to be operationalised by the same government.

Another area which was touched on is unemployment. I would like to say that this is a very serious problem in this country and in other countries as well. Almost 400,000 people are entering the job market every year, and the formal sector, both private and government, absorbs about 200,000 of them. So you can see that the bulk of our youth entering the job market have no jobs. 

Therefore, the government is doing all within its reach to address this problem. The ministry is in the process of finalising the National Action Plan for Youth Employment in Uganda, with support from international labour organisations. 

At East African Community level, regional issues paper on employment creation and poverty reduction in the East African Community with special focus on youth employment has been finalised and is to form the future intervention.

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development under the PCY programme continues to support youth income-generating activities to enable them improve their productivity and create wealth. 

On industrialisation, the government is pursuing the programme of opening up industrial parks in various districts as an incentive to both local and foreign investors. 

There is also a deliberate strategy on labour intensive employment on maintenance of roads. This has also attracted many young people than any other age bracket. 

We noted that sometime back, there was a mismatch between the skills acquired in university and other tertiary institutions of higher learning, and the demands of the labour market. We, therefore, need to foster greater linkages between the labour market and, the education and training system, to ensure that the curricula are aligned to the needs of the labour market, and that the youth are being trained in fields where employment opportunities are available. 

In the ministry, we also have labour externalisation which has had some success and some negative impacts with regard to the people we have sent out. I would like to report that we have so far externalised about 12,000 of our people to work in various countries. Unfortunately, one of the organisations has not been very successful, and they have used our people for other purposes besides the ones for which they were taken. 

We have taken very decisive steps; we have cancelled the licence for this organisation, and we have also worked with the Ministry of Internal Affairs who contacted Interpol to help us to see how we can handle those who are employing Ugandans when they reach there. 

Some of the people have come back and we have talked to some of them. We have sent some to doctors and the results are not convincing. So, we would like to have a second opinion. What they are coming up with as a conclusion can be seen even by a lay person; that they have some gaps. 

MR KUBEKETERYA: The minister said that they cancelled the licence of some fraudulent organisations that have been taking Ugandans out for employment. Can you name them so that Ugandans can know which ones are fraudulent and which ones are not?

MR OPIO: Madam Speaker, this question was raised on the Floor. I am going to come up with a statement, and we have written to you - I do not know if you have received the letter - saying that we are ready to respond to the statements raised by hon. Kyanjo. That will specify the firms and the discussions will follow afterwards. Otherwise, if I just mention it, I will leave it hanging. 

I was saying that although some of these areas have provided us with foreign exchange, because of the problems in the Western World, the numbers are also coming down. 

There have been suggestions that the Uganda Government advises those who are externalising labour to reduce their wages so as to make sure that we continue. Others are saying that if we do that, we are going to reduce the quality of the people because they will earn less. 

This is a difficult area to conclude, but I would like to say that, that unit in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has done a good job, and we shall continue to find ways and means of getting some of our people jobs outside; not only jobs of that level, but even the jobs at a higher level.

These are the issues, which were raised –(Interruption)

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am sorry to have interjected but the minister is praising the Ministry of Gender that they have done a good job. Much as I appreciate the answers being given, there was a pertinent question that we asked, which is for the establishment of the Equal Opportunities Commission timeframe. The Constitution mandates that it should have been established within one - I pointed it out that it is four years down the road. The minister has said that out of five, only three able people have been identified. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He said of the five, three are women.

MS KAWOOYA: Sorry for that. Now, since they have been identified and it has taken four years, and he has told us ably that the President is to complete the process, what we want to hear is that since it is a matter of urgency - This afternoon, the Minister of Internal Affairs has just stated that the Police itself is among the disadvantaged. This morning, I received the concerns of the male counterparts who were battered, and they were asking for help. If this commission was in place -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you are now re-opening the debate.

MS KAWOOYA: Madam Speaker, I am coming to the final point. The question is, when the minister says the process is ongoing, for how long? We want to be reassured that at least in the near future we can have a message to send over. This concerns everyone. In the last financial year, a budget was given to the Ministry of Gender to establish this. Today we don’t know where this budget is. We need reassurance. Let the minister reassure us and that is all. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I don’t know whether the Chair was listening. Anyway I will not answer for the minister, let him answer. Where is the money and what is the timeframe?

4.52
THE MINISTER FOR THE PRESIDENCY (Dr Beatrice Wabudeya): As to the question of the time frame, the honourable minister has informed the House that the list has been submitted to His Excellency, the President. It would be unfair for us to ask the hon. Minister of Gender to give us the time frame because the matter is not in his hands anymore. However, I wish to request that His Excellency the President be given time to approve the list and he will bring it when his consultation process is over. Thank you.

MR OPIO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Presidency has already answered the other one. 

Concerning the money, I have just stated that the money is already being utilised. We have purchased five vehicles because there are going to be five commissioners. The procurement process is taking place to acquire a building for the commission. So, when we discuss in the committee, we shall give the details on how this money is going to be utilised. But what I am stating is that the major items i.e. the purchase of five vehicles and the process of acquiring a building for the commission, are underway. The details will be given when we discuss with the chairperson and her committee.

I would like to assure the chairperson that as a ministry, we have worked very hard to get these names and they have been agreed upon by the President. He wrote back and advised that we get the nominees approved by Parliament before putting in place the instruments, given what happened sometime back. We wouldn’t like to make the President sign the instrument before they have been vetted by Parliament. Otherwise, the names are there and we are waiting for the President to send the names here. When they have been vetted, the process will take place. 

We are sorry for the time it has taken, as it was a long time. I am told this was passed in 2007, and when I joined the ministry, the process of vetting was still going on. We hurried the process and it is now nearing its end. I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity.

4.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE, ENERGY (Mr Simon D’Ujanga): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity and I support the motion. I would like to thank His Excellency the President for having been elaborate in his speech on the State of the Nation Address.

On pages 23 to 27, namely, paragraphs 43 to 52, His Excellency the President elaborately enumerated the current and planned activities of my ministry. Nevertheless, Members have raised some issues to which I would now like to respond.

Most of the issues raised are to do with rural electrification. These schemes commenced but have not yet been completed. I would like to inform the House that these schemes will, this financial year, receive priority. This decision has been taken by my ministry so that we are not everywhere but nowhere. So these schemes are going to receive priority this financial year. 

At the moment, my ministry is updating this list and as soon as we are through with it, we will share it with honourable members to ensure that whatever schemes are in their constituencies are finished this financial year.

Allow me to respond to some specific issues raised. One is to do with – (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the honourable minister. I share the concern of the minister, but I was in the last Parliament and we passed the Energy Act. In that Act, we provided for two percent levy from every consumer. According to the information that I have, there is over Shs 40 billion. Uganda Electricity Transmission Company has Shs 9 billion and there is a problem as UMEME has raised some percentage. That money is protected under the law, and that is the money, which is supposed to be used for rural electrification. 

The minister’s hand is tied. Why am I saying so? The PERD Act gives the concessionaire power to supervise Ministry of Finance. The minister may have a good heart, saying that all will be catered for in the budget, but I want the minister to be fair to this country, and ask Cabinet and the Prime Minister to bring the PERD Act here so that it is amended. Otherwise the Minister of Energy, with all due respect, is powerless. He has good intentions, but all the money is under Finance, and the Ministry of Finance has authorised – Madam Speaker, with pain I have to reveal this - the Ministry of Finance has authorised UEDCL to build headquarters with this money, which is meant for rural electrification thereby violating the law. 

I tried to ask the Chairman of the Finance Committee so that we use our powers to stop this. The Auditor-General queried that this government - we own Amber House, which belongs to the Ministry of Energy but the government rents Amber House. Therefore, it beats one’s reason. We own Amber House; we rent it; UEDCL has been authorised by Ministry of Finance to build headquarters with money, which is meant for rural electrification. Can the minister clarify on where he is going to get money to complete these schemes and when we will have the PERD Act in this House so that it is amended?

MR D’UJANGA: Madam Speaker, all monies come from Ministry of Finance. So, even concerning the programme that I said we would give priority this year, some money has been put in the budget and the honourable member is aware.

With respect to the PERD Statute, I am glad to inform you that Cabinet has discussed this matter. In the event that privatisation is over - maybe there is need to have a fresh look at the PERD Statute. This matter is receiving government attention.

With respect to Amber House, it was originally owned by Uganda Electricity Board. During the privatisation period, this house was handed over to a company called Amber House Limited, which has been running it – [Ms Amuge rose_] - I will take the information, but let me finish the sentence I have started. I know almost everything in this sector. We have had several discussions with the Ministry of Finance and this matter is also at hand so all the concerns that were being raised are being handled.

The levy you talk of. You recall in the Seventh Parliament that because of the darkness looming over the country, we decided that rural electrification be suspended. Regarding the money you are referring to, the levy was diverted to the thermal stations. As soon as we retire the thermal plants, this money will then be available for rural electrification. That is partly why I am very confident that the list will be handled this financial year, and when we are ready with it, you will be able to see it and have your input. Now I can have the information.

MS AMUGE: Madam Speaker, I just wanted to assist the minister and say that, what he is trying to explain is so comprehensive and it is already before one of the committees in this Parliament. You can only ask the committee of COSASE to expeditiously handle the issue, but he cannot handle it now, as it is quite comprehensive. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I just wanted to pick up the issue of the levy. You have said that the money went to the thermal stations, so you are saying that it is not being used to buy a house for UEDCL. Can you confirm that?

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the minister should really be frank with this House because we can no longer go on like this. Amber House was built with tax payers’ money and everybody knows about it. He has also been complaining about that company he is talking about and he is stuck. This is some of the money that would be helping us either to put up health centres, make roads or any public utility, but a certain company, known to Ministry of Finance. When you look at the budget, it is not indicated anywhere. Why can’t we be transparent at this stage, Mr Minister? Be frank and be exonerated from this cross that you are on. Thank you.

MR D’UJANGA: Madam Speaker, I have said before that this matter has been discussed and finalised between the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources, and Ministry of Finance. When a company is in place, there are some procedures, which must be carried through in order to wind it up. This is Amber House Limited. This matter is being handled.

About the levy, I would like to repeat that government subsidises power generation using thermal and this is to reduce the tariff from 24 cents to around 17 cents. So each year, there is some amount in the budget, which is put in order to buy down the tariff. Since there was the buying down of tariffs in the Seventh Parliament, we decided that some of the money, which was for rural electrification be used for buying down this tariff. 

And the issue of building a headquarters, I am just hearing of it now. I will check on that – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But if he does not know -   

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, with your permission, the Ministry of Finance, which is the supervising body of UDCL under which this company has been privatised, has given a letter to UDCL. Soon you are going to see an advertisement for UDCL to build a headquarters using money which is protected. I am speaking with authority on this matter and I am asking the Minister of Energy to take up this matter. The money which is going to be used is our money, which is under you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does the Minister of Finance wish to say something about this?

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, the information that is available is that the Ministry of Finance is finalising arrangements to transfer Amber House to the Ministry of Energy and Minerals. (Interjections) Of course, it is not in the hands of that Ministry. It is in the hands of the Uganda Property Holdings and we have held meetings – it is also a government company; it is wholly owned by government, but plans are underway to ensure that the Ministry of Energy and Minerals takes over the running of that building. That is the information that we have.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What about the levy? Where is the money for the levy? Is it building a house? That is what we are interested in.
 
MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, we shall come back to this House – (Laughter)- when we have the facts. I thank you.

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, any company, especially if it is a government company, we know how they operate; even companies declare dividends, don’t they? This is a company that this Parliament does not know of its owners. This gentleman who has just gone to the Ministry knows very well – by the way, Madam Speaker, I want you to be very honest with this gentleman. Put them to the carpet so that they come and tell us how much money they have collected from that building, and who the shareholders, are so that we can be comfortable. It is a very strange thing. Water has gone above the bridge in that place!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, honourable members, I have been informed that the report of that committee is ready. So, I will give it an early opportunity on the Order Paper.

MR D’UJANGA: Madam Speaker, allow me now to                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        please continue with the response to honourable members’ concerns.

Hon. Kassiano Wadri of Terego raised the issue of power to the West Nile region. Madam Speaker, as we reported on this Floor earlier on this year, the concessionaire, the company which is supposed to supply power to this region, WENRECO, run into financial difficulty and the region was without power for one month. I am glad to say now that the government has taken over part of these operations in the region, whereby government is supplying fuel for running the power station in Arua, and under some arrangement, whereby there will be an extra account in which all the revenue from the power generated will be banked so that we are assured of continuity of power supply in this area. The situation is, therefore, improved; power is restored to the region. 

The other challenge we have now is that of completing the mini-hydro station at Nyagak. Similarly, this construction has had financial problems and we would like to move in as government and take over the construction of this power station, with a view of concluding it within a very short time. 

Madam Speaker, before government could take over the construction, we thought it necessary to send the Auditor-General to audit the company. I am glad to say that last Monday, we received the auditor’s report and we will continue to discuss this report, and government will enter the concession in order to complete this power station. 

The other smaller issues: Power supply to Kiruhura District and Kazo. Supply to these areas is going to be covered under Electricity for Rural Transformation II and Cabinet has approved ERT II, and within a very short time, ERT II will be brought to this Floor seeking Parliament’s approval. So, that matter is covered.

The other issue was raised by hon. Bahane Silver and it is to do with Nyamabuye site –

MR OCHIENG: Madam Speaker, many Members have talked and have requested the minister to be very clear on the number of issues they are intending to implement. When you talk about ERT II, and you say that it is still at Cabinet level, and by the time you bring it here and we go through the rest and all this kind of thing, we will be very far. 

Madam Speaker, I, as usual, did look at these people’s programme, and all the programmes that they intend to implement, and there is a lot of money under a programme that we provided for last time. This time round, under the requirements of the Budget Act, we talked to the ministry and requested them that instead of waiting for monies that will be approved, and then you follow this and follow that, this money is provided to complete all these pending installations and the like. To date, I have looked at their own ministerial policy statement for the Ministry, and for Finance and that recommendation has not been effected. They are still telling us to wait. I am worried that this type of waiting will be the type that we did four years ago, and up to now, those schemes have not been completed.  

I request that the money that is to do all these schemes be utilised with the amount of money that is lying idle under a one Kaisotonya–Nkenda arrangement. We can then wait for that ERT II to tackle the issues of Kaisotonya, because by that time, we would have known where the power is going to be produced. It will be clear, since right now, those things are the impediment to that process. 

Since the money is there, we should use it and we stop this politicking, saying we will find the money. You have failed to find the money for the last five years, and the wires are just hanging there with the poles rotting. I think the Minister should come out very clearly and complete these issues with the money that is there, basing on the recommendations that we gave him, other than what they have done. They wasted our time when we looked at their report and made recommendations, which they ignored. I feel so cheated working for a long period of time - day and night - and my recommendation is not being taken on. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the issues you are complaining about will come in the budget debate, especially about your recommendations. Let him now answer whether the money is there, and he tells us how quickly he can move.

MR D’UJANGA: Madam Speaker, you have guided this House many times, that we are responding to issues raised by the State of the Nation Address. However, since this has come to this Floor, I can address it. 

Kaisotonya–Fort Portal–Nkenda is a very crucial programme, whose money cannot be diverted because we need this transmission line by the end of 2010. Now, we are doing Resettlement Action Plan (RAP). The money, which is still on the budget, looks very much, but this money is meant for RAP, whose activities are ongoing.

Secondly, ERT stands for Electricity for Rural Transformation. This is a World Bank funded project, specifically for rural electrification. It will not be fair to start pre-empting our policy statement because the time will come when we shall discuss it here at length. So, I really beg your indulgence that we leave the policy statement until the appropriate time comes. However, the money which is there, the Shs 54 billion for Kaisotonya, is for the Resettlement Action Plan, which should have started sometime back; we are behind schedule. 

For Kiruhura, Cabinet has already approved this ERT II, which is a continuation from ERT I. It is going to come here. The chairman of the committee can help me expedite so that contractors can move on site before the end of this year.

The other issue was raised by hon. Silver Bahane, and it was something to do with Namabuye, which is a five megawatt mini hydro site. I am glad to inform this House that this site has been packaged now and it is going to be developed with NORAD funding. This small power station is going to be part of the Kisoro–Kabale line. 

There is what we call “empower systems”, which are booster stations. In other words, by the time you are extending power to Kisoro from Kabale, you would have poor voltage. So, we are going to use this mini hydro station to boost this voltage. This is also at hand.

Hon. Chelangat Tete of Bukwo District was wondering why we cannot do rural electrification in the region of Sebei by using mini hydros. There are many little streams in that region and we have started on a number of them. We have identified some few, which we will concentrate on to develop rural electrification in that region.

The last issue raised was to do with exploration of opportunities of uranium and nuclear energy. The ongoing airborne geophysical survey and the geological surveys are aimed at identifying minerals, including uranium. Once the surveys are accomplished within the next two years, we should be able to know the uranium potential of this country. 

In addition, the Nuclear Energy Unit has been formed. Members will recall that we brought a bill here, The Atomic Energy Bill, which is now an Act. Under that Act, we have formed in the ministry the Nuclear Energy Unit and this is for peaceful application. 

The background is that the other sources of energy in this country are hydro, with a total of 3,000 MW and geothermal, which we think is more than 2,000 MW. So, if the country develops, we may have nowhere else to get power from. We are preparing ourselves to use atomic energy for power generation. So, we have formed this unit for peaceful application, and we have already sent four junior professionals who are first degree holders to Sweden to do nuclear power engineering. 

You will recall that the oil programme took us from 1986 before we started yielding results, similarly with atomic energy. We have already started training for application of atomic energy for power generation. So, these were the issues raised.

As I said at the beginning, most of the issues which were raised were to do with rural electrification. We are compiling a list and we shall share this list with honourable members in order for you to have your input. About the other issues, we shall come back with them and there will also be a chance when we present our policy statement for members to have their input.

Apart from all this, as I always say, we are always available to clarify any other issues that members may individually raise with us. I thank you very much.

5.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion thanking His Excellency the President for the State of the Nation Address. I thank the movers of the motion and I also thank the honourable members who have contributed and supported the motion. During this debate, many issues were raised and some of them will be answered during the debate on the budget. However, there are some issues which we think we have to answer as a ministry at this stage. 

The honourable members raised an issue of economic performance. I would like to thank Members of Parliament who have acknowledged the fact that the Uganda economy remains buoyant, growing at seven percent per annum in the last financial year and projected to grow at six percent per annum, which is by any standards much better than many economies in the region and the world over. This is because Government is implementing public expenditure efficiency measures to improve value for money, which will help to sustain the high economic growth of our country. 

Government will also focus on improving production and productivity in the agricultural sector, including agro processing, which will help to create productive employment. I urge the honourable members of the House to support Government in ensuring that there is value for money by effectively monitoring what is happening in their areas of representation, and providing feedback to Government. 

Members raised the issue of authenticity of economic growth figures. I want to inform the House that the growth estimates are arrived at using statistical methods, and use is made of the actual data collected from the field for a number of sectors. These figures are computed by the Uganda Bureau of Statistics, which is mandated to do so by law. 

Whereas it is a difficult task to compute various statistics in developing countries like Uganda, the Uganda Bureau of Statistics aims at producing the best quality statistics for the different users, including Government. I want to state that these figures are not cooked as some people would like to suggest. Other than UBOS, these figures have been studied by different international agencies including the African Development Bank and the World Bank, and are compared to their figures in other economies of the world.

By definition, GDP is estimated output, that is, value-added from the various activities conducted in a given country, usually measured annually. It may not be the best indicator we can use to determine welfare in the country, since it does not consider distribution of income among the different actors and sectors in the economy. 

The President in his State of the Nation Address stated that the per capita GDP stands at $450, up from $264 in 1986. These numbers are actually the same as those released by the Uganda Bureau of Statistics. As already stated, it is UBOS that produces these growth numbers and Government is one of the users or customers of these statistics. The only difference was on the dollar value of the per capita income, which fluctuates depending on the prevailing exchange rate. In June, the exchange rate was at about Shs 2,500 per dollar. 

Members raised the issue of interest rates and the issue of Government treasury bills and high interest rates. Government issuance of treasury bills is not the main source of high interest rates in Uganda. The issuance of these treasury bills has not constrained the availability of loanable funds to the private sector, given the very high liquidity in the banking system. (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I think the minister may have said something without cross-checking, and it is a serious matter regarding the exchange rate. He said that in June, the rate was Shs 2,500 to a dollar. I do not know whether I got him or not because if he said that, then it is a very serious matter. It is not true. 

When Government gave Quality Chemicals money, they said that due to exchange rate appreciations, they lost Shs 15 billion. So, the Minister of Finance must clarify because if we leave this on record, and then tomorrow we query it yet nobody has raised this matter, then I think it will encourage people to just steal government money saying that they have lost this money because of appreciation of the shilling. To the best of my knowledge, our shilling has never reached 2,500.

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, I wish to concur with the honourable member; the rate was Shs 2,050 not Shs 2,500. 

I was trying to explain the interest rates and I said that high level of liquidity explains the reason why there is significant growth in unsecured personal loans extended by commercial banks. 

The major causes of high interest rates are structural. These include the high costs of doing business in the country as commercial banks extend their branch networks; poor information sharing among the banks regarding borrowers; inadequate legislation on matters of property rights, contracts, and collateral registries, leading to increased investment in foreign assets and high default rates. 

Government is trying to stem this and address the problem through the following measures: First, by establishing the Credit Reference Bureau to mitigate against high default rates by facilitating easier tracking of borrowers; secondly, Government has licensed additional commercial banks to increase competition; thirdly, we are publishing interest rates and charges by different financial institutions on a quarterly basis for increased public awareness; and fourthly, Government is underwriting the risk associated with bank lending to agriculture, and generally maintaining the overall macro economic stability. 

Honourable members raised the issue of capitalisation of UDB. It is true that UDB is under-capitalised and it is necessary to provide investment finance so that the small scale firms can access this funding and add value to our products, and minimise poor harvest losses. 

Members will recall that the Ministry of Finance made a proposal last year to recapitalize UDB through issuance of bonds, and raised Shs 200 billion, which was rejected by this Parliament. Instead, this money was reallocated to other activities including support to Parliament activities. The Ministry of Finance welcomes the change of heart and is committed to strengthening the financial capacity of UDB. We are trying to mobilise funds, including borrowing to ensure that UDB has the capital that can be accessed by Ugandans.

Hon. Members raised the issue of Uganda’s investment policy being in favour of foreigners. We are aware that the policy is guided by the Investment Act, which is due to be amended. The principles underlying the amendment will soon be presented to Cabinet for consideration. However, using the Investment Code, many of the companies that have benefited from incentives are actually local. 

The Uganda Investment Authority database, using the Investment Code classification described above, shows that 23 percent with purely local investors have been registered; 34 where Ugandan shareholding is above 50 percent have been registered; and that only 43 percent companies are purely foreign. The investment regime in Uganda, therefore, is non-discriminatory. 

The following investment incentives are available for all investors whether local or foreign: Investment capital allowances; investors, who register as investment traders, are entitled to VAT refund on building materials for industrial and commercial buildings; duty and tax free for plant and machinery materials; fast arrival privileges in the form of duty exemptions for personal effects and motor vehicles previously owned for at least 12 months, for all investors and expatriates coming to Uganda; and export promotion incentives and facilities including manufacturing and bond duty exemption on plant and machinery and other imports; stamp duty exemption, duty draw back and other incentives.

On land, the ministry, in consultation with other stakeholders, has concluded the allocation policy which does not necessarily favour foreigners. Land will be allocated free of premium to investors, whether local or foreign, to those who satisfy a certain criteria including the level of investment, the sector – whether it is agro-processing, ICT, hotels, minerals - and also the level of employment. 

The Attorney-General has also pronounced himself on the aspects that must be prominent in any agreement regarding land allocation for investment. Therefore, foreigners are not favoured. This allocation policy will be used in Namanve where over 300 applicants have applied for land and over 50 of these are local investors.

One issue that affects local investors is that most prefer to remain informal. They do not wish to register with Uganda Investment Authority to obtain investment licences although investment licences are free of charge. Whereas foreign investors require them as per the Investment Code and cannot start business, without them, local investors do not necessarily need them to start business but would need them to be recorded in the UIA database and, therefore, be in focus for UIA facilitation services, which are all free. 

Local investors believe that when they are registered for the investment licence they are very exposed to URA taxation. As a result, they miss out on the largest incentives which are available like capital allowances and other related tax incentives. In addition, UIA has no way of tracking them to deliver them the information, and this is vital for their investments. 

The issue of jobs was raised. It was said that investors who come to Uganda give the majority of jobs to non Ugandans. The issue of non Ugandans working in Uganda is a matter for the Immigration Department. Such people are required to fulfil certain requirements before they are given work permits by the Immigration Department. The Investment Code plays no role in this aspect. 

It should also be noted that not all foreigners working in Uganda are investors. There are those who are resident traders who do not need an investment licence to get work permits but rather only need authorisation from the local authority to trade, and there are also others who work for non profit organisations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But minister, I think you are not being fair to the country. Recently, I gave information here that in Egypt the policy of the government is that for every foreign investor, you must create nine jobs for the Egyptians. That is the government policy. One Ugandan, nine Egyptians; every foreigner creates nine jobs. That is what we are asking for.

MR DENNIS OBUA: Hon. Minister, Malaysia is a country that has developed because of foreign investment, but their policy is also just like that of Egypt. Once you are a foreign investor, you must know that there are certain conditions within their employment policy that you should adhere to. One of them is that you must employ indigenous citizens of Malaysia. 

Here, our biggest point of complaint is that we do not seem to have a comprehensive employment policy that should guide foreign investors whom we are encouraging to invest in Uganda. That is our point of departure. We entirely support the initiative of foreign investment, but the recruitment and employment policy here in Uganda is not very conducive to the young people.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, if you go to Nakumatt, you will find Somalis and Kenyans entirely. I do not think I saw a Ugandan there.

MR KAJARA: I do agree that through non enforcement of the policy by the Immigration Department, Uganda has faced this problem of non Ugandans who are not experts. The policy is that you can employ foreigners where Ugandan experts are not available. The Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development has just told this House that they are finalising a labour policy but meanwhile it should be noted that there are a number of foreign investors employing very many Ugandans. Some of them have even taken Ugandans abroad to work. For example, MTN has taken some Ugandans to Nigeria and Mauritius is employing 400 Ugandan IT graduates in the IT parks. That is why the Government of Uganda focuses a lot on investment promotion and entrepreneurship development as well as improved investment climate in order to increase the supply of jobs.

Hon. Members also raised the issue of funding for agriculture, specifically the issue of the Maputo Declaration to raise the budget share of agriculture to 10 percent of the total budget. In accordance with this declaration that encourages Government to allocate 10 percent of their budgets to agriculture and rural development, I want to inform Members that Government has a holistic approach to funding the agricultural sector. 

Therefore, in addition to the allocations made directly to the Ministry of Agriculture vote, they are funding other sectors which ultimately benefit agriculture. These sectors include infrastructure; water for production; the energy sector which facilitates agro-processing, particularly in the rural areas; health, to ensure a healthy agricultural labour force; and education. This is in addition to other programmes such as NAADS and NARO. 

This financial year, Government has also established, together with commercial banks and other financial institutions, an agricultural credit facility that enhances funding for agricultural mechanisation through public-private partnerships. 

Members raised the issue of the Road Fund, saying that the Road Fund Act provides that sources of revenue for the fund will be, among others, money appropriated by Parliament and road user charges including fuel levies. This is for the purpose of financing routine and periodic maintenance of public road infrastructure and related activities.

The budget for this financial year 2009/2010 has proposed an allocation of Shs 238 billion to fund road maintenance activities across the country. These resources will be appropriated from the Consolidated Fund in accordance with the law.

In future financial years, Government will institute specific road user charges, including fuel levies. The necessary legal and operational arrangement for their management- (Interruption) 

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We made the law that the Road Fund should be a separate account. Fuel levy, license fees, especially for the first registration and PSVs, should all go to that account. 

This Parliament sponsored a trip for Members of Parliament to go to Kenya, Tanzania and Malawi where they are using the Road Fund money for both routine and periodic road maintenance. How come now the Minister of Finance is allocating money? We would love to know how much money we are getting from the fuel levy and the licence fees. You can lend us money for the Road Fund so that at the end of the year, we know that we have been able to collect a certain amount of money. Do not allocate money which is not your money. Every taxpayer, driver or owner of a vehicle is paying money on each litre of fuel, on top of the excise duty. The President has talked of repairing the roads and we are relying on that money. Why do you want to allocate money? 

The Ministry of Finance did not want the Road Fund. Ask anybody in Kenya and Tanzania; they are all stuck with that money. It is too much money collected. Why don’t you allow us to have our money so that we can know that we are able to collect a certain amount of money? If it is less, then we can revise it. Do not allocate money to us because it is our money. Thank you.

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, I did mention to this House that it is true that there is a road fund and a Road Fund Act. However, much as the Road Fund Act was passed, it has not been operationalised for a long time. The Ministry of Finance has just appointed a board which is going to manage and operationalise the Road Fund. Meanwhile, we are saying that before these people go on the ground and before they can recruit staff, Government has allocated some money which will be used for what the Road Fund Act provides. 

I have also just said that in this coming financial year, the Road Fund will take effect. The money has been collected; it is in the Consolidated Fund and it is being used. It has not been segregated and so you cannot know how much it is. We are going to ring fence it, now that a board of the Road Fund has been established.

Hon. Members raised the issue of equitable allocation of resources among districts. With respect to this, resource allocations to local governments are undertaken through three modes of transfer. One is conditional, the second one is unconditional and thirdly through the equalisation grants. 

These allocations are based on an allocation formula that includes parameters such as population and land area, in addition to sector-specific parameters, which vary from one sector to another. The details of the allocation formula have already been provided to hon. Members of Parliament as part of the National Budget Framework paper, under annex 7, which is the allocation formula for central government transfers to local governments. Government, through the Ministry of Local Government, is in the process of finalising a more poverty-focused allocation formula for consideration by Cabinet.

Lastly, the amendment of the PERD Statute, which was mentioned, is underway. The top management committee in Ministry of Finance has finalised those arrangements and it is to be tabled before Cabinet and later Parliament, which will address issues raised by this House. I thank you, Madam Speaker. (Mr Ekanya rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, before hon. Ekanya comes up, there is something I want to know. I have asked and written and no one has answered me from your ministry or the Central Bank. 

When will you facilitate banks to leave Kampala and go to areas where there are no banks? Kampala is congested; every avenue and street has a bank and yet there are districts in this country that do not have banks. That is why we were cheated by TEAM and the others. I have written to your ministry and all of you. I copied it to you and even the Governor of the Central Bank, but no one has answered my letter, and there is no acknowledgement. I have been waiting.  

MR MUKITALE: Minister of Finance, I did raise a concern that the current increase in the number of banks in Uganda is not delivering the expected reduction of interest rates. The reason is because Ministry of Finance and Bank of Uganda have increasingly given out treasury bills to these banks. As long as they are going to get profits without any administrative costs and risks of losing money, they will not reduce interest rates at which they lend to the commercial sector, which would create more employment in this country.

So, whereas you may be claiming to be mopping out inflation and mobilising resources from these banks, you are denying this country money that would be invested to create more employment opportunities, while at the same time reducing interest rates for the business sector. I would like to say that I have not heard an answer to that effect. I thank you.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to ask the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development what action he has taken under the East African Community to ensure that Uganda currency is convertible within the region like other currencies. If you go to Kenya, just across the border you cannot buy anything using Ugandan currency, yet on the streets of Kampala, Kenya money can be easily used. 

Tanzanian currency is not even acceptable in most of these countries. I really find a lot of difficulty. We are in the East African Community. The other day I heard the President complain that after consuming Kenyan milk for almost 50 years, when Ugandans wanted to export milk and chicken products to Kenya, the Kenyan Government thoroughly blocked and frustrated the process. The same applies to the financial sector.

Mr Minster, under the East African Community – I am the Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs - there is a meeting of all ministers of finance in this region to ensure there is equity and compliance to the East African Community Treaty. Within that treaty is a provision that allows convertibility of all currencies within the region. What action have you taken to ensure that Uganda’s currency is convertible within the region?

Lastly, you talked about banks. The productivity of civil servants and the labour force in this country is threatened because of microfinance institutions like Blue Financial Services and Bayport. These financial institutions are robbing civil servants like teachers and doctors. They are licensed by Ministry of Finance and Bank of Uganda. They take people’s salary for six months even after the clients have paid off the loans. As a result, civil servants have been forced to be in a perpetual cycle of borrowing, which has affected UPE, the health sector and other sectors because their interest rate is 180 percent. What action is the Minister of Finance taking to protect civil servants in this country?

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, I wish to thank you and honourable members for those concerns.

First of all, it is true that there are many more banks that are being licensed in the city than those rolling out into the rural areas. However, I would like to say that the duty of regulating banks is supposed to be that of Bank of Uganda. This should be done at the time such banks are issued licenses. Within the license, there should be conditions that compel these banks to roll out into the rural areas. I can promise that we shall handle this with Bank of Uganda.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: My letter was copied to them. I am encouraged that you are going to follow it up because they have also not answered it.

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, I have just said that we, as a ministry, shall prevail over Bank of Uganda to ensure the banks that are allowed to operate in Uganda roll out to rural areas.

The issue of microfinance institutions cheating not only civil servants but also communities of Uganda is rampant. I would like to inform the House that Ministry of Finance is taking deliberate action. In the past, these microfinance institutions and SACCOs did not have a regulator. What we have done is to finalise a law. Though the institution that regulates the banks is Bank of Uganda, they did not accept to take on the role of regulating these small financial institutions. 

The Rural Financial Institutions Act does not provide for the regulation of such small financial institutions. What we have done is to carry out a study and we will soon table a law here that will regulate the operations of these SACCOs and microfinance institutions. We want to stop them from cheating Ugandans and getting away with it.

On the issue of the Uganda currency, I would like to say that this is a matter for the East African Community. We know that one of the protocols, which is intended to be achieved other than the common market and the customs union, is movement towards a common currency. Until that is achieved, you cannot compel the member states to use your currency. 

The East African Community is moving step by step. We hope that we shall, in the near future, arrive at an agreement on the convertibility of the currency and the use of a common currency. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.58
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament. Madam Speaker has been concerned about the failure by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to answer letters. What I do, whenever I write to her, is to copy that letter to ministers of state for finance and the Secretary to the Treasury. 

I also have directed hon. Omach to ensure he assists the Minister to answer letters because – (Interjections) – I am going to explain why. The reason is because the Minister is overstressed. She travels quite a lot trying to procure scarce resources for us. So, she should be assisted by hon. Omach to ensure that letters are replied. He could even draft a letter and then she signs. So once again, hon. Kajara, that is a very important issue. We should have a system of ensuring that letters are answered. 

MR OTTO: Thank you very much, my lecturer and Professor for giving way. I heard the Deputy Speaker well; I personally wrote to the Vice President. We have a culture, hon. Prime Minister, in which your ministers do not even acknowledge receipt of letters, let alone reply. Certain letters we write are not easy to reply, but at least acknowledge receipt of our letters. 

Hon. Prime Minister, given your credentials at Makerere University, can you instruct your ministers to at least acknowledge receipt of official correspondences. It serves a big purpose in this country. 

PROF. NSIBAMBI: I think it is better to answer the issue. To me, the preference would be to answer the issue or to indicate that the issue is being discussed. However, I do not agree with you that it is all my ministers. I know that most of my ministers answer. There may be a few who may be slow because they are overloaded. The Attorney-General, for example, is overloaded with so many issues. The Minister of Finance is equally overloaded. 

There are so many people asking for issues. Recently, hon. Okello-Okello asked for a waiver of taxes regarding PRDP activities, and I wrote to the Minister of Finance. These are weighty matters; they have to consider them. You must also remember that in addition to answering so many letters, everyday I enter my office at 7.30am but from 8.00am up to 10.00am, I just answer letters. Can you believe it? So there are so many letters. So, I ask you to be understanding. However, when the Speaker or Deputy Speaker writes to you, in terms of hierarchy, you should have the courtesy to answer, hon. Kajara. Thank you. 

6.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Mr James Nsaba Buturo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to answer some of the issues that were raised by my colleagues, and thank you for making me the last speaker. I do not know what this means, but I am going to dwell on the subject of corruption. 

Allow me to quote a certain Englishman who did say, “Corruption is like a ball of snow; once it is set rolling, it must increase.” The challenge this nation is facing is that all of us have got to work together if we are to overcome corruption. The problem I see, and it was evident in comments made by my colleagues and the Leader of the Opposition, is the tendency to look at an individual and assign them the task of overcoming corruption. The truth of the matter is, until all of us pull together and move together, each one of us doing their bit, we are not going to overcome this problem. 

I want to persuade my friends who are very keen at pointing fingers; you need to know that the other fingers are pointing at you, as if suggesting that you have a role to play. It is our duty to convince Ugandans that all of us must really play our part. 

The comments made by the Leader of the Opposition will be remembered for four things. The first one is about blaming the President for what the hon. Members think is wrong but not giving him credit for all the things that are right under the President’s administrations. 

The second observation I got was that the Leader of the Opposition is absolutely out of date. I will demonstrate this very shortly. What he has been talking bout is three years out of date. I am going to demonstrate that very shortly. (Laughter)

The third one is his remarkable lack of showing the true nature of what corruption is. I will explain that shortly too.

The last one, which is remarkable in his statement, is the absence of what his proposed prescriptions are. Up to now, very few Ugandans know what he stands for apart from pointing fingers. My view is that we need to move away from that. 

Let me make a specific quotation. The Leader of the Opposition did say: “Right from the first State of the Nation Address in 2006, when the President declared that he would exercise zero tolerance to corruption and announced various legislative measures to underpin the stand, we stated emphatically then, and every year since then, that the NRM Government can never act decisively on corruption. Time is bearing us out”.

I do not know whether the Leader of the Opposition has been around all this while, but we have undertaken a lot of measures, and I want to quote some of them and he will perhaps tell us whether he was here or not. 

I want to say that we are continuing with this battle. It is only a few weeks ago that this House passed the Anti-Corruption Bill and the matter is on its way to H.E. the President. This is a major one we have undertaken with the support of this House. He complains about the IGG lacking powers. The Bill is talking about increasing the powers of the IGG and those of the Director of Public Prosecutions. 

He talks about the Auditor-General lacking support. The Auditor-General has special powers now which you can easily find in the Audit Act. I do not know whether the Leader of the Opposition remembers those things.

I do not know whether the Leader of the Opposition remembers very well that the whistle blower legislation is already before the House. To point a finger at the President when the matter is before Parliament is a travesty of justice and hon. Members needs to consider that. 

We are continuing to do so much. Only last week, all these anti-corruption agencies - Inspector General of Government, Director of Public Prosecutions, CID, and Auditor-General - were given an impressive array of vehicles to boost capability to address the challenge across the country. We are doing what we can and we want to continue doing more. 

I want to say that we need to have a comprehensive understanding of what corruption really is. The Leader of the Opposition has a really narrow view of what this problem is. He says: “For us, hon. Members, any serious effort to collectively fight corruption must start with a reclassification of corruption for what it really is - plain theft”. 

I agree with him that corruption has several elements and one of them is theft or embezzlement. However, there are other forms of corruption that we need to address as a society. Diversion of funds is a form of corruption. Abuse of office is a form of corruption. Abuse of moral values is a form of corruption. So, narrowing corruption as we see it in this country to mere theft is simply doing injustice to a problem facing all of us. However, I agree with him clearly that we must look at those who continue to steal public resources because so much is being done to undermine the unity and stability of this nation.

I want to cite the example of the IGG here. He says that the President set up the Office of the IGG and other anti-corruption agencies initially to prime the image of his regime, but largely also, as an instrument that selectively targets his opponents. Let me quote one of the things that the IGG has done in the FY 2007/08. During that year, the IGG arrested and charged 60 public servants and these include ministers, chief executive officers and members of NSSF, the Commissioner, Ministry of Gender, 10 chief administrative officers, four town clerks. Now, that does not support what the hon. Member is saying, that the President set up these institutions to target his enemies. 

Not only that, the IGG recovered during that same year assets worth Shs 1 billion, and tenders which had been cancelled since that time, amounting to Shs 355 billion. Now, that is not a small achievement in one year for an institution that was set up to help us overcome this problem. 

If I may say this, the Leader of the Opposition has been away - I do not know where he was – but the former IGG is not in office. The idea that the former IGG is still around is indication that he is not aware that things have changed. She is not in office. The current IGG or Deputy IGG is Mr Baku. 

I want to appeal to members, as I finish, that we should look at corruption in a more comprehensive way. I want to quote what the Leader of the Opposition said: “On corruption, hon. Members, our assertion is that this country needs a complete rethink and reawakening”. He does not tell us what exactly that means, but I guess he is supportive of what we are doing so far, except that we need to do much more and indeed we are going to do much more.

Finally, I want to quote another Englishman, Bess Myerson, who did say, “The accomplice to the crime of corruption is frequently our own indifference”. Let me say that in our integrity survey, Pader District is one of the worst performers in that matter, and the Leader of the Opposition has not told us anything about that. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I invite the mover to wind up.

6.14
MS ROSEMARY NAJJEMBA (NRM, Gomba County, Mpigi): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, allow me to congratulate myself for this motion. I have been the most disciplined Member of Parliament. I have not moved out. I have been seated in one place since we started. (Applause)

First, I would like to thank my party, NRM, for choosing me to move this motion. Thank you so much for trusting me. I wish to appreciate your contributions, hon. Members, that thanks of Parliament be recorded for the clear exposition of government policy in the President’s address on the state of the nation. 

I particularly thank all those Members on both sides of the House who spoke in support of the motion. I also appreciate the positive criticism brought up by some members, which I believe was in good faith. I assume we all love Uganda, we love our people and it is our desire to see Uganda grow from a peasantry economy to a much more industrialised one. 

To those who hold the view that the speech that the President gave was nothing new but the same old song, I wish to quote Bill Clinton, the former President of the United States of America. In his book, My Life: The Early Years, on page 457 he said, “The essence of political responsibility is being able to concentrate on what is really important for a long period of time until the problem is solved”. 

I appeal to government to practically and effectively respond to all members’ concerns as they are our people’s concerns. Until they are solved, we should never cease talking about them or doing something about them.

Special effort should be put on the areas under the social-economic development sector such as communication infrastructure development, education, health, agriculture, especially the fight against hunger and the fight against corruption. 

Hon. Members, for all those members who felt that the President in his address left out very pertinent issues, please take heart. The President could not talk about everything. Probably we should make it a point that he addresses Parliament more regularly, so as to deal with all important issues. That is a matter that Parliament can take up with the Executive.

Lastly, I urge you to support all government programmes, particularly in your areas. It is through such concerted efforts that we can make Uganda a better place. The future can be better than the past, and we all have a personal and moral responsibility to make it so. I thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Najjemba. I want to take this opportunity to thank the Leader of Government Business and your team, the Leader of the Opposition and your team; I thank you all especially for your staying power. I regret that some members had to go away to deal with issues of famine, so they were not able to participate with us in the debate. Nevertheless, I think we have done quite a bit of work. I want to thank the ministers for really answering comprehensively this time. 

I would urge the Clerk to quickly publish the Hansard because starting from Tuesday, I would like all the committees of the House to go and examine the policy statements. We had agreed last year that we were spending too much time first in the general debate on the budget, in the committees and then when the reports come. So, we took a decision that we will first go to the committees, look at the policy statements and then return for the major debate so that we do not take too much time, because we keep on repeating the same things. So, from Tuesday, please go and deal with the policy statements for three weeks.

I have already notified you about NAADS on Monday, and the debt issue. Please come back for that. I also want to suspend the work of the standing committees for those three weeks so that we can focus on the work of the sessional committees.

I put the question that the House do approve the motion as moved by hon. Najjemba.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I also put the question that hon. Najjemba sit there. (Laughter) Hon. Members, the House is adjourned sine die. Thank you so much.

(The House rose at 6.19 p.m. and adjourned sine die.) 
