Thursday, 14 July 1994

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS 

(The Deputy Vice-Chairman, Mr Joseph Ekemu, in the Chair.)

The Council was called to order.

LAYING OF PAPERS

MR RWAKAKOOKO:  Mr Chairman, with your permission, I would like to lay on the Table, report on the NRC Sectoral Committee on the 1993/94 Budget containing observations and recommendations.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR KALULE SSENGO: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I wish to express my regret at the fact that many Papers have been laid on the Table, but we have never had time in this House to discuss some of these very important Papers, some of these reports are the reports like those from the NRC Committee on the Economy, I think by now we are on report number four, but ever since the first report came in, we have never discussed a single of these reports, and I feel this is a very big short coming on the part of this House. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MOTION

(General Debate continued.)

MR LUKWAGO (Kooko County, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Chairman, as the electricity misbehaved yesterday, I was talking about Namalere mechanized.  When we visited Tororo, during our familiarisation tour as a Sectoral Committee, we found a lot of iron bars, stuck in Tororo, as if they have no value.  We came up with a conclusion that there are so other many items imported in this country which are wasted and we suggested as the committee, that there should be a commission to look into all these imported materials and equipment which are put to waste.  At one time, the Minister of Agriculture informed us in this House, that Namalere Farm Company had made a profit of Shs240 million within six months, but ever since then, we have not received a progressive report and we do not know what is happening to that company.  Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

MR SIBO: Point of information. I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor, that there has been a lot reported in respect of Namalere, and a lot reported in respect of a number of equipment and drugs imported by the Ministry of Agriculture, and this for instance, they were lots of over 100 tractors that were laying at Namalere, there was bush clearing equipment that was being used by a company that had been set up by the Minister of Agriculture illegally, these things were there and had been transferred to that company illegally, and yet there has been no reaction from the Minister of Agriculture in respect of these reports, and we do not know the present position of that company. For instance, we do not know what has happened to these tractors that were reported.  There was a rumour that they were being sold, and if they were being sold, how were they being sold, and to whom were they being sold, all these things are not known.  We would like to know why the Minister of Agriculture couldn’t really listen to all these complaints and reports that are being made to this House?

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you for the information.  Mr Chairman, I will give an example of project formulation.  Either this country is borrowing for money for expenses or for money for development?  I will give an example of a loan AG 31 A, that is Shs1, 353,000,000/= out of this money a long term expatriate will get Shs 125, 000,000 salary, allowances Shs 21, 000,000/= and motor vehicles will get Shs 50, 000,000.  I will give also another loan that is AG 31 D Kenya Boarder tsetse Control.  

A long term expatriate will get Shs 375,000,000= out of Shs1, 110,000,,000 and when you add allowances, vehicles, Shs61,000,000 consumable, Shs181,000,000 -  just minimum of Shs190,000,000 is the only left to training.  I will give another example that is a loan of tsetse Control in Buvuma Island, is Shs164, 000,000 a long term expatriate will get Shs105, 000,000 as salary allowance Shs 23,000,000/- vehicles 14,000,000 consumable, maybe these are chemicals they use to control the tsetse, that Shs8 million. Are we developing? I think it is up to the House, if they go through our report, these items are there.  

As it has been discussed, it has been said by hon. Kalule Ssengo, that we need to discuss some of these Papers, fully, especially the report from the Committee of Economy.  Now, a farmer is being blamed the hon. Deputy Minister of Works, he condemned here people getting free food, that it is going to make them lazy, as if he does not know, we have had persistent draught for the last three years.  A farmer is not being facilitated with just a simple loan, there are no tools to be used, the areas which used to us the ox-plough, their cows were rustled and there is a programme in our Budget almost every year, Teso restocking, how far have they gone, nobody knows, and indeed even last year, the Minister here, in his speech, he said, he had Shs33 billion which he was going to invest with the Cooperative Bank for farm credit, what happened, the Minister never mention it in his Budget Speech here, and in his Budget Speech, this year, he said he had reserved Shs6 billion, where it is going to be heavenly knows.

In conclusion, I would like to sound to hon. Members that Agriculture in this country is already in trouble, not only agriculture, even the Animal Industry is also already in trouble, as we speak now, maybe, half of our cows have crossed to Rwanda.  (Interjection) I do not know they are searching for water - and as we speak now, Lake Victoria is already in trouble, it is going to be eaten up by the hyacinth weed, therefore, hon. Gentlemen and Ladies, serous view has to be put to agriculture which is a backbone of this country, if we are here serious.  Thank you.

MR WANDIRA (Baale County, Mukono): Mr Chairman, I thank you very much for giving me this opportunity to show my views on the year’s Budget.  I would first of all like to thank His Excellency for appointing a man of experience to be the head of Finance.  His education and the experience in the field of Economics and Planning has enabled the Minister of Finance, hon. Mayanja Nkangi for the last two years to present to us, this precise reports of the Budget of our country.  

When we talk to the public, we see that, there are very few people who did not like this year’s Budget apart from some political party who are complaining or who are struggling for power now.  

On economic performance of 1993/94, regarding the hiderness of the stability of our economy, we all cannot deny the bad effect of the drought, which hit the whole of East Africa.  

On the second show to our economy, the emergency of strong market pressure which increased the value of Uganda shillings, this was, I think, party due to the lack of corporation of some of our ministers who were thinking that, the whole burden of the work for the stability of the nation is entirely on the shoulders on the Head of State. Here, what I mean is this, when the President is touring other parts of the world, for financial assistance, and for some donation from generous NGOs, some Ministers should be visiting some countries like those in Europe and in Africa who are in need of our Uganda cash crops.

I know that everybody in our country is aware of the importance of the preservation of our environment, especially, not to destroying some forests and swamps.  

As we are now disturbed by our weather conditions, which is not reliable in the country, I would like to bring this suggestion to the Government to allow some farmers to grow their temporary crops like maize, rice, millet, beans, peas and different types of potatoes and some vegetables like cabbage and tomatoes, etc. in swamps.  This system will enable us to get enough food throughout any type of drought.  

We should all get together with our leaders in the country and take the responsibility of encouraging our people in the country to engage in this type of cultivating during the dry sessions.  If this were done, we would not have so many people who died of famine in Kumi and Pallisa, and other parts in the country.  in my county of Baale, we had four victims  The farmers who will be working in swampy places will be using some buckets to spy their crops until the Minister’s plan of irrigation and valley dams is in cooperation, which he proposed on page 3, item 7.

Lastly, on tax collection, both the Ministers of Finance on page 24, in his Statement and His Excellency’s Speech, on page 10, those were not happy for the very slow collection on taxes, and that they thought that these people were slow and ignorant in this new job of collective revenue and taxing investors and giving them some licences.  Here, I feel that, these people are not to blame very much, for our country Uganda is still new to this kind of jobs.  I would therefore, like to make some suggestions of giving them extra training abroad.  

During the colonial times, when we found, it difficult to teach here, because we had only one University of Makerere where some of us were teachers, we were trained as general teachers, English, mathematics and so on, we could even teach what we did not know, but the time came when these were to sent abroad to specialise and then specialization started a teacher, especially to teach a certain subject, and Police also were taken abroad to be trained, the Army were also taken abroad.  So, if we follow a system of that kind, we might be able to get competent people to do at taxation.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR SEKITOLEKO (Bugangaizi County, Kibale): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I thank you for giving me this opportunity to contribute on this Motion.  My concern today is mainly on Government planning.  Government has spent a lot of money on some projects, and many of these projects have been abandoned, and some have been badly planned, we do not need to go very far from even our city centre.  There are so many projects that Government has spent on money, but then they have failed to take off.  There are houses, even as high as 17 stories in the city centre, they have been there for the last 20 years, 15 years, we need office accommodation, but government has not cared, to act on this structures.  

Take the City Counci, for instance, is building stores in the City Centre, the plan which I cannot buy for my small town in Kakumiro, they have no toilets, and I am told they have been built on the top of sewerage pipes and I am also told that the highway road is going to pass there.  Now, why waste a lot of money to make such plan in the City Centre I mean the tax part, the high road is supposed to pass there, they are built on top of sewerage pipes, the plan has no toilets, has no Police -(Interruption)

MR HARUNA ADAM: Point of information. (Inaudible) I would like to inform the Member holding the Floor, that it is not the Government - the problem is with urban authorities, the Government plans - I mean what is called master plan, but when it comes to the development plan, the urban authorities seem to overlook this master plan, so as a result they are always by-pass the master plan, so it becomes a difficult for other project to be implemented.  I think if the Government should put in a place particularly in the Ministry of Housing and Urban Development to monitor the implementation of the master plan, by urban authorities, I think that they could avoid some of these confusions.  Mr Chairman, I thank you.

MR SEKITOLEKO: Thank you very much, -(Interjection) yes to monitor, that is very important, that Government should monitor these projects.  I mean a plan like that at the car park, somebody has in mind for such structure to last how long and why making it; why at this age?  I think there is a need for Government to monitor these projects.  As if that is not all, for instance, people in Kakumiro, His Excellency went there and he wrote two letter to the Minister concerned, that these people should be given electricity, 20 miles and the people were told to provide poles, they provided poles, and the poles were all not, they have been there for years, they do not mind, it is important that our efforts, our planning is really, towards something.  I want also to speak something about the banks.  The banks have disorganised us, especially UCB in the villages.  They claim, that one has to raise Shs 200, 000,000/= some branches have raised it, even the banks have remained closed.  

But, something more serious, is that this UCB does not lose money in those branches it loses money in the city because they are even individuals with over a billion as loans.  Now, why should we make people of a country or of two Gombololas to suffer and give somebody a billion and close a branch because you want Shs 200,000,000?  The service that the bank gives in a place is quite big, first of all security and also our people were just learning how to bank or to use the bank, and in some cases, it was mistake of the UCB, because what UCB did, gave some loans to the farmers, farmers scheme, without security, and these farmers these days fear to take their money to the bank, because they borrowed some money there, and they had promised, that the loans would be continuous, but then the bank stopped, and these people did not also bank there, so there is that problem.

I want also to talk briefly about drinking hours, or about drinking. I hope this time I will hard, but I have complained much earlier to the Minister of Finance, that there is need, there is a very great need for this country to make sure that it levies some tax on local drinks like crude waragi and others.  That money, to at least reduce the cost on beers; you put some taxes on waragi, then that money reduces - offsets the cost of beers.  I am saying reduces the cost of beers -(Interruption)

MR BWANIKA BBALE: Point of order.  Is it in order for hon. Ssebastiano Sekitoleko form Bugangaizi to advise the Government to levy a tax on an illegal commodity, is it really in order, Mr Chairman, when the law is in place to -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: The hon. Member was expressing his views, and he did not talk about illegality of a matter, so he is in order, so please, go ahead.  

MR SEKITOLEKO:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I want to inform you that the majority of drinkers in this country are drinking that waragi - enguli- therefore, it is very important that a solution is found.  First of all, a lot of children in this country and a lot of homes are broken, because of this waragi.  A lot of our civil servants today work few hours because of hangover because of drinking this waragi.  A solution must be found; and a lot of our population are drinking this enguuli which is not even checked, which is not supervised, just put in the market -(Interruption)

MR BAKABULINDI:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor, that once you start discouraging the local brewers of waragi, malwa, and yet you know very much, that you have got even another burden of the retrenches and we are lacking jobs, you are already creating insecurity and poverty among the people of that class. (Interruption)

MR BASOGA NSAJU: Point of information. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, I want to inform the hon. speaker on the Floor, that perhaps, is over stating the case, that most civil servants do not stick or get glued to the chairs in the offices, because they do not receive a living wage, and they spent time to make ends meet they have fees to pay, they have sick relatives etc, and if he was to sit and constraint on office job, from 8.00 a.m. to round 5.00, he would not survive in the present day Uganda, that is the reason.  Thank you very much.

MR KARUHANGA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, thank you.  I wish to inform hon. Sekitoleko, that the reason why people are drinking a lot of crude, kasese and liralira, kangadi and other things which comes from his constituency also is because the price of beer is so high, that it cannot be afforded by the majority of our people.  As a result, the people resort the alternatives which they would not otherwise resort to, and I want to inform this House again, because I have informed them before, when we were discussing the Budget last year, that Kenya produces 4.5 million crates of bear per month, while Uganda produces something like 120 thousand per month, which shows, 2.5 million crates of beer per month in Kenya, and you can challenge these figures, if you want, but at that time I said, why does not somebody responsible find out the reasons why, and the reason why, it is because our people drink crude because of the prohibitive price of beer.  At the same time, the crude which is drank by the majority of the people is illegal, enguli is illegal which means, that in fact we as legislators are not legislating for our people, we cannot put up a law and say this is an illegal thing and the majority of the people drink it, it means that we are either not living on the ground or we are not living with the people and we do not know what is happening, or we just keep laws in place because we do not address the matters.  Thank you.

MR SEKITOLEKO:  Mr Chairman, exactly, that is what I was saying, that the price of beer is very high, what we can do now, let us also tax waragi, so that the tax on waragi comes on beers, I don’t see -(Interruption)

MR PINTO:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I have information for hon. Member to continue to call waragi an illegal drink, enguuli.  In fact, there is a whole industry in Uganda East African Distilleries, built specifically to encourage people to brew local spirit for distillation and purification.  

So, the production is not illegal, the consumption in that state is in fact and poisonous and dangerous to your health, but the whole thing falls on indiscipline, people bring waragi, enguli and forget themselves because they are indisciplined as we speak now, there would be people who are drank during the day instead of working, if people were disciplined, they would be producing wealth instead they take their time drinking generally.  So, this you can see, is also cause of our poverty, because people are very idol, I think we should in fact encourage people to produce the local spirit for purification and distilleries so that they would they buy a more purified drink.

MR ELYAU: Point of information.  I think, Mr Chairman, let me inform the Member holding the Floor, that it is not the waragi as such it is crude, enguli, we could call it so, because I remember in our areas where people are very poor, there are two things which I have noticed. one; the poor ladies who want to educate their children use these things so that they get school fees.  Secondly, the poor people who are sleeping without blankets use those one for blankets, because after taking waragi -(Laughter and Interjection)- yes, if you are drunk then you can go and sleep -(Interruption)

MR SEKITOLEKO: Mr Chairman, the dangers we are getting, the dangers -(Interruption)

MRS KALEMA: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I would like a clarification from hon. speaker and from the other hon. Members who have so far contributed or gave information to hon. Sekitoleko about what we should choose.  Should we choose brewing waragi as an economic venture or should we choose health.  Because in the long-run, we lose people and which is more economical and more expensive.  Thank you.

MR SEKITOLEKO:  Mr Chairman, why I am advising the Minister of Finance to put this tax on these drinks is that the people who drink it will be fewer and also its standard will improve.  After having said that, let me briefly say something about famine.

Farming in this country seems to be very artificial.  One has food in Kakumiro another one has food in Bugerere then there is famine in Teso. So, there is just coordination.  But still seriously then there is a problem to address this problem of famine with people who every time have no food - it is understandable because this year we had famine in -(Interruption)

MRS SEKITOLEKO: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I am glad hon. Sekitoleko is saying what he is saying, and the information I am giving is to the whole House, Sir, I would like to inform everybody that 30th of July, 1994, we shall have an open day at Serere, Teso.  I wish to invite everybody so that you drive through the East and you see exactly what is going on there.  Welcome everybody.

MR SEKITOLEKO:  Mr Chairman, I was saying that famine we have the problem of distribution. It is also something to do with trade with business in our community.  For instance we have continue to support people in Karamoja.  Every year - I was there 20 years ago.  People were still begging for food.  Now, in a situation like that one, those people are not poor.  They in fact, organise their marriage with over 100 or 50 cows.  What we should do is not to give free food.  Free food should be accompanied.  Tell the person that you have got to work in order to get free food.

Tell or teach them about farming method.  But if you continue giving free food to our people, I think that will be bad.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MRS BAHEMUKA FLORA ALICE (Women Representative, Hoima): Thank you, Mr Chairman.  First of all I would like to express the views of my people in Bunyoro District, for the support Government gave towards the coronation of Omukama.  I thank the Government for Ebyaffe the grandson of Kabalega.  I do appreciate the small grant that was given to the small farmers in the distressed areas. But I still say, other areas need similar grants in terms of facilities that enable a small farmer to make a larger garden so that we can produce quite a lot. Under decentralisation policy, the Central Government is going to work on projects which he considers of national interest or regional interest or other projects which belong to the life Ministries.  In which group, I would like to call the attention to the Minister of Agriculture that the district farm institute which exist in some areas and in Hoima in particular the place is in need of rehabilitation.  We also have Law Training Centre and the Community Development Centres. Next we also have the Mechanisation sections of Agriculture Department. All these places are lying idle.

MRS V. SSEKITOLEKO:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, than you very much for giving way.  I some times get surprised when Members talk like they are coming from another Constituency.  Honestly hon. Beatrice comes from Hoima, I expected something different.  But may be when you come here, you are not supposed to tell the truth.  I shall start like this: We have what we call the Hoima Belgium Survival Funds Project.  This is a ten million project - I am talking about dollars - meant for only two districts - that is for Hoima and Kibale.  What is it supposed to do.  It is supposed to improve the agriculture she is talking about.  They are supposed to get credit even if you are a Minister you cannot get part of that credit from Hoima or Kibale unless you are from there. 

Now, the DFI she is talking about right now, it is under rehabilitation.  Only recently, when the Minister for Cooperation of Belgium was here, that is the only area he came to see.  What more do I have to put there, I go to other areas.

MRS BAHEMUKA:  I thank the Minister for that information.  But at the same time, I would like to say that the rehabilitation that they are doing is not enough because they do not have a tractor - they have problems of workers and you know these workers they want the job that bring them a lot of money.  So, we still need at least tractors to facilitate the workers there.  They have developed some of the demonstration plots, but the exchange to which this work is going on is not enough.  So, madam Minister, I would not mind seeing a tractor in that area so that we can get more plots to demonstrate the farmers in that area and also to make more development in that place.

If these places are rehabilitated, they would go along in the sensitizing people about the modern crops which we talk about in this country.  Everybody is tired of refusing crops which do not assure them of a ready market and they are very much eager about these new crops like vanilla, chills and such things. But then they need to know the technical of know-how.  So, if we rehabilitate these places, we shall be able to have seminars and workshops and then improve our work economy in that part of the country.

I would like to make a quotation, in the Budget Speech of the Minister and it says, ‘education and extension programmes will educate and encourage small farmers to store surplus stocks.’  

We have a problem of a hand-hoe in our homes, and with the hand hoe we cannot do much and that is why we ran short of food in our own homes and then ended up with a serious famine.  I am suggesting and requesting Government that the small farmers be given loans to purchase some tractors.  If this is difficult then under decentralisation, which would take tractors, given to the Departments of Agriculture so that these can be hired out by these small farmers.  

My district in particular, has very few tractors.  Hiring them for ploughing is quite expensive.  Sometimes people have suggested animal ploughs.  These cannot do much in my district where elephant grass is the vegetation.  Although they could do for second or third ploughing.  But we need to make larger gardens so that we can make a reasonable produce. 

Next, in the same Speech the Minister said, I quote; ‘Government re-seek to improve transport and information flow between the districts.  I also add on that this will help the information flow within the districts.  My district, Hoima, happens to have some people living in the disadvantaged areas geographically.  We have the Western Rift Valley; this is along Lake Albert.  Our people live over there.  There is an escapement, which separates them from the main and subcounty headquarters.  So, information cannot reach these people just as they cannot connect with the main headquarters, of the district because of that escapement. Sometime back an attempt was made -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member your time is over, please.

MR ELYAU (Kalaki County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Chairman.  First of all this is a very important time for us all to re-examine ourselves when we are talking about the Budget.  The Budget is a very important thing in one’s life and in a given season.  For example, areas, which are burdened with problems like where I come from.  

So, things have turned up to be very unwelcoming.  Since for the last five years, we are here, I have not seen developed changes in the rural areas.  For example, roads, although the Government did very well to give the equipments to the local administration, these people are keeping this equipment without use because there is no money for fuelling them. As I speak now, all the roads are not open.  They are all bushy.  So, time has come for Government; if possible, I suggest that the Government opens some of these roads -(Interruption)

CAPT. GASATURA:  Point of information. I would like to inform hon. Member on the Floor that even the youngest of the districts - Ntungamo District, has from their own resources paid taxes to manage to open up some of those roads.  So, some of the older districts actually ought to be leading the way rather than derailing.  Possibly some of the members of the Community there I hope none of the Back Benchers here, have not even paid the graduated.

MR ELYAU:  Mr Chairman, this man from Ntungamo are the people who are responsible destroying our cattle.  (Laughter)  These are the people who have made us poor and they make it as a laughing stock. (Interruption)

CAPT. GASATURA GARD: Point of order.  Is it in order Mr Chairman, for the hon. Elyau whom I believe bright while in his geography class to impute that people in Ntungamo would fly over and rustle cattle all the way across the land to Ntungamo?

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members should be informed by the log amongst themselves.  Please, go ahead.

MR ELYAU: Mr Chairman, this is not matter to be taken by laughter.  We are all here to represent the interests of the groups in Uganda, and you cannot say that we are moving forward if other areas are laughing in the end.  Currently, as I talk, a child in that area where I come from, the poor mother and father cannot even raise anything to pay the fees.  Now, I am suggesting, how can you say that we are getting richer when other people are getting poorer.  We are now supporting the Government but how can one remain just as he or she is. Why do you fear going there? You leave us alone to struggle or suffer - the inconvenience of being victims of Government.  So, let us be very serious.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

Secondly, I want to know from the Minister, I think people are saying our economy is growing.  It may be true because when I read the New Vision of last month, I was made to know that our shilling is now ruling somewhere outside Uganda - that is being used outside Uganda - I want to be informed.

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR FINANCE (Mr Kafumbe Mukasa): Point of information.  I think the hon. Member is mixing up a lot of things in one way because if you go to the Bureau De Change here, you will get the US Dollars. This is not Britain or America.  The currency is just a medium of exchange for value.  

So, it is not that whether they accept with Rwanda or Kenya or what, we should be proud of the shilling. So, it is not because the shilling is accepted in Kigali that is not the reason why it is not in Soroti.  There must be other reasons why people do not take the money to Soroti; may be there are no good reasons to exchange the money for.  But I beg you not to confuse the two things.

MR ELYAU:  Thank you Mr Minister for the information.  But I am not asking Kigali motive.  I was wondering why the shilling gave operation in other areas when we, the owners of the shilling were suffering.

MR KASAIJA KABUUBI:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, thank you very much.  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that the point he is raising is very, very important and I would like to inform the House that the Minister should not stand and tell something which is not true. The people of Uganda at the moment are experiencing shortage of money.  There is money in supply but it is little.  So, what he is trying to talk should not be blast - put aside because if our currency in circulation has reduced, that means we cannot even buy - I mean then, therefore, Bank of Uganda or the government should print more -(Laughter and Interjection)- no it is not inflation; the point I was saying -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order, please.

MR KANYOMOZI:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I just think that the House is getting derailed on issues of finance and partly I think may be, they do not know what is responsible for currency being available for exchange; surely the hon. Member who has just sat down cannot say the government should just go and print money when he was a party to passing a financial institution bill here.  

The printing of money must be accompanied by productive forces, you just do not print money anyhow, and as for my Friend in Soroti, there is a problem of not having money in Soroti is not that the government has ill motives against them, there must be goods and services which can attract that money to come there.  May be what you should be asking for is for those goods and services rather than just simple currency, the currency is a medium wave exchange it cannot do anything else.

MR ELYAU: Mr Chairman, as far as we are concerned in our country we should be honest before we finish this interim period so that at least by the time we end the interim period, all other areas have equal development, and as I talk now the government came out with a policy of closing the transport company; the only buses which were going to Kaberamaido via Karasi. Now, we do not have a bus because of the policy. Can’t the Minister alternatively give us the buses, which can help us to transport our people because children are going back to school? (Interruption)

KIGYAGI:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform the Member holding the Floor that, actually what government has done is to liberalize all kinds of services including transport service.  So, it is upon us as citizens to send either taxes or buses to operate in these areas because the services, which have been offered by government in terms of transport have been mismanaged by us.  So we have, since the economy is liberalized, I think it is up on us to send vehicles into those routes so that they can serve those people in those routes.

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Thank you very much Mr Chairman, I want to inform the hon. member and the rest of the House that I do not ever tell lies I always have my facts, let him - and anybody can challenge me even this House or outside, but let me give the information here, because the other time somebody was saying that we are banking money on one consolidated account, when I know that Mr Wakweya who was a member of PERD banked money in Nile but because of tribal tendencies, they sacked him and now they tell us the opposite.  

But let me go to the point.  The information over here is on page 40 of the bank draft to the Budget.  They say that the National Debt is being estimated, and if the estimation is not good enough for our country, when people in the villages where 80 per cent of our population lives, and when the hon. Member talks of the roads and transport; Budadiri in the last 30 years have contributed a billion dollars to the economy in government taxes, but they have never got any benefits out of all the governments since we became independent.  

Not only that, when our government says that we are doing very well, Britain is a member of IMF and World Bank, and here is an article where the British High Commissioner is saying that they cannot allow export guarantee for Uganda, now if our economy was doing very well, certainly Britain before the expansion of the Asians we used to have export guarantee 60 to 90 days - (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Minister, please, that was information, let him finish.

MRS SEKITOLEKO:  But he is misleading the House, Sir.

MR WANENDEYA: I was being courteous with the good Lady  -(Laughter)- Mr Chairman, the information I want to give over here is in connection with the fact that, our economy is not doing as well as the government would want to think, and if they were be right, let them have a survey and go in the villages of Uganda and then they would know that the economy is not doing well.  It is the Chairman, who is commanding this. (Laughter)

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr Chairman, some of us take this House to be very honourable, because it is the Supreme Body, of this country.  Statements made in this House should be able to guide the country properly, the government has issued statistics in the background to the budget, if a Member does not produce contrary statistics, to show that these ones should not be relied on for developing the country, is he in order to continue to insinuate that the government is a liar?  It gives out statistics, which the country should ignore for all purposes, is he in order and this becomes habit of the same Member of Parliament.  Is he in order, Sir?  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member if you have to make a point of information you should not use that opportunity to smuggle in a complete Debate. So, hon. Wanendeya you are out of order.  Hon. Elyau, please continue and finish your speech.

MR ELYAU:  Okay, thank you, Mr Chairman.  Now I go to the point of protection on food.  I am here urging that the Government should wake up today so that next time we do not suffer unnecessarily as if this is not our country.  When food in some areas - when food in some other areas is in plenty, people are dying somewhere else.  The food which is produced in Ankole or where and where is all our food, only to organize that kind of food in one central place so that we do not suffer like we are not able to see the truth.  

I am suggesting that there must be a plan for food protection with good policy, this year so that we know that in case of famine, the government must be having food in place. For example, why is the Ministry of Rehabilitation failing? They send orders to people who supply food. The people are arrogant and they do not supply food because there is no food. If anything, they will charge very highly, but if the government had put in place some food somewhere with cheapest rice it would be very easy to send that food to the areas affected.  

So, I think food should be a prerequisite in the nation because we must be able to feed ourselves as a nation.  Without food we cannot talk about the policy. So, I am urging you people, although some of us take it as a joke, this is a serious matter, suppose your aunt, your sister, your child, your uncle had died would you be happy?  This is a serious matter we have suffered, and people have died as if there is no government.  It is not good.  So, I think the protection and food policy must be made clear.  

Lastly, I am appealing to all our Members in government to let us know what they are doing in our areas. So that we shall be able to assist the people to understand sometimes we get the information here across as if we are quarrelling, but if this policy was availed to us specifically, we would be able to know and assist the Ministers.  This is what is important.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member, finish your Debate, please.

MR ALYAU:  So, Mr Chairman, I want to assure you that the country is seriously watching what might again happen because now local people the local food we are going to have in Teso will go on paying school fees, taxes in arrears, and then the millet next year, there is going to be another famine and serious one we have been accused of eating lizards but I have never eaten a lizard you also know.  We have been asked to go and eat grass as if we are cows.  This is a serious matter, Mr Chairman.  I thank you.

MRMBURA MUHINDO (Busongora County Kasese): Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Thank you for giving me the opportunity to be able to contribute on this Debate on the Budget.  The main stay of this country depends on agriculture, and this is subsistence agriculture.  And it is the duty of government to assist the people in this major activity, extension work is very important to advise farmers on scientific methods of agriculture.  

Moreso, like those of us who come from the mountains where soil erosion is very rampant we request government to be able to advise the farmers.  Due to the government must be on its toes to forecast and advise farmers accordingly.   Kasese would be indeed a grain basket despite the earthquakes and the floods, which we had, but I am sorry to say that the people of Kasese have pinned against the wall by government institutions. (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Every body is pinned.

MR MBURA MUHINDO:  Everybody is pinned but we are pinned more.  Mr Chairman, Kasese is a district of only two counties, and in these two counties you find two national parks; two prison farms, and a refugee settlement, which are not even there, an army farm -(Interjection)- there is an army farm in Kasese, there is no activity; the farm is there but no activity is taking place, if it is there, very minimal.  And so, the people of Kasese would not be dying of hunger we feel that government has done a lot to pin our people against the wall, and therefore, that some of the land must be returned to the people so that we can produce.  I cannot see why one of these prisons farms cannot be degazatted.

MRS SEKITOLEKO:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I have been informed by hon. Loyce Bwambale, that the DRC of Kasese actually told everybody in the district that government had returned to the people one prison farm and even the army farm is under consideration to be returned to the people.  The only reason we are not in a hurry is that, with the freedom of settlement in Uganda, who is going to move on to this land? 

So, in short, what we have communicated to the people of Kasese is to tell them, to work with government so that we know exactly who moves there.  We know who loves to move to Kasese, and of course, when he was talking about who is settled where, I know in Mubuku half the people who are in Mubuku were not originally from Kasese.  Now what I would have loved to hear is at least a work of thanks to government to have listened to you, we returning what you are demanding, we have already written, what more do you want.

MR MBURA MUHINDO:  Thank you very much for the information, which the Minister has given.  This is the very reason why we must talk so that we know what you have in plan. Because officially as district we have not been told.  And we cannot depend on rumours and it is good that I have heard it from and from the government and therefore, we are very grateful.  And we are asking for more. (Laughter)

Now, let me talk about savings.  Now, it is true that many of us are living from hand to mouth, and when you are living from hand to mouth, you cannot save, it is very difficult, it is difficult to save when you are living from hand to mouth.  And when we cannot save, therefore, means that our banking system is going to be very weak.  And so when the banks put up, set an amount as deposits, which must be there in order for a bank to operate, it becomes very difficult in many areas because people have no savings.  And because they are no savings, therefore, no loanable funds; and the cycle continues. There are no loanable funds if they are no sayings these are the facts of economics and financial management. 

So, the banks have also had their own problems; and I am going to tell you why they have had their own problems  People have lost credibility in these banks.  Depositors deposit their monies and the bank officials use that very money for their own benefits and when they come to withdraw, the money is not there. An example like what happened in Kasese is still very, very vivid; in the eyes of many Ugandans, and of Kasese people. When people’s monies were removed from the banks by the banking officials and now how do you convince these people to go and bank? How? It is very difficult.  So, I am calling up on UCB, that you must put back confidence into the people because without confidence, then your business is at risk.

Feeder roads; feeder roads in a district are very, very useful, as channels of communication to transport food, goods and others.  But although I am very grateful to government for the repairs on the main bridges connecting Kasese and Kabarole, we are very, very grateful, but we still request government that some of the bridges on the feeder roads, an example a bridge like at Kanamba in Kalusandara subcounty and another one in Kialumba our districts cannot raise enough money to repair them and so, I am requesting government to lend us a hand as you have already done before.

Income tax.  It is important that government must collect taxes in order to give services.  But it is also important that the business community must be educated on how to write their books because they have to pay the income tax from the profits earned.  Now, I would not enjoy the animosity that is there today government and the business people, so there is need for the community to be educated on how to write their books so that the exercise can be smooth.

Corruption, -(Interruption)

MR J. NTIMBA: Point of information.  Thank you Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Colleague on the Floor that many income tax payers have been antagonized by the fact that when they are over assessed, by the revenue collectors and make appeals against these over assessment, the appeals are more often than not ignored.

MR MBURAMUHINDO:  Mr Chairman, let me talk about corruption. Fighting, the recently concluded CA Elections where there was give and take demand from voters and bribery from candidates, there is no such a way leaders and the population who have passed through an exercise to fight corruption; there is no way.  

So, government is now at task how do you get leaders may be who have bribed their way through, and the voters who have also fed their stomachs and you expect to say you are going to fight corruption? This is a big challenge.  And it is the work of the government to see how such a scenario does not happen again.  And I am sorry to say that even next year we are heading for another General Elections, citing from what happened, these too might even be a big boom for those who want to receive and those who want to give and, therefore, I can see that the challenge is a big one.  Because when people have bribed their way they must get a return on their investment so how do they get that return?  It will be through corruption in Government and embezzlement.

Let me talk about irrigation.  The future of this country has seemingly been thought in irrigation but I want to say a few things.  First of all, irrigation exhaust the soil minerals through this thing and because of this a lot of fertilizers are needed and when you go to using a lot of fertilizers you know that you are also polluting the environment and that fertilizers are also not cheap and, citing Mubuku Irrigation Scheme as an example which I know so well, I am sorry to say that Mubuku Irrigation Scheme is in a very sorry state.  From the time when FAO left and the Uganda Government took over, completely not much has been done.  Most of the channels are broken down and I am requesting the Minister of Agriculture that if we are going to convince Uganda that irrigation can save us then let us first of all show them from the examples that are already on the ground.  Can you improve Mubuku Irrigation Scheme, please? (Interruption)

MRS SEKITOLEKO: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, you cannot eat your cake and have it.  We are decentralising, Mubuku Irrigation Scheme is not a Central Government Project, it is a local project.  So when you are taking the good type be prepared to take even the bad type.  Mubuku is part of Kasese. So, these people are only ones who are in production the whole year around.  If you want to get rich and get rich quick, go to Mubuku.  That is where all the horticultural eaten in Kasese are grown.  Now, he is telling you there is nothing.  It is the job of Kasese District Administration and the farmers there should be charged for staying there.  If somebody failed to pay he should be thrown out.

MR MBURA MUHINDO: Thank you very much for the information but I also want to tell you that Mubuku Irrigation Scheme is under Agriculture and they have very little to do with the local Administration if anything it is only maybe, now that they are going to be involved.  But also the problem with decentralisation.  Where government fails to do something it just tell you people you are now decentralising; can you do it? This is not a challenge because you are finding that you are unable to do it but you want to shift the blame to somebody else.  Now you are going also to give us a scheme which is already broken down and when we are unable to rehabilitate it then you say you are decentralised and therefore, you should have done the scheme when at your own time you did not do much. (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I am seeking clarification from the Member holding the Floor. I am rather confused with his argument regarding decentralisation and items, which belong to the government.  As a Local Administration when a project, which is run by the government and it is put in a district is it in the interest of that local administration or it is entirely belonging to the government, the local administration is not supposed to have any dealing with that particular project.

MR MBURA MUHINDO: Thank you very much.  I just want to tell you that there is nothing that is not government.  Everything is government.  So, when I fail and I say my energy is not enough can you enhance me? That is what I was saying.

Now, let me talk about tourism. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Your time is up, hon. Member.

MR MBURA MUHINDO:  I am just trying to wind up, Mr Chairman. Tourism is going to be a big boost for this country but I want to say that if we think we are going to put our hope in tourism then it must be reflected in our budget that we are able to invest in it and, therefore, have better facilities.  Because it is only when you invest properly that you will be able to get returns.  

And finally on Education; it is a big shame even up to today to read that teachers cannot be paid and then lame excuses are given that the computer.  Now, I want those who are here to tell us, a computer is no longer mystery in management of our society in Uganda. A computer is fed with information and the output to the information.  Now who is to blame!  Are you blaming the machine or you are blaming the one who is putting the information?  If the people who are putting the information are incapable then you remove them or two, if the computers which you have are faulty maybe, bought through dubious means and you have wrong computers then solve the problem there but do not tell the people that they cannot be paid because the computer is the one making mistakes.  It is the people who fee the information to the computer whom we should condemn and, therefore, we condemn you the government for not paying the teachers.  I thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

CAPT. BABU (Kampala Central): Mr Chairman, thank you very much. I would like to start off by thanking the Minister of Finance and the government for having improved their tax collection and I do hop that the revenue collected this year will be able to offset the deficit in the balance of running our budget.  I think that is a great step forward and I think we should thank the government for having looked at that side.  If we can balance our budget I think we will be able to run the government better and we will be able to reduce the poverty that we have in this country.  

However, there are a few comments here and there people we must talk about and these are comments that unfortunately we are going to fight a little bit because the government seems to have forgotten some of the very policies that they have set.  We are talking about economic growth here for the nation and poverty for the people.  The nation is having here micro-economics is being practised, there is growth you can see it, we talk about the good things of the infrastructure but the average man in his homestead, in the family, is poor and this one you cannot run away from and, therefore, the onus is on all of us in government including the people in this House.  We must go back and try and help the household income to increase and we should stop these empty promises, we will do this, we will do that.  We must devise means and ways of helping these people and I would be coming up with my own as we go along to show that we can improve on this poverty.  We can improve on production.

Now, after we have talked about that, somebody was talking about stability a few minutes ago and I just want to bring in this monetary thing.  Circulation all over the world is done in currency and there are people who specialise in nothing but currency speculation and wherever there is a problem in a particular country a particular currency is used as medium of exchange and this happened to this very country at one time, the Kenya was having a ball and their currency was so strong that the people in this country used to have to change a wheel barrow against the Kenyan currency. I think that is something that we should understand that the problem you create sometimes also do bring about problems instead we should thank the government for stabilising the currency.  However, we would be talking about a few other things as we go along.

I want to talk about interest rates.  I am not happy with the way the interest rate issue has been handled in the banks and this could be one of the areas, which has created poverty because in the business sector we have failed to borrow money.  We have failed to start new businesses.  It looks to me that a man who borrows his money in dollars pays less interest rates and a man who borrows his money in shillings pays more money and these currencies are now convertible.  

We must, therefore, look at our interest rates a little bit more seriously if we have to improve our business structure and especially in the private sector.  If we do not do that our local people will be thrown out of the business and the foreigners who get their money cheaply from other sources will come here and will be the only investors in this country and I can assure you, it is not the foreigners who are going to be the best investors, the best investors are going to be Ugandans and, therefore, Ugandans must be encouraged to invest. (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the Member holding the Floor that actually what he is saying is actually disastrous.  The interest rates on commercial funding from the banks ranges between 19.25.  We have been told that inflation is around 7.5 per cent.  Recently the Central Bank has set an interest on savings and it has put it between 2 and 3 per cent.  So, you can imagine, you borrow between 19 and 25, when you put your funds on savings they give you between 2 and 3 per cent and when you put it on fixed deposit they give you 6 per cent.  This disparity is so big that the banks may be are saying we do not want your money; we have enough deposits.  This is what they are saying.  So it is very difficult for the local community here now to borrow from commercial banks to do any form of business because of this disparity in the interest rates.

CAPT. BABU: Mr Chairman, I think I will take hon. Wanendeya’s information. (Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman and I am grateful to my Friend, hon. Edward Babu.  One of the basic principles of economics are interest rates and if they are not properly assigned or properly managed they put the whole economy out of gear. Even if the Deputy Minister of Finance has been saying that statistics are alright, he must be living in another world where some of us are economists in our own right and we know what is going on with our economy and interest rates. The trouble is when we tell people the truth especially my Brother, the Deputy Minister, he takes an offence and start sometimes quarrelling instead of managing interest rates. The Committee on Economy has said several times as to the way interest rates should be managed but nobody pays any ear or listens to it.  

So, I am requesting and I am giving this information adding to what hon. Babu is saying that unless interest rates are properly managed this economy, even if we sing and even if Dr Allen will sing that it is fine, it is not if we are really honest with ourselves.  I thank you.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA: Mr Chairman, government has accepted that commercial banks have not been responding to the forces as far as interest rates are concerned.  And the government is not even threatened but promised to take action if the banks did not respond but I want hon. Babu to recognise that one year ago interest rate was 48 per cent.  At least today interest rates as a result of liberalisation and containing inflation has come to 19 and the government has accepted that UCB until it is restructured completely, UCB still continues to play a negative role on interest rates because UCB controls 65 to 70 percent of commercial banking and the law reconstructing UCB could be before the House I think in the course of next week.  So, I do not think the government has made any claim but we must also recognise that in less than twelve months interest has moved from 48 to now 19.  It is not good enough but better.

CAPT. BABU:  Mr Chairman, I do not remember very well but last year I think this thing went below zero.  It was minus 23 -(Interjection)- inflation, yes.  And if it went that low the interest rate should have followed suit.  I am told these two work together, and they are directly proportion.  I mean my little mathematics. I was just wondering, if you look at page 22 of the Budget Speech, I was coming to say, they are saying that as from July 1st 1994 the interest rate thereafter fully liberalised, in other words they are going to leave it to the market forces to decide our interest rates.  

I am a little bit worried about the supervision of the Bank of Uganda. The Bank of Uganda does not have the capacity nor the zeal to the control these banks and, therefore, I am a little bit worried that they will not be able to use the muscle that the Central Bank has to make the banks agree to what they want.  The Government has to come out and push it a little bit.  

Sometimes when you talk about privatisation and liberalisation against your people then that liberalisation and privatisation is not for this country.  I think we must realise here that we must try and help our people also to get into the market.  We want also to do business.  We want to be there, we do not think only foreigners can do business here.  From the interest rates, I would like to talk about government expenditure a little bit.  When we talk about government expenditure we reduce figures, we do all sorts of things and when we go out there we are told -(Interjection)- oh! Yes, we have reduced but this is subject to a crash budget.  

Somebody in the Ministry of Finance says look, you see, Ministry of Defence this time you are not spending until this month we have collected enough.  Then what we budget sometimes becomes superficial but on top of it the government has got some leakages and expenditures which I think should be looked into.  I move around this town and every garage and every garage that can keep a car has got a government can in it and that government can is as good as new, nobody want to hoard them off, there is some sort of policy that they will not sell government vehicles. These vehicles are all over the place.

MR KANYOMOZI: Point of information. Mr Chairman, the hon. Member has raised a very crucial point on government expenditure and use of assets.  It is not only government cars but machinery and equipment, tractors, bulldozers, these things we use to dig valley tanks, all of them are brought in, in one year if they have a fault their just parked and abandoned. Definitely that increases our expenditure because the replacement is even higher than if we took care of those instruments. I think just to supplement what the hon. Member is saying, we are wasting a lot of assets by abandoning these capital goods that we acquire only to abandon them the next day.

CAPT. BABU: Mr Chairman, if we do not request the government to go and get revenue and these vehicles are, in my opinion and I suspect - (Interruption)

MR KAIJUKA: Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member that it has been government policy not to board off government vehicles until the government was so structured that the obvious abuse that followed this policy of boarding off vehicles could be control and, at the moment the government has set up a committee the cabinet expects a report from the Ministry of Works, Transport and the Ministry of Finance and I know the chairman of this Committee has reported that the report is ready. So, I expect that soon the government will review this policy.  Thank you.

CAPT. BABU:  I accept that information, it is very good information. However, where they have parked the vehicles, they are being cannibalised, most of them do not have some of the spares, they have removed engines, they have taken tyres.  By the time the Committee reports and they come up with information you will only have shells throughout this town and I am told there are some people, There is an allegation that some of these vehicles are parked purposely for certain people to buy.  That they have lined up to buy them and we would like this information confirmed.  

If it is true then, something should be done.  We are worried that we will never get anything out of all these, people are going to buy them as scraps and seeing beautiful cars, cross country, we are seeing Landrovers in this town being parked all over the place.  I am a little bit worried.  So, I would like to request the government to quickly hurry up with this particular policy and come up with a mechanism so that they can sell off these vehicles.

The tax revenue collection.  In the new tax administration, looking at the policy very carefully, I am quite happy, there is an improvement but there is still a weakness in the tax collection. The weak get hit and the powerful get left because I am seeing what is happening now.  The very weak people are the ones who are being chased around and the real powerful people even people go and have tea with them and decide on what a taxies they should pay.  I think time has come for this nation to start with the powerful and go for the weak after.  

The powerful in this country have even been given credit lines, they order things from abroad, they go and sit down with the taxation, they agree on payment in the next two years and they pay every month.  The statistics we have and if anybody wants to challenge me on this one I will produce them because they are big men even in the government who have got this facility.  I think they should be stopped.  I think if you want taxation to be fair everybody should pay.  If we have to pay then all of us should go there and pay and we should not let the poor people be the only ones who are chased around town. 

Talking about taxation, I am very happy that the taxation administration has improved.  I am a bit worried when some taxes become punitive and when reasons given are not good enough.  I am now going to talk about one particular case in point of the second-hand clothes.  The second hand clothes in this country, somebody says we are going to save the textile industry.  Which textile industry? Which one? None.  In fact, the clothes we buy from second hand make us look a little bit human.  If we did not have them in this country, some of us would be walking naked.  We cannot afford what is in town.  And to, therefore, become punitive and put there 30 per cent and 30 per cent is totally wrong and I am going to try and convince this House to bring those taxes to 10 and 10 periods.  If they want to do it they better go and do it before they come here or I will move an amendment and I am requesting the Minister to do so; because this is a second hand clothes.  

At the moment, the reason why they are getting problems one, there are people in government involved in second hand clothes schedule.  This is point number one. 

Point number two; the so-called investors who have come here to invest and got investment licences, are bringing second hand clothes.  Three; religious organisations, are bringing second hand clothes, they do not pay tax.  And NGOs, these are the people who are abusing the society. (Interruption)

MR WENENDEYA: Point of order. Will it not be in the best interest of this Council, if the Deputy Minister for Finance noted points and at the end of the Debate replies to those points?

THE CHAIRMAN: The Minister is in order.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA: Mr Chairman, God should bless hon. Wanendeya.  Mr Chairman, on the matter of second hand clothes, it was announced in the budget, no NGO, no religious organisation, nobody will import second hand clothes in Uganda be it free.  Secondly, if all the people of Uganda hoped to put on second hand clothes, that are one reason why you say, textiles should not bring in any income at all.  They are being taxed because the services have to be rendered to these people.  

Like education, government has said that, emphasis is primary education, primary healthy, feeder roads, and our cultural research and extension services.  And as source of revenue, if we have no new clothes to be taxed, and we have opted to go to second hand clothes, then that is the only way, we can tax themselves.  But, do not forget, that the value also - the way they value second hand clothes.  For example, we say a bale for second hand clothes is 40 dollars, just because we do not know really what is in the clothes.  Whereas if one imported new textiles, he would pay about 80 per cent, on a far fair reasonable price. 

So, if we sit together and you see how calculations are made, it is not punitive. But it is a question said, the people no longer put on new clothes, and they have gone into second hand clothes, and we want to rise revenue, equally to distribute to each one to pay little bit.  There is one area, so it is not punitive at all.

CAPT. BABU: Mr Chairman, I would like to thank the Minister for his information it is very kind of him. I would like to finish very quickly by saying, that whilst I agree with him, that there are other areas where he can tax us indirectly. Like fuel, which affects all of us, and which, I shall be talking about.  And electricity, which is giving us headache now to pay. I would like him to know, that if our income, if our salaries in this country were good, if our civil servants could get enough salaries, if the people outside could get salaries, they could afford new clothes; who want to put on second hand clothes? We put them because we do not have the power to purchase new clothes.  If they want us to have to power, to purchase a good suit from winner classic - boutique whatever it is, then let the salaries go to Shs 2,000,000 a month and we will stop going to Owino boutique.  I think the government should look at our income, our purchasing power, before they can increase taxes in certain areas. I would like to end, by talking about investment, privatization and liberalization. I am a great supporter of these things.  

However, I have got a feeling that these have got also side effects.  If everybody who comes here seems to be an investor, we must end up getting some wrong characters coming here. And, we have started getting time.  Because there are people who have been given licences, and abused every rule that we have set.  They have come here, instead of becoming investors, and they have become dukuwallers. What will our people do?  I think in certain areas -(Interruption)

DR MAGEZI:  Point of information.  I thank you, Mr Chairman I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor, that in fact our immigration department should seriously be strengthened.  Because of our desire to invite investors, we have weighed visa requirements from a number of European countries, who have not respected us Ugandans, because we are not investors in their country.  And in this coming in of investors, we are going to get a flood of conmen white they will be Europeans, but they will not be investing here. They will be reaping this country, of its wealthy and taking it outside.

MR MAYENGO:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. member on the Floor, by way of emphasizing what he is saying, that when we passed a resolution in this House, permitting the departed Asians to come back, we said there would be three conditions.  One; they were not to operate these retail stores.  Two; they were not to throw out the Africans that they have found occupying these premises.  Three; they were not to increase rents unreasonably.  They have gone ahead and done all these, and they are just looking on.

CAPT. BABU: Mr Chairman, I was talking about investment.  I would like people to come and invest here.  But some of us should be very careful, some of the investors who come here; they are people who have been thrown out of countries abroad, who are looking for green pastures.  They are going to come to this country, they are going to start some front businesses, and their businesses will be totally different. I would like us to find some mechanism within the investment authority and I am a little bit worried, that we might not have the capacity to investigate some of these people.  Some people come here and create and give wrong information even to our leaders.  And this is becoming very annoying.  

I would like to give an example. There was an airline started here called globetrotters, they came to us, and we advised them technically that, the route they wanted was not viable. We told them we had investigated, and the market is not viable.  They went ahead, they applied pressure, they were given licence to operate for a short time; within three months, they had abandoned the route, and even cheated people on that route.  These are the investors we are talking about.  The investors who come here in nice designer suits, and alligator shoes; and people when they walk around here, they drive in a Mercedes Benz which they have had from the Conference Centre, that is an investor.  

No, we want our Investment Authority to really go out and stop, even getting our civil servants abused.  Because they come to the leaders; these investors now, they now have a ticket, to go and talk to our leaders even before its investigated statements are made.  I am not going to accept.  That statements are made, and the statements which are made, they have put our leader in a position of embarrassment. Because some guy, has gone and told our leader, something which is not true.  Now, when in Aviation, because I happen to be in Aviation, and I have been looking at a lot of gold diggers coming to investment the Aviation Industrial area; these gentlemen, they come here and they want us to break international rules, and give them licences to go to other countries.  

We cannot give them permission to operate in Kenya for example.  The Kenya Government has to give them permission.  We have by luck from the Kenya Government.  And, therefore, before we allow them, the Kenya Government has to allow them. So, when somebody goes and says that, the Uganda Government, the people and then other people who are very good, some of them are very highly trained people, when they are called off several times, they begin to wonder if they should even work for us.  I think we should now review these industrialists.  I am not happy with the way they are going around to purporting in this country, to be able to become our advisers in business. (Interruption)

MR BUTAGIRA:  Point of information. The information I want to give touches on a issue of people who have really taken this country for a ride; that they are investors.  There must be a system, which must be followed.  This issue of every body having access to the President that he is an investor, and then he takes us for a ride like in the case of Egyptians who had a circus.  

There was a lot of noise, that these people were real good investors, they squatted there, somewhere there, and after some time, they even invited the President, he went there.  Now, what a shame our President to just visit a circus, and what happened, it turned out to be bogus, they parked up and they went away.  They were given a case of putting up a fish-processing factory in Entebbe, again by some Asians, calling themselves investors.  They went to State House, and they came back, and started talking big.  Where are they?  The President must be protected. Not, every Indian should have access.  Now many Indians grown horns, because they say no evil touch them, the President will come in. There must be a system.  

MR KYEMBA: Point of information. Mr Chairman, the Programme which some of the information will get on this Floor, is that some of the information will get on this Floor, is that some of the information is exaggerated, and researched and not quite correct.  While some of it may certainly be correct.  I would like to appeal to you that if some hon. Member  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, please, give your point of information.

MR KYEMBA: Mr Chairman, that is why I am standing here, I would like the hon. Member who has given the information here about Entebbe Fisheries Factory, to tell the Members that certainly there is some work going on there.  I was visiting that particular site to inspect it about a week ago, and certainly, the work is continuing. So, I would like the hon. Member in his honesty, to tell the people the right information.  

Certainly, we are all concerned if some investor comes to con the people of this country.  But certainly, the hon. Member of Butagira’s stature should be able to tell this House, that such and such has been done. And I know, as a matter of fact, that much of the work has been done on this factory and I think by September the construction will be ready.  They are about to move on to the - they have done a lot of civil work, and it is about to go on to other details.  Thank you.

CAPT. BABU: Mr Chairman, thank you very much.  Let me finish very quickly. I would like to talk something about immigration in this country. And immigration in this country as per investment is becoming dangerously working on the edge.  One, there is one thing about the immigration.  When we allowed our friends to come back, after correcting the mistakes that were done in 1971, for both of them had taken up citizenship in other countries. Canada, Britain and other countries.  These gentlemen have come back here and somehow they have got Uganda passport also.  It is illegal for anybody to have true citizenship in this country, and it is a constitutional matter.  And, therefore, all the people who have got Ugandan passport, who happen to have come from outside, must denounce their former citizenship from where they have come. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.  Will you, please, wind up your speech?

CAPT. BABU: Yes, Mr Chairman, I would like to end with banking.  The banking at one time, in the Bank of Uganda, and Ministry of Finance, we heard that, the PAPSCA Project had run into a little bit of a problem.  And a few people had been invited, and some of them had been taken to court. I would like to know what happened to the PAPSCA Project, how many of those people were found guilty, and what action government took?  Because we are told, PAPSCA project more or less came to a stand still.  What happened was this was supposed to be -(inaudible) We would like to know -(Interruption)

MR DAMIANO LUBEGA:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the speaker on the Floor, that the statement he is making that the PAPSCA Programme has more or less, come to a stand still is not correct.  Particularly as far as Rubaga is concerned, we are doing a lot of good in Rubaga, programmes there are being monitored, I am getting reports from time to time; maybe, he is talking about specific cases, but he should not generalise.  Thank you.

CAPT. BABU:  Okay, Mr Chairman, I would like to thank hon. Lubega; but there was a problem, there was also people who were taken to court, and I do not want people who make faces when we tell them the truth.  Some of these people went to court we would like to know what happened? Did they go to jail? Were they released? Were they not found guilty?  Was somebody making a mistake?

MRS MUGARURA: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, the case the hon. Member is raising is real.  That there are so many forces within the government and structures, which are checking up these people; so the case is still under investigation.  Thank you.

CAPT. BABU: Thank you very much.  And we hope that one of these days, we will hear what has happened.

And UCB; a lot of people in UCB, all the bosses, one time we were told each one of them got 200 million, 500 million, 100 million loan; we would like to know what happened?  These are the banking institutions, and this is the monetary sector.  What has happened to these people who took these loans? Have they paid? What is happening? And this is another area that I would like -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, please wind up.

MR KANYOMOZI:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to information the hon. Member holding the Floor, that in actual fact, you are being asked, or we are about to be asked as the Minister has said.  They have been asked now to transfer all those loans into a trust.  Very few have paid, the only one who has paid and I know he has paid very well, and he was also paid handsomely to say.  So I am saying, the loans are still intact, they have not been written off, and the country is going to be asked to guarantee 52 billion shillings of bad debts, and of September last year.

MR MWANDHA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I want to inform the hon. Member for Kampala Central in connection with the information that has been given.  That this House having received and debated the report of the NRC Sectoral Committee, on the budget of 1993/94; I accepted a recommendation of the Sectoral Committee as follows: one; number 11, paragraph 252 recommendations. And I am referring to specifically recommendation number (a); the UCB should not devote itself from the responsibilities by alleging the duty of recovery of loan it granted to different bodies. To a different body trust.  A special recovery department within UCB should be set up to recover the 32.2 billion shillings which is now 52 billion shillings.  The committee, therefore, rejected the idea of setting up a trust.  In other words, when this recommendation came to this House, and was debated, by all of you hon. Members, you actually accepted this recommendation.  In other words, the information given by hon. Kanyomozi, is really in contradiction with this particular position of this House.  Thank you.

MR MUDIRIKATE MUKASA: Point of information. Mr Chairman, I want to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor the, this what you turn to be loans according to the terms of those loans, are not actually loans in banking terms  They were lent to senior staff under the non-existing banking terms, free safe loan - doubtable loans and the rest of it.  And in million that hon. Babu states, and to make matters worse, all these senior staff who have taken these loans have been accepted to retire, and these were unsecured loans; now, how is it going to be recovered? They were unsecured, and they have been permitted to retire, and where are you going to find them?

CAPT. BABU:  One, Mr Chairman, the other day, when I was talking here on the supplementary budget, I said that there are two areas we must look at very carefully, in this Parliament, and I request to concentrate on two areas.  One; the fuel - petroleum products.  We will never look at it seriously, that place - a lot of money is being loaded, is being loaded on the fuel that we buy.  Two; if they increase the fuel, the whole economy is affected.  Three; electricity bill.  If these two are not checked very carefully, we are to find ourselves - if these investors we so proud to have will run away because electricity is one of infrastructures required.  And, therefore, our friends who are giving us the loans, whom I am told are the ones requesting the tariffs to be increase.  I would like to request -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, to my Brother Babu, I would like to inform him and support him that electricity bills are very high and illegal.  And we have talked in this House, so many times that, before they put up rates, of UEB or electricity, they should come here and re-approve. And I think that we should take up a stand this time, because up-country, many of these small millers have been closing because they do not have the money to pay and they have no ability to pay; the rates are very high. The rate was 55 shillings per unit; today it is 135 shillings per unit.  At the same time, inflation is going down, the economy is improving, but the rates are going up, really some of us we do not understand the sense of the whole system.  

So, may be they brought it here to this House and then we can put some sense in these rates.  Otherwise, we are deceiving ourselves, nobody is going to pay these rates, they will use every method to avoid paying, and the whole scheme will collapse like any other.  So, we are doing this in good faith.  Thank you.

CAPT.BABU:  Mr Chairman, I end by saying that electricity is being stolen because the people cannot pay for it. Meters are not there, people are burning this electricity, they have got people who come and connect it.  The majority of people in this country do not pay electricity simple because it is too expensive. I would like to request that this is looked into very seriously and petroleum products because these are going to change a few things.

Lastly, I have a request from the majority of the people and the workers on education; that the primary education in recent time, they were getting some grants from the local government and these grants were coming in and offsetting the PTA.  That the government should look into this very seriously so that they can reduce the PTA.  People can no longer pay school fees.  The biggest problem in this vicious circle is school fees.  We would like our children to go to school. I would like therefore, to request the Minister for Education and Sports and probably the Minister for Finance and Economic Planning for that matter to give a little bit more emphasis through local government and the district councils and the City Council to make sure that they take some money to the primary schools so that they can reduce on the PTA and the parents in this country can have a bit of relief.  I thank you. 

MR NTIMBA (Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like to join those who have congratulated the Minister for Finance and Economic Planning for his excellent Budget Speech and I am going to start by commenting on one aspect of our policies.  I was very happy to be told that government intends to open an Embassy in South Africa and also to re-open our Embassy in Tokyo.  However, I would have liked the Minister to elaborate a little more on that or to tell us what criterion government uses in deciding where to open an Embassy or where to close an Embassy.  If the intention of opening an Embassy in Pretoria or re-opening Tokyo is to improve on our balance of trade position with those countries, I am all in for it.  But if the idea has resulted from the present euphoria following the abolition of apartheid in South Africa, then I would have misgivings.  Let me use this opportunity -(Interruption)

MR AGARD DIDI: I thank you, Mr Chairman.  The speaker holding the Floor having served in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for such a long time knows that, one; Tokyo is a member of G.7 and it was probably a mistake that in the first place we were forced to close there.  With regard to South Africa, whether we like it or not, the South African economy is the strongest in this region and if South Africa joins COMESA, all multi-nationals who would like to come to COMESA would like to locate themselves somewhere where they can branch out from as a catchment area.  You know very well our recent turmoil, many companies based in Nairobi who intend to operate in East Africa.  Now in order to be able to sell yourself to these multi-nationals, it is necessary to have presence there.  It is also on such reasons that the close relationship between the Movement and the ANC which is now in power in South Africa means that there is really a new reality.  So, people to people level, I think even the country-to-country initiative must be encouraged.  This is what I can tell for the time being. Thank you.

MR NTIMBA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I thank the hon. Deputy Minister for amplifying a little more on that aspect of our friendly relationship.  However, as the Minister rightly points out, in association with that Ministry stretches over many years.  Let me use this opportunity to caution the government against repeating the mistakes of past regimes.  About 20, 30 years ago, the leaders of this country were opening Embassies just because a leader happens to be a close friend of some other Head of State somewhere else.  

I will give you an example where at one time some leaders in this country said let us open an Embassy in Accra because we are great admirers of Kwame Nkrumah.  I do not dispute the fact that Kwame Nkrumah was a great person but when you look at our resources, you find that perhaps that would not have been a priority and when you look at our history, look at the number of embassies we have been opening and closing anyhow.  Accra in Ghana, Bangui in Central African Republic, Baghdad, Tokyo, Canberra, Maseru and of recent one of our Ambassadors without permission from Kampala went to Bujumbura and opened a consulate.  

So, I would like to use this opportunity to ask the Sectoral Committee responsible for foreign affairs to work out guidelines which I am sure will help the ministers of Foreign Affairs in deciding to open or close Embassies.  Let me come back home.  This question of putting up the taxes on second hand clothes has created problems for many of us who represent the wanainchi.  

I am not going to say much because my hon. Friend Babu has said quite a lot about that but what I would like to say is that unless the Minister for Finance and Economic Planning can come and prove to us that statistically that the selling of used clothes imported has jeopardised our textile industry.  I will not be prepared to support the increment of taxes.  Let me talk about the need to widen our tax base.  I am surprised that it is going to take us as much as two years or more to study the modalities of introducing value of added tax in this country. 

We need to spend as much as two years studying the subject. I would have preferred the government seriously considers introducing VAT in much shorter time because it is one of the ways in which we can expand our tax base. A lot has been said about electricity bills.  

As one of those who represents people who live in urban areas, I have this to say.  The majority of my constituents, many of whom use electricity, have had to abandon it because it is just too high for them to afford. So, as an alternative, what are they turning on to?  They are turning on to charcoal and as you know, charcoal is burnt from living trees not from the dead dry wood but from living threes. (Interruption)

MISS KABASHARIRA: Point of information.  I would like to inform the Member on the Floor that he is actually giving a very important information and quoting the figures here given in this book, page 7 on the GDP performance, on electricity, when you check by 1990/91, the consumption was 15.3 per cent, 1991/92, it went down to 11.3 per cent, 1992/93, it continued to go down to 5.3 per cent, 1993/94 it went to 4 per cent.  This shows that people have run away from using the electricity because of these tariffs and what does this one create?  Destroying the environment using the cheaper means of fuel and then destroying the whole environment and then electricity not helping us.

MR NTIMBA: Mr Chairman, I am extremely grateful to my statistically minded hon. Sister across the House. I think she has said enough.  I do not need to labour very much on that.  But now, I was talking about our people being forced to go on charcoal.  Now it so happens that environment protection and generation and the development of electricity happens to fall under the same Ministry.  It could help our need to protect our forests.  It is six, seven years since we started talking about Environment Protection, planting trees, but this has become more less a singsong.  When you travel around the country especially in my part of the country, you still come across bare hills and people are still talking about tree planting, tree planting  -(Interruption)

MR ETYANG:  Point of information. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. My colleague the Minister in charge of electricity would give that information.  I was saying that, my colleague who has been asked to give information directly connecting the less use of electricity to the deteriorating condition of our forest will subsequently come under that information.  But I would like to offer what I think is really the most divesting effect on the forest with regard to the use timber, at least as far as my experience is in this part of the country.  You find a situation where there is a lot of immigration to the urban areas from town.  

Now ordinarily, our people in the rural areas do not cut green trees purposely for getting charcoal; they collect the timber and use it for cooking as fuel; it is that person who has moved to town and has carried with him rural habits and has continued to use those habits for his cooking purposes in town that had increased number on need for charcoal.  So, the person remaining behind there has, therefore been urged really for commercial purposes to cut down these trees and burn charcoal to keep the increasing demand in town.  They count it safe, as I understand it, as electricity is getting very expensive.  I hope my be this information will help my colleague who is giving this information especially he has asked a question which I think the Minister in charge of UEB will give detailed and more authoritative informed answer.  Thank you.

CAPT. BABU:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, thank you very much.  I just want to inform the hon. Member that, that information is not -(inaudible)- 36 to 40 million shillings - Shs45 million, depending on the distance and depending on the road.  Now, I would like us to be very careful when we are saying that it is expensive; if you do not have money, 40 million is a fortune.  So, I think we should be very careful when we come to this House; to say that pulling electricity is cheap, it is not! It is a very expensive exercise.

MRS V. SEKITOLEKO:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, to substantiate what hon. Paul Etiang has just said, I am glad hon. Kabuubi is here, we went to Bujenje, we took electricity with us because it was very, very powerful what Paul said, is exactly what they said, it is too expensive; because they even asked how much is it, they said it is too expensive.  We took the transformer ourselves, we put everything in place; these Banyoro were only supposed to share the electricity with us and of course they would pick up their Bill, but what hon. Etiang said is what they did not want to hear of, they said, it is too much, it is too expensive, before you know what it is, but they did know how much.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members that was point of information.  No further debate should arise.  Hon. Ntimba, please wind up your debate.

MR NTIMBA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman, I have so many things to talk about but because of the limitation of time, I am going to squeeze them in the limited time I have.  Before I leave electricity, I can only look forward to a time very soon, when hopefully, the Minister responsible for the environment, will come to this House and bring a comprehensive Bill concerning environment protection and at that time, we hope we can thrush out this problem of the need to establish the linkage between environment protection and the problem arising from the high cost of electricity.  Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

MR SEKIZIYIVU:  Point of information. Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform the hon. member holding the Floor that putting up only one pole of electricity costs about Shs 300, 000/= that is without wiring and if a peasant cannot even afford to pay school fees of Shs 5, 000/= in the village, I do not think he can be able to afford electricity which could cost him about Shs1, 000,000/= including wiring.  Therefore, electricity is very expensive.  Thank you.

MR RWAKAKOOKO: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I think we are discussing an issue for a long time when the truth is on the ground.  I reported in this House, that I wanted to pull electricity on a distance of less than one kilometre, passing by hon. Kanyomozi’s house.  My house is in the Town Council of Ntungamo District. They quoted for me and I did not bring that letter but I can bring it, Shs 36 million, I gave it up.  I have written to UEB through the Ministry of Industry. In 1987, Nytil annually with the capacity of generating 20 million pounds weight of power was paying Shs54 million per annum, in 1993 and it has gone on increasing, it has reached Shs3.6 billion for less weight generated.  I think there is something that the tariffs have got to be studied seriously.  There is a Commission, which has been set up; they have visited and they have found that true.  So, the UEB tariffs have a negative effect on our economic performance.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the hon. Member holding the Floor is proposing that, the hon. Minister of Energy comes here with an Amendment to rectify the tariff.  Normally, when we are debating like this, it becomes a tradition that it is general debate.  May I inform him that no Minister is going to come here and bring that Amendment unless and only unless you come with a Private Members Motion demanding that it be clarified. Otherwise, if the predecessor of the present Minister for Energy was here and assured us that there would be rural electrification by the year 2000, is it there? We are near death age.  It is not there.  (Laughter)

MR NTIMBA: Mr Chairman, I thank the hon. Member for Lira Municipality.  (Interruption)

MR BAMBALIRA: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, I am rising on a point of order. In view of the fact that, we are discussing a very serious matter and the chairman of that Board is here.  Is it in order for the chairman of that Board to keep quiet without telling us something about electricity?  Hon. Victor Kobel - if he is a Director, he should tell us something about UEB. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Ntimba, please wind up.

MR.NTIMBA:  I am going Mr Chairman, to wind up. (Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA: Point of order. Mr Chairman, is it in order for Uganda Electricity Board to increase tariffs when it is illegal because the increase of tariffs must be approved by this very House.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Wanendeya you are not quoting any particular section of the law, so UEB is not out of order.  Hon. Ntimba, please, wind up your debate.

MR NTIMBA: Mr Chairman, I have been trying to wind for the last 10 minutes but I have had so many interruptions.  Now, I would like to wind up by talking about the programme of rehabilitation of our road network in this country.  I am going to wind up by talking about the rehabilitation of our road system - to rehabilitate our road system, the Ministry of Local Government has not been to do much for us.  I know some Japanese equipment was imported to rehabilitate some of our roads, but the speed at which they were operating so slow that it will take a long time for all these the Municipal roads to be covered and I also want that since I am from a Municipality, I will take the information, Mr Chairman.

MR IMAGA ARUNA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, what I want to say is that, the tarmac on these roads was done during colonial times, up to now we do not know who is responsible for repairing these roads; the small tarmacs in these towns, particularly in towns of Arua, Masindi, Mbale, Soroti, Fort Portal.  

Now, the issue is, these towns used to be tarmacked by the Central Government, because the local authority in those areas do not have the capacity to repair these roads.  In fact, I had put it down in notes if I was allowed to speak; one of the point this is one of the points we are failing to raise; enough revenue because the towns are poor, the business is poor so, people are doing a good business.  Most of the revenue in forms of income tax, in form of graduated tax, in form of any tax comes from the urban areas, but when it comes to services, these urban areas are ignored.  i think that is an important point.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

CAPT. BABU:  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor, that the Kampala roads he is talking about started nearly 14 years ago.  This is the send phase and this is the EEC Loan, which was given to this through the Government to the City Council.  Now, the income of the City Council is much higher than of course Arua Municipality and you are not faulty Kampala City Council because of their capacity to pay a loan bank.  I think we should be proud because hon. Ntimba comes to the Parliament through the road we have repaired and I think this is the pride of Uganda; everybody is seeing as Kampala; especially when we are going to the marketing of investment in this country.  Thank you very much.

MR NTIMBA: Mr Chairman, I thank the hon. Members who appear to be supporting me on this and this since all these Municipalities fall under the Ministry of Local Government, I would like to ask the Government to take a fresh look on the whole process of rehabilitating the our road system and find a way of rescuing the small towns who cannot manage to rehabilitate these roads from their limited resources.

Finally, I congratulate the Government for the resuscitation of or the re-introduction of the Rural Farmers Scheme. I have had an opportunity to visit one of the two banks and I am hopeful that it is going to help to boost our agriculture in this country.  Since I am not a man who represents only my Constituency, I am a nationalist, I want to say a word of suggestion; while this scheme is being developed, I want some measure of priority of this reintroduced Rural Farmers Scheme - some measure of priority to be given to these famine stricken areas; so that within the next six-seven months, the areas which are crying for famine and famine, will have been taken care of.  I support the Motion and I thank you for giving me the Floor, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I now adjourn the House, to Tuesday next week at 2.30 p.m.

(The Council rose at 5.45 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 19 July 1994 at 2.30 p.m.)















