Tuesday, 18 July 1995

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliamentary House Kampala.

PRAYERS 

The Deputy Vice Chairman, Mr Cosmas Adyebo, in the Chair.

(Debate continued.)

MOTION

MR WASUGIRYA: Mr Chairman, I thank you very much.  I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate all those who were elevated.  Secondly, I would like to correct an impression which was created yesterday or rather last week, by hon. Kabuubi Kasajja.  He said something to effect that the Sheraton Management Contract is not offering something for the Ugandan Government.  First of all, let me declare that I happened to be a Director on the Board of Sheraton.

Apolo Corporation entered into agreement with Sheraton International and that is why we had Sheraton International managing the Hotel and I will not say much but just single out a few areas which actually should prove to hon. Kabuubi that actually Sheraton or rather Apolo Corporation has contributed a lot to the development of this country.

From 1988 to 1994, the Hotel made revenue of shs.41 billion.  That of course means that the Corporation, in that period of time added 2.4 billion to management which is Sheraton International.

We must also realise that actually much it is a foreign company managing the affairs of our Hotel, it happens to be offering employment to Ugandans.  As I speak now, Sheraton is employing over 400 workers.  We also have in place the Ugandanisation Programme because the top hierarchy; the General Manager, the Financial Controller, Personnel Manager, the Manager of Foods and Beverages, the Desk manager and so on, were initially whites. But because of the Ugandanisation Programme, as I speak now the Personnel Manager is a Ugandan.  Since the Contract is going on up -(interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, with due respect to the hon. Member holding the Floor, I would like to inform the House that this hon. Member is misleading the nation.  I happened to be a Member on Parastatal Accounts Committee.  I examined the accounts of the Parastatal Bodies including Sheraton which the hon. Member has been a Director.  I did not want to be the of Sheraton to our Brother who is on the Board as a Director.  But I have never, never seen that agreement between any country with any foreign bodies as one for Sheraton Hotel. I wish the hon. Member had told us the profit these Corporations are soon making from year one up to the present time. If you - this information from me, I would say, they have not been making any profit at all.  So, I am afraid he is misleading, the House.  Sheraton is not making any money.

MR KABUUBI:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I would like to give this information to the Member on the floor that what I spike I still maintain it that the Management Contract of Sheraton Hotel is very onerous.  It is very much onerous on the side of Uganda Government. So, we are not benefiting anything out.  For example, I have asked for the figures which I wanted to present to this House but they are still not yet ready.  But once they get their money; their so-called profits on gross profit, that is wrong; that is already an anomaly. 

MR WASUGIRYA:  Mr Chairman when an hon Member stands up to say that Sheraton is not contributing anything, I do not understand, because Sheraton is on record among the Parastatals in this country for being able to pay taxes for this country. The Hotel pays to Government a minimum of Shs.70 million in CTL and it has since paid to government amounting to over Shs.500 million.  So, when someone turns around and says that Sheraton is not playing anything I do not understand.  This information I can even surrender it.  Lastly on that topic, I must say that actually Sheraton is also up-to-date with the payment of utilities. Talk about electricity, water and the rest. (Interruption)

MR ONGOM: Point of information Mr Chairman, the information given to us by hon. Kabuubi was that Management Contract Agreement between Uganda and Sheraton is very poor or bad and it is onerous according to him.  But the hon. Member who is deputing him is not giving us the information whether he is agreeing with that statement or not.  He is giving us the figures which they should pay anywhere; taxes do not amount to profits.  So, can he tell us whether he agrees with the statement or not.

MR TIVU: Point of clarification. Mr Chairman, I want to clarify to the hon. Member holding the Floor that Sheraton is not a private Enterprise whereby it is entitled only pay taxes.  Because it is really accommodated by Government Funds, so it must pay dividends to the Government. I think this is the concern of this Parliament.  We are not only interested in the taxes along.  We are saying we giving accommodation to each every government institution.

MR MARWAS: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, tow Members on a Committee of this House stand for a Parastatal Accounts Committee.  They have stood up to tell us things are not well in the Contract as far as Sheraton International is concerned.  This is a Committee of this House that concerns all the Parastatals in this country.  I would like to know from the Member, apart from the small paper he has which has even been handed over, what else or rather other information does he have? 

MR WASUGIRYA:  Mr Chairman, I am not in the position to give the details of what the hon. Members are asking about.  But to some extend, I may agree with hon. Kabuubi in saying that there as are some  loopholes in the management contract and actually we are addressing ourselves to that one. Secondly, this is to do with Entandikwa. The people we represent actually welcomed the idea of the Entandikwa who heartedly.  But as I speak now, there are twelve districts in this country have not been served with Entandikwa. Of course, I am aware that sometime back in June, a deadline was set for those districts which had not submitted their documents to the Ministry of Finance, and coming from Pallisa, I know even the day when actually these papers arrived in the office of Finance. That was the 13th June 1995.  But I understand the source of information said, in the Ministry of Finance that among the twelve districts is not going to get this Entandikwa money until coming September.  I am saying that this money was voted last Financial Year.  If anything, this money is supposed to have been received by these districts.  Now, for one to tell me that money which should have been used in the last Financial Year, will come in September, this is not welcome in the ears of the wananchi.  I am aware this is the kind of problem which cropped up during the Rural Farmers’ Scheme. Some expected the money in time when actually the weather was favourable but then they ended up getting the money after the rains.  Therefore, that meant they could not use that money for productive work.  So, I have got fear because right now in Pallisa, we are having second rains. I have got fear that this money may come at the time when these people will have nothing to do with it in the agricultural production period.  Therefore, I am appealing to the Minister concerned to do something.

Thirdly, Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr Chairman, I thought I should not disturb the hon. Member because actually he is trying to lift the problem which was in Pallisa to the Ministry of Finance.  We had all the time to get the papers ready. There are some conditions which have to be fulfilled in order to get these funds.  It is true your papers came before 30th June 1995.  But they came when the last batch for printing cheques had already been verified.  We closed the year on 30th but we stopped printing cheques some weeks before. Now there is a procedure again to get money from the new Financial Year.  It will be up to this House how soon they can go through the Estimates so that we can get the Funds released. Otherwise, the Vote on Accounts is not enough even to meet the money required for Entandikwa just for Pallisa.

MR ELLY KARUHANGA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, this Parliament decided between Shs.30 million per Constituency County.  the amount of counties in this country are known.  So, there was no speculation on how much money that is going to come out of the Government to the Entandikwa Account.  All the work for getting the documents cannot be attributed to be a fault of the people who applied in the counties.  The fault must lie only with the officials, especially the people who were carrying out the programme on Entandikwa led by the Entandikwa Minister.  

Therefore, in my District Mbarara, we too know that up to the time they were printing the cheques, the cheques could be printed any time, but the Law is that if the Law was that 30th was the closing date, that money should have been spared aside and the process should continue, and one hopes that that is the case.  Now to keep others behind, when the rest of the districts are receiving money, in my view is discrimination by the Entandikwa officials.  So, I am requesting the Minister to take corrective measures to make sure that this money is filled out as soon as possible; he is not waiting for September.  Thank you.

MR MANZI TUMUBOINE: Point of information. Mr Chairman, there should not have been any problem because if the programme is in progress and it reaches 30th June, and it has not been accomplished, that money is put below the line in the Bank of Uganda which means it does not revert to the consolidated Fund, and therefore it continues being used thereafter.  But if they keep it on the Consolidated Fund Account, then of course it is completely wiped out.  I believe the hon. Minister was aware that the Entandikwa money should have been re-organised. 

MR WASUGIRYA: I thank the hon. Members for those pieces of information. But I hope the Minister has taken serious note of the same.

My last point is to do with retrenchment staff of Uganda Hotels.  I have been and have interacted with the former workers of Uganda Hotels.  They are really not happy about the way they have been treated.  I have got a few examples here.  The rent retrenchment package for one who has been a General Manager of the Uganda Hotels, and who has served the Industry for the first 22 years, is only Shs.2.2 million a man who has been a Manager of Uganda Hotels, that is too little. (Interruption)

DR TIBERONDWA: Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member on Floor that the whole exercise of retrenchment has been badly handled.  He is talking about people getting Shs.2 million and yet soldiers some of them lost parts of their lives like eyes and ears and so on, are paid only 0.5 million shillings with about 20 pieces of iron sheets.  I request the Government should review it so that it can be handled better, not only for retrenchees from Hotels but from Civil Service and the rest of the offices.

MR WASUGIRYA: Mr Chairman, my point is to do with the East African Community. As I speak now, the former workers of the East African Community are around and they are really concerned about their money.  What is the Government stand on this issue?  These people worked for that money, they deserve to get their money, and there is no explanation and there is no explanation to them.  What is all this?  Thank you.

MR H. IMAGA: Mr Chairman, I rise in support of the Motion.  Let me take this opportunity also to congratulate those who have been newly appointed Mr Chairman, for us Arua we accept and appreciate these appointments but they should be enforced with development.  Also, allow me to take this opportunity to remind the hon. Minster for Internal Affairs hon. Kiyonga, about the position of Arua Police Station. Year in year out, I have been standing here reminding the Government that this Police Station was destroyed about ten years ago.  Government has been under taking reconstruction.  But this Police Station has been completely been neglected.  Today if you go to Arua you will see about 45 Police Officers accommodated in small uniports.  The Minister perhaps should go to Arua and see this for himself. (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information. I wish to inform the hon. Member that it is not only Arua Police Station. Masaka Police Station which was hit during the war in 1979, the police is being put in the Custodian Board House.  So, I think, the hon. Minister since that Police Station is on his way, he should one call there and see what is happening.

MR IMAGA: Thank you for that information.  I want also to take this opportunity, Mr Chairman, to comment the Government for having introduced some non-perennial crops in northern region. I want to take this opportunity to appeal to my hon. Colleagues that this chance should be taken seriously because when the coffee was introduced to Uganda, the experiment was done in the North.  But later it abandoned.  I think the Government has really taken quite an appropriate decision to have introduced coffee in the North, Now, right now, we must really thank Coffee Development Authority which has accepted to establish 2 Centres for Coffee Nursery per division.  So, if we all stick to this opportunity, I am sure by year 2000, the North will be exporting coffee.  Let me talk briefly about the road toll, which has been introduced by local authorities.

The first question is, should we tax produce or not? If the answer is yes, who should tax produce? Central or Local Government? If the answer is no, my question is why not? If you go back during colonial time, cash crops were mainly introduced to raise revenue to the Government. Immediately after Independence, the whole Budget was financed by the tax from Cotton and coffee. As I said before, this cash crop was introduced to raise revenue because the British Government by that time was not happy to see that the British payers money is used to administer Uganda. So, now we are fortunate enough.  Now the question is that should this Government really have tax on this produce? (Interruption)

MR KAIJUKA: Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that he is perhaps confusing the two issues.  One; the question of removing roadblock relates to one issue of removing a trade barrier.  In other words, when we talk of trade barriers we are talking about tariff barriers and non-tariff barriers.  So, the Minister for Finance was not saying Local Government should not tax their produce.  In other words, local administration can be taxed any of those produce that they may consider appropriate.  Thank you.

MR IMAGA: Thank you for that information.  Usually, Mr Chairman, my concern is revenue.  Interest is to see that we run a surplus budget.  So, the issue of road barrier is not my concern.  But what I am trying to advocate for is that there should be at least a tax or revenue from progress.  That is why I put the question who should collect this revenue?

I would like to suggest that the Minister of Finance or the Minister for Local Government, at least they should discuss and find suitable way of tapping revenue from a produce.  As you know, right now ten per cent of our budget is just covered. Let me just try to comment briefly on what the seconder said about the sugar price.  I heard him say that the imported sugar is cheaper than the locally manufactured sugar.  But it does not matter because from local manufactured sugar, it gives us employment.  But my question is, does this member, really know at what level our people are being employed in Sugar Industries? If you look right now, the people for West Nile are being recruited.  These left their homes; their wives have deserted -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  The hon. Member should not mislead this House by saying so.  These people are recruited on contract of twelve months from Arua and other places.  They work for twelve months and go back to their homes. So, it is wrong to say that these people lose their homes and families.  This is not true.  Thank you.

MR DRATRUTRU: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, may I inform the hon Member that I do agree with you that the labourers for sugarcane are recruited from West Nile. At the same time I do agree when these workers come here, they find it extremely very difficult to go back.  I had 35 people from my division alone and out of 35, three died here and their bodies were not carried home because their was no means to ferry them there.  The other 32 who finished their contract were unable to raise money to go to bus and go home.

MR IMAGA: Mr Chairman, I think the hon. Member is just talking of what is taking place right from now.  These labourers started being recruited way back during colonial time and it is continuing.

Lastly, may I wind up by briefly touching on cotton. Cotton is a major source of income for Arua people as well as for Government.  But the problem experienced now is the road.  Formerly cotton was transported through Pakwach, which is 65 kilometres.  But this road is completely damaged.  Now the cotton is transported via Arua to Pakwach.  This covers about 120 kilometres instead of 65.  These are very important issues. We request the Government to come in to at least take over that road.  Thank you very much.

AN HON. MEMBER: Mr Chairman, I stand to support the Motion. Before I support the Motion, permit me say something. Ugandans we have really suffered.  We have suffered because of bad policies made by ourselves.  We have suffered because of the negligence of Government pursued policies.  The policies should be led by us and for us and for the future of our children. We should not make policies which are likely to kill us or kill the future of our nation.  I am concerned with the Report in the Press about the Moslems.  There have been scenarios and accusations about Moslems that they did not go to school.  This is a historical fact that Moslems were denied a chance to go to school.  It was not their own making.  It was because of the bad policies and politics which was there by then, the Moslems did not have chance.

MRS SEBAGEREKA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to give information to the hon. Member holding the Floor that the Islamic Religion came here as traders, our forefathers liked the religion as opposed to the protestants and Catholics who came as missionaries.  They were not denied as such, but the people who came for slave trade and our forefathers copied the religion. (Applause)

Therefore, I would like to congratulate the Third Deputy prime Minister and continue with my information. I am very concerned and so I wanted to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that the Moslems are not denied now.  The Moslems have everything opportunity to study only that some Moslems schools teach two streams; one stream is for Islam and another one is for academic subjects, but that makes the people who are taking the Koran and Arabic to be incompetent when they go out to meet their counter-parts.  So, I would suggest that these Koran schools be integrated like how to protect Christian religion take divinity and foreign languages.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.  

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Point of information. Thank you Mr Chairman. I would like to inform the hon. Member who was on the Floor that where I studied from right from primary hood I studied with Muslims, secondary school I studied with Muslims, HSC I studied with Muslims, Makerere University I studied with Muslims, here in Parliament when I came I found Muslims.  So, I am wondering how Muslims were denied to go school. (Laughter)

MR LYADDA MIYA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to be protected, because my point had not come, I have a point I am trying to deliver, I had begun by saying there are reports in the Press I am not talking about the historical fact about Muslims because they did not go to school.  I am saying Muslims is a historical fact that they did not study; it is true that Muslims compared to other religious did not do as Catholics and other religions. But what I am trying to put forward here is a simple thing which I am saying that we must have at least policies to protect everybody to protect minority to protect the Majority.  

What I am saying here is that if it is fact that Muslims did not go to school it is not something to be talked about to be proud of, you should not really try to criticize those who are unfortunate, they are unfortunate that they did not study, but if you open up a Muslim, and open up a Catholic you would find they same blood the same intelligence and everything. What we need is collective responsibility we work together as Ugandans other than altering words which are supposed to insinuate others or make others look lower than others.  (Interruption)

MR BWANIKA BBALE:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, I thank the hon. Member for giving way.  In fact the Muslim community received the remarks which were made by one big dignitary with a lot of misgivings, wherever I have been going they are complaining towards a statement.  But, in Bombo the Vice President tried to explain giving figures, in fact so happen that the Vice President was misquoted because the figures which were given were such that the Muslims proportionally very well educated than other religious community. (Applause) 

If you look at the ratio, the ratio of Muslim there are few but when you look at the people who are educated they are higher than any other communities. I was at a mawulide  in Luwero where a certain Muslim gave us a list of 78 Muslims with PHDs including Salim Bachou is here so many, in fact it is unfortunate that that thing was misquoted and it is intended to divide Uganda but as we see it here we are with Muslims, so it is wrong. The Vice President promoted the Muslims (Laughter) So, it is entirely wrong  to give Ugandans the impression that Muslims are behind, and in fact better off than any other religion.  Thank you very much.

MR LYADDA MIYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  On that background that my colleague has told us in this House that it is not the issue of either education or not education according to the - what I am saying here is a simple fact that we Ugandans especially people in this House should be beyond the politics of sectarianism.  A person who is holding an office of a Vice President should not be seen talking about religion -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: Order.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, we are aware that we have got very little time in between now and December. Is it in order for the hon. Member to continue labouring on an irrelevant area which is not relevant to the Motion before us? 

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: He is expressing the Muslim concern through Parliament he is in order. Please wind up.

MR LYADDA MIYA: Thank you very much, what actually is annoying the muslim community -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: Wind up.  Could you wind up hon. Member.

MR LYADDA MIYA:  Mr Chairman my second concern is about the protection of Ugandans I am still on the Policy in the contribution of our budget.  Indians came to Uganda, Uganda is also privatizing industries and factories and we have also passed a law here to protect Ugandans especially in Custodian Board houses.  This privatization - we have seen foreigners coming to take over factories because the Ugandans themselves cannot afford to take or to buy those properties.

Now, what is happening, if you went to a factory today you will see an Indian mistreating an African especially the educated because he sees those educated people as a liability as people who are going to run them out of business an Indian will never like to see a man with an engineering degree working as an engineer he would prefer to have an illiterate Indian as a production manager to man and to control a man with masters in his factory.  The owner of the factory or let me say a Hotel like Nile Hotel, you will find somebody the owner becoming the overall supervisor and everything and these fellows are really subjected to suffering in the factory. There is nobody; they have complained but there is no Policy in place to protect an employee - demand because we have so many people now on streets especially the unemployed, ignored, the educated they are all mistreated, they are all treated the same. (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: Let him wind up.

MR LYADDA MIYA: Mr Chairman, for me what I trying to propose here that because of the massive unemployment in Uganda and because the Government is selling off the factories, therefore, the Government is not going to employ, it is going to employ almost 30 per cent of the population the 70 per cent is left to the private sector which is being manned by foreigners. I am proposing that Government should come up with a policy with a minimum salary of 1,500 without a definite time because a worker in oxygen somewhere has a brother who is working there -(Interjection)- getting 1,500 is supposed to work up to mid night and when it comes to mid night he is left to move on foot without transport and when he complains he is chased away they bring another one because they are so many who want to get employment.  So, I am proposing that we should come up with a minimum salary wage and also time factor should also be involved.  Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: Take your Seat.  You know hon. Members we programme our work schedule and we wanted certain items dealt with within a specified time, and this means you must stick to your time allocated according to our rules of procedure.  We have used the rule for procedure to programme our work schedule, if I have given you time and I call you upon to wind up, please honourably wind up, it will be unfair for me to direct that you be stopped because you can be stopped.  But, that one will be too much for you or for me.  I would like to respect my time schedule because we have a lot of things here to do and please I am calling upon every member that once you hold the Floor try to summarise your point within the time specified and if you are given an extra one minute to wind up honourably please because you are the ones who put that rule.

MR HIGIRO SEMAJEGE: Mr Chairman, I thank you very much for allowing me this minute to make my comment on the subject matter which is very important.  I have got few points first to make before I go to the main.

One; is that I wish to than the Minister for Finance for having given us a very developmental budget and if all of us -(Applause)- you read through you even find there are a number of new ideas which will support the faster development of our economy I wanted to mention them because they are clearly spelt out.  

I want also to say, that there is a point which is normally feared and that is about the debt it has been stated that it is over 60 per cent of our G.D.P. Often many people get scared of it; we do not have to be scared of the day 3 billion dollars to the country is a small amount, what is important is to ask where is this money going how is it spend, it this money is spent on productive sector it means that no matter how big the debt is it is improving your capacity to pay, therefore, it does not matter even if you have 70 per cent of G.D.P. as a debt do not worry because this debt is going to make it easier for you to pay and to earn.  

So, please let us ask where does this money go, my worry is that the biggest bulk is going on simple consumption and it is not going on productive sectors and that is an important point to remember, that is not going on productive sectors and I wish the Minister for Finance should try to revise that situation.

Now, I would also like to thank the Minister of Finance for the ‘Entandikwa’ you all know that Lwemiyaga is one of those areas which of course is known to be very backward, but I want to tell you that we have already got our money, people have received the money the reason is that immediately I got the idea when it was announced, I talked to my people, committees were set and I told them the deadline and they were within that deadline the world Vision has helped us and the individuals who are selected have already got the money, so there should be no complaint.  Mr Chairman, I beg that you give us next round before September and we shall take it.  Thank you. 

Those who have even more will be added. Another point which has been up and it is very topical is about privatization.  Privatization is ideal for Uganda and any other countries, it was started by England of all the places and when they privatized the economy of UK improved tremendously and even at ours there is a lot of improvement but there is something that is going wrong, that is we are selling our public enterprises we are selling them because they have not been very efficient, we are selling them because the Government cannot run business.  When these enterprises were started original idea was that there would be training ground for Ugandan entrepreneurs then that is if the enterprise was started by the Government it would eventually go to the skills of Ugandans this will not work because we transferred that objective to handing over these parastatals to political reward and failed.  

But what we should do now is that the money which is obtained from sale should benefit local entrepreneurs is some way or the other, while we cannot do a lot because money is very little but we should show that there is some special benefits to the African entrepreneurs where is it, where is that special benefit? I would like to ask the Minister where is that special benefit to the African Entrepreneurs?  It does not seem to be there, this money is - we do not know which account, we do not know which is making a profit at all and we should like (a) that the money is put on the account which is making profit is not just dormant.

(b) That there should be special treatment for some Africans Entrepreneurs, one of those would be to establish incubators there are certain things called incubators, incubators normally for chicken that is where you put a small they produce.

Now, an incubator is where you have a small institution or a house where you have people who have the knowledge and those entrepreneurs who want to come and have no knowledge but ideas are trained once they know what to do they go to the public and with that Mr Minister of Finance and the Minister for Industry if you care to know more I know you may run to Europe but run to me I will give you -(Laughter)- the service is free; I am not going to charge the Government about this but you could pay millions if it was done by the other people.  

Another point I would like to mention here is about tourism, I am glad the Minister of Tourism is here and I am also very happy that the same Minister has just been promoted to a higher office this is fantastic we want to congratulate him, recently I talked to him I was asking him to go to some areas of interest for tourism and he got scared he said in that area there are no roads Dr Higiro you want me to go and get lost, but now he is a whole vice premier really I think that road to go to Byamugenyi will trouble you, you should be able to make it, use your influence Mr Chairman.

Now, Tourism, has been recorded even here in Uganda to be the fastest growing sector it is growing at 18 per cent yet very little is done for it.  L et the Members read, pages (132 to 137) you will see there no local in put all that is put for developing tourism is from donations is not that a shame? Really a Government of enlightened people like we are we know that tourism in Spain gives them over 40 per cent of their budget, in Egypt nearly 50 per cent and many other countries like Kenya it is coming to 30 per cent and let me tell you and the House, tourism costs very little compared to what we tell you and the House, tourism costs very little investment very little input for you to earn a lot of money.  In fact what we pay for establishing a factory here, can do a lot of wonders if you put a bit in tourism and I wish when we look on the budget we should at least change put some money for development of tourism.  

Then another idea we are selling hotels and lodges where does that money go, this money should not be put in the general let this money actually be in account to develop infrastructure for tourism.  The other time the Minister for Tourism who is now a Vice President was -(Interjection)- I know what I am talking about, I am saying who was a Minister of Tourism but now Vice President I am meaning what I am saying, you know, by the way, that tourism sector by the way whoever goes there has a chance of going higher (Laughter) That is a joke.  

I am just saying here that the money which is obtained from tourism industries which are being sold that money should be provided for the construction of roads to these very attractive areas, I wish the Minister for Tourism now would actually claim it so that this money is used let them not send me to Masaka District who just gets just a peanut that they will do the road to Bigo Byamujenyi they will not do it, they do not have the money but where is that money which we get from selling our lodges? that bit should be there to help us develop our tourism. 

Now that I am winding up, roads; I like the speech of the President, I like the speech of the Minister of Finance but I was very disappointed, I want to say it that the road from Villa to Sembabule through Tusi and Konje which is a major road an economic road was left out of the priorities as it does not exist this is where you have the cattle this serve you milk, maize and beans and I want to say this, that when in September rain starts Mawogola is likely to be cut off the roads are simply impossible and this is for sure if you get time you will drive through that road during the sun shine now and you will know what I am talking about.  I would beg that all the Ministers here campaign on my behalf and on behalf of Ugandans that this road be done so.  

Finally, I would like to say, Mawogola, Lwemiyaga, Nyabushozi and Amechaka we have no other problem I want to tell you, that area is a rich area my people are not poor but when they have no water - I wish that something very dramatic could be done to provide water in that place.  We have said it many times ever since I came to this House but I would like to say without water there we are missing development and Uganda is missing a lot of revenue, Uganda is missing a lot of capital.  I wish to support and I am glad you have given me this moment and I will go within the time more will be said later.  Thank you very much.

MR RUKIKAIRE (Historical Member): You will recall that this afternoon there was some demonstration by the former East African employees also in connection with East African compensation scheme and rather allow speculations through press and so on, I thought it once while before more detailed account of what has happened is given to the House and the public for me to give a provision statement on what the position is.  You will recall that out of our budget in the previous provisions a sum of 7.7 billion Uganda Shillings was provided to meet the requirement of the East African employees in respect of their compensation.  At that time this was based on a verifiable numbers at that time and also in accordance with a provision of the agreement of the East African compensation scheme.  That amount of 7.7 billion has since all been disbursed and it covered a total number of three thousand seven hundred and forty four paid.  Since that time the Minister of Public Service has continued to receive complaints both from those who were paid out of this 7.7 billion to the sect that what they were paid was inadequate and many other workers claiming to be former employees of the East African Community have since come forward and presented themselves to the Ministry of Public Service in the last two month and so and a fresh computation has been made and has transpired that there maybe an additional 6000 workers who are claiming compensation.  This has been tabulated to amount to an additional 8 billion Uganda Shillings, the Minister of Public Service has, therefore, prepared a cabinet paper containing all these new findings and containing all the new tabulations and this Paper is before the cabinet for a final policy decision.  I presume that as soon as this policy decision has been made House and to the public to make a statement about how this matter as seriously as it possibly could you will recall it was a burning issue and it is very rare that an amount of 7.7 billion in one budget should be put aside for such a thing with all the other priorities being put aside, so the matter has been handled but because of the new discoveries because of the new demands we have looked at the problem afresh and the matter is before cabinet for the final decision.  

While I am on this Floor permit me just for two/ three minutes again to make a small preliminary report about this burning issue of privatization about which so many Members have been concerned.  Although I have not been in the country for the last month or so, I want -(Interruption)

DR KARUHANGA: Point of information.  Thank you Mr Chairman, and I thank the hon. Minister for giving way.  Before you leave the issue of the East African community, first I want to thank him for what he has stated and cleared the air, but what has been baffling me after I saw those people and talked to some of them is the fact that they had set up a negotiating team with the Ministry and that this information which sounds to be so reasonable must have been kept away from them to the extent that they had to marshal all the people to come before parliament and make a lot of noise, how come that this information was not availed to their leaders to communicate to the people, instead of just allowing the whims and what have you to come here and disturb the House when in fact such a reasonable statement if it had been communicated to them I am sure they are not unreasonable to have taken it instead of spending a whole day making so much noise and disturbing the peace and quiet that we have enjoyed hitherto.  So, I would call upon him to make sure that the officials who are carrying out such an exercise of negotiation with so much amount of money being put aside in budget should really - there seems to a lack of communication or there is communication gap between what is being done on one hand and what is being received on the other to the extent that it is bringing and generating unnecessary clash between the Government and the people who are expecting these funds.  

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I will be happy to communicate that information to my hon. Colleague the Minister of Public Service and the Second Deputy Prime Minister now so that if indeed it is true that the leaders of the former East African workers have been demanding this information then one should be able to explain why that information was not given.

MR OKELLO LUWUM: Point of order.  Is it in order for you to stop us from commenting about the Minister’s statement when the Minister has just actually wetted our mouth because we have a lot we could contribute on his statement on the East African Community compensation.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I have not stopped hon. Members from contributing either through point of information and so on and so forth.  As you know the Minister has been so concerned and it was upon himself  who rung me then said he would like to make a statement in the House on his own.  So, you can see how concerned he is, but I think it will also be out of order to interrupt the Minister from rally explaining to Parliament first and for most and I think from the experience here in the House, point of information always delays hon. Members who are the floor, why do not patiently wait for him so that he can make a statement on behalf of Government there after you will be given time I have not stopped any hon. Member.

MR RUKIKAIRE:  So, Mr Chairman, I thank you very much for your kind of intervention on my behalf and also to say that this is actually a preliminary information for the benefit to Member of Parliament that is why you see I do not have a written statement.  I just went and picked up some information from our files and officials and I thought that Members were entitled this afternoon to be given at least part of the information so that in the way informed so that you are able to explain to the people when you meet them and especially having been confronted with such a large number of demonstrators it would have been improper if we had closed this afternoon with somebody saying something about it.

So, Mr Chairman, I had moved to the second point -(Interruption) 

MR APORU OKOL: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I feel a bit disturbed from the statement made by the Minister, I want to be clarified he has just stated that there more 6000 workers who are claiming to be paid and I am sure and I am also aware that there has been offices in Arusha and there had been also offices in Nairobi and these offices are still there and a record should be there because this country had never been in Nairobi and these offices are still there and a record should be there because this country had never been in political - there had been no turmoil actually in those countries and definitely this statement  should have been researched so that when it comes here we are very clear because we are bothered by the people who always tell us what is happening about all this.  You know it should have been researched but not half-baked statement.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: But I think as you heard from the Minister he said, to enable you to get a picture of what is happening he came with the preliminary information it is not final, I think he is on the way of preparing a substantive government official information at a later time maybe, this week he hurried here to give you the basic information so that when these workers asking in the evening as they are representatives you should now be in the picture.  Then that is what the Minister said.

MR RUKIKAIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, but let me add just for the benefit of the person who have sort - clarification that the question of East African compensation and the records and verification has not been a simple matter not just for the Uganda Government but for the Kenya and Tanzanian Government, this is a matter when the East African Community broke up in 1970s that had taken years for these governments to be able even to reach where we are in terms of verifying this information, it is not a simple matter we have spent the last nearly 7 years trying to verify with the Kenya Government how much money they owed the Uganda Government in terms of the East African Compensation scheme.  To this date we have only been able to verify a third of (1/3) of it, so I will not accept another information on this matter.  

So, let me make it clear that neither simple nor something that you can go and find in one piece of information and that is why it has taken this long.  But, let me once again give you the assurance that this matter is in the hand it is being considered as highest possible lever and former employees of the East African Community who have not been paid should be given the assurance that it is being so considered as the highest possible level and as soon as possible we would be able to announce what measures are being taken to deal with those who have not been paid.

Now I had requested your permission, Mr Chairman, to spend only three minutes to talk about the issues of privatization which I know has been part of debate over the last two weeks.  It is a petty I was not in the country and I was not able to come here and explain some of the issues raised and I am grateful that my Colleague hon. Kisamba Mugerwa has been able to provide you with some of the critical information that was necessary but let me say this, that since May this year we have had a report to submit to this House in keeping with the requirement of the statute, but because the committee on the economy together with the committee on the parastatals have made and had a long meeting with the Minister of Finance and documented some issues which we wanted to be considered and possible included in this report we would have to put it off until a reconciliation of these issues had been carried out.  

Even as late as yesterday we had a meeting which was chaired by my Colleague here the Minister of Justice to determine this issue and I want to assure you that within the next 14 days you will have a report laid before this House giving you the latest update position on the issue of divestiture so that you have information and you do not have simply to talk out of the blue, but let me also say, that this concern about African entrepreneurs about which hon. Higiro has spoken, about which many of you have spoken although it is a big fashion of your concern and you think that the money which has come out of the process of the sale should be used for this purpose, it is not simple as it appears and when this report comes to you with the next fourteen days you should be able to see why I am saying what I am saying.  But, let me give you some good news, since December last year until about April this year I have been negotiating with the European Investment Bank for fund which are called venture capital and you recall that the Minister of Finance in his Budget Speech made a statement that an amount of 20 million US dollars for venture capital was available to Uganda investors this money will be disbursed through five selected banks and borrowers can access this money from anything from 50,000 thousand dollars up to 1.5 million US dollars this is money for Ugandan investors who have good and sound projects proposal and therefore Ugandans should not hesitate they should come forward and try to access this money even before we decide how the proceed of the divestiture account are going eventually to be used for the promotion of the African Investor.  

So, in short, the report is coming but even before the report comes you should be aware that there some other funds which are available for African investors.  More than you will recall that recently there was a question of ginneries which are being advertised for tenders to people who want to buy them and this is for Ugandans and also for foreigners.  Over the last one week we have been looking at the possibilities of helping Ugandans to be able to buy some of these ginneries with some assistance, and I have put aside in the last week a total of 2 billion Uganda shillings from - funds which will be able to assist Ugandans who want to put up money to buy some of these ginneries.  

So, there are ways and means in which we are trying to help Ugandans and you should come forward and discuss them and see how we can give you advise on how to access this money, do not just talk about the divestiture account money, yes, it is going to be there and we will decide and explain to you how it is going to be spent, but be aware that there other sources which I think are available to you and you should try and chase them.  Thank you very much.

MR ELYAU (Kalaki County, Soroti):  Thank you, Mr Chairman, for giving me this opportunity.  First of all, I support the Motion saying this is one of the last activities of this Council more so, at the budget Parliament has a lot of role in this budget for running the nation and then developing the nation.  Although I could say a lot of things have been done by this Government over the six years I have been with you in this House, there is still some important areas where I think the Minister and the other Ministers concern should take serious note on.  Let me start with a human being’s life. Health services have not been adequate at all to our people, I feel not proud at all although we say we have done somewhere well, people are dying in areas I come from especially in my area these days where there are no doctors even in the Mission hospitals, you pity yourself when you find people are not admitted when they are really seriously heal I want to call upon the Minister of Planning to plan for people’s lives so seriously so that everybody will be alive to see our Movement going on and it is going to be a pity, to try to do programmes of trade and so on when people are dying.  So, I am saying there must be emphasis put on human beings first of all so that we all exist. 

Last week I saw a Langi carried away from Lwara on a piece of log across to Bata just because there was no doctor to attend to them in Lwara; this is a private hospital.  How comes that we watch such a situation? The poor boy was carried by the people in the market; now they are asking what is happening I did not have the answer so I want this to be taken very seriously unless we provide for services we are going to be doomed because people formerly when I was so small people knew the Government when they could go to the hospital of Government and et services, they knew roads are worked on by government and so on. Now, in case of life what are we really showing? Because when you talk about privatization of or self sharing what we call cost sharing for a villager this one is bad news, how can he consider if it can be raised like in Soroti he cannot raise his bread and his meal can he consider for his life now?  I think that is where we are still a little bit backward we must do something for health services.

Secondly, I was very happy to hear the Minister talking about roads at least those one to be tarmacked, last year but one I think when the President was offering the 8th Session, Lira/Soroti road was mentioned as being one of those to be tarmacked I am surprised when the Minister was talking that road has not been mentioned for tarmacking although we are very grateful he has been now up graded, now which parliament will now tarmac that road because if we go away and somebody else comes in then I am wondering who will now finish that tarmac road, because we are not sure that we are going to come here ourselves -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform the hon. Member three point which has been raised concerning roads.  Last time hon. Member here raised the issue of the Kafu/Karuma road, Kafu/Karuma and as we all know was signed by the reconstruction contractor in September last year and were supposed to have started construction in November that period between September and November to enable him mobilize himself, but this contractor was a foreign contractor as we all know we do not have an organised local Ugandan contractor to take up a project of this size.  This contractor was his first time to venture into road construction he has been basically a building contractor and in Uganda we only have a few road contractors like Mukalazi, sterling as a local contractor and so on.  

Recently, I took up a trip down to South Africa to look for road contractors who would come and invest in Uganda, very soon I will be able to inform this House what was the outcome.  But Kafu/Karuma was awarded to Wade Adams who has not been able to mobilize himself to start real construction what we have done it is not easy to terminate a road construction of building construction it need the court to separate the two.  

So, the easiest way to go about it is to discuss with the main contractor to see if he could allow to sub-contract another contractor so that we can proceed and we have gone ahead to do that SOGEA a foreign road construction company has come in to be sub-contracted to carry on the Kafu/Karuma road.  But there is a rumour that Wade Adams has been sold off, so we are waiting to verify this information if it is so true at the end of this month we should be able to inform the World Bank who are assisting us to construct this road as of what next course we should take as the Ministry or the Government.  

I also want to inform hon. Higiro Semajege who mentioned about a road from Villa Maria to Sembabule, this road we called the bets about three month ago, we received the bets hey have been evaluated by the consultant the consultant has given us a report and the contract has been worn by SEITCO followed by the other contractors. As a policy the Government also goes through the consultant’s evaluation to see whether it was rightly awarded or not.  It is only that yesterday that I chaired a meeting in my Ministry regarding the awarding of the Villa Maria Sembabule road and we agreed to go back to the consultant to give us more information and by the end of this month this road will definitely will have been awarded and we normally give a contractor one month to mobilise himself but as it been a recent style that contractors take even five month before they mobilize, I want to assure hon. Semajege that by next month this road would have been awarded and now will be looking at the contractor as of to when is taking up a serious construction.   I think Mr Chairman, those are the few areas which -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: You should go to Lira road for tarmacking.  

AN HON. MEMBER:  Sorry, Mr Chairman, it was Soroti/Lira road.  Soroti/Lira road was recently up graded and it was - it is in the final stages of being completed what remained was the swamps.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: Why do you not allow the hon. Minister to finish the third point?  Order.

MR KASAIJA KABUBI: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, we have a problem throughout the country about the road situation which is very bad and the Minister has taken it upon himself to give - information why can he not come up with a Ministerial Statement covering the whole area.  So, against that background is it in order for the Minister to blame and waste the most important time we are having with that piece mean information, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: You see, hon. Kabuubi you know that according to our rule of procedure, any hon. Member can put a question to any Minister for an answer, but since you have not bothered to do it you are yourself out of order. (Laughter)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Soroti/Lira road was recently up grade it is just like when you give birth to a child you would like to see this child crawling walking and then running.  I want to inform the hon. Member for Kalaki that we have just finished up grading this road and we are now in the process of using the same survey which was carried out when we were going to up grade this road to prepare documents so that it can enable us to find a donor to assist us to construct that road or tarmac that road.

I think hon. Chairman, I will not allow these chits here if somebody wants can forward to me or can raise a point here and then we can answer.  Thank you very much.

MR ELYAU: But my concern was that as we are still here and since this is our last session we should make sure that we know what we have been after we left this session.  I thank the Minister for that piece of advise but I think the road has become so useful that, not at night for me who sleep in Otuboi; I do not sleep; lorries are moving day and night because the road has become comfortable the more you leave it longer it will get to be spoilt so I am urging the Government to do something so that at least a bit of East and North be connected.

Now, I go back to the side of electricity. Since they talked here, Mr Kaijuka promised me he was going to look into that matter of electricity, somebody has again come by the way as we are going to end this Session we have a lot of primary schools, Senior Secondary Schools these people have failed to repair electricity which is going up to my place Kalaki even that is where the Minister for Justice comes from, this is a very serious matter can somebody save us from this shame because it is just a mere repair only then we could see electricity bright in that area.  We have a lot of schools which cannot read at night can they have something, is there any assurance in this budget that at least this year we shall accomplish that mission if not you are putting us in shame.

Now, another one is the RCs, were promised to be paid - up to day RCs are our strongest supporters if the RCs are not going to be paid I am afraid something will happen, because the RCs are asking who is to pay us?  So, I am urging the Minister of Local Government to tell us what is going to happen if these RCs who are complaining that they had not been paid who is going to do something about these RCs because when I go to the village this is the question they raise, I do not know if this area is covered anywhere in this budget.  (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I think the point the hon. Member is raising is very vital.  I believe it is one of the factors that is causing the RCs to be very corrupt because whatever, case that they are now committed to do is even to get involved in some criminal cased just because they now they are going to extract something.  So, I think the Minister for Local Government should take it serious and consider these people.  Thank you.

MR ELYAU: Thank you for that good information.  Now, Mr Chairman, this is good because these are backbones, the RCs they are the ones who -(Interjection) that is why our policies there are going on.  By the way I want to thank you Mr Chairman, the Government and RCs in general that in Kalaki county where I came from that time here there were very few schools but today out of 30 schools we have 16 under construction and 10 are finished. (Applause) 

Apart form that, when you were a Prime Minister you gave me some mabatis (iron sheets) we are now constructing a senior secondary school form senior 1 to senior 6, we are also building Kalaki Senior Secondary Schools and a T.T.C. where hon. Kategaya gave mabatis.  So, these are already signs which show that although some people had started letting us down that we have not done anything but I think we have done something we have done very good things.  You see, some people fear the word Movement I do not know what is wrong with that word, if you open a dictionary and see what a movement is, I saw movement in 1968 when I joined Co-operative Movement -(Interjection) It is true.  So, I do not know why people fear a word ‘movement’ only but we are doing something. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Order hon. Members.

MR ELYAU: So, Mr Chairman, let me - because for some of us when we work with this Government we were nick named we were movement people but then I am surprised to see that what kind of movement is it that I carry on my body, politically we need philosophy for guiding our policies, guiding our activities in the villages which we have now.  Except maybe, what I want to urge the Minister of Industry that they should guard against the implement we are getting - recently in Soroti somebody deceived the traders in Soroti he brought ‘Kyapa Kuku’ which is not the normal ‘Kyapa Kuku’’; each farmer who buys the hoe, the hoe breaks off and now we have already put the matter on the ground to collect all the hoes back.  Can the Minister check who are those importing Kikwangara hoes in this country because it is very serious, when we are doing production since the hoes are very vital instrument we should not find out that there are very poor qualities of this kind of hoes implement when we need to produce our food and our cash crop.  So, the Minister concerning that industry should check what kind of hoes are getting are they manufactured locally or they are brought from out side.


Lastly, the last two years somebody deceived the KAR old men in the village they were given to know that there is somebody who is going to consider them either British Government these people were given to raise 2000 (Two thousand) raise a photograph and now some of them have gathered to ask me that, please we are getting finished what is coming forth -(Laughter)- they are dying, every any time, we are getting finished we took our photos, we paid something who is doing what?  Can the Minister tell us was there really a promise from this Government or promise from the British Government, so that these Africans can settle really they are very concern, it is very, very bad affair because these are the old people who served one time.  So, if the veteran is here let the veteran tell us whether that money is coming.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR ONGOM (Omoro County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Chairman, while I rise to talk I hope you will protect me against some of my neighbours. Mr Chairman, I would like to support the Motion and I start my contribution by saying something about privatization again and parastatal reforms.  Many Members have voiced concern about the way the Government is implementing the PAD Statute I am actually concerned.  When we were debating the PERD Bill here, many Members were concerned that the interest of Ugandans be protected when privatizing the parastatals.  Most of the enterprises which have been divested now, as you are aware were developed by the money collected the public and therefore, I think it is only proper that the public does not only gain but actually believe that they are gaining something out of this not only believe but actually gain something out of the privatization exercise.  

You will recall, that this exercise was concerned with two aspects, one to privatize that is to divest and also to reform the parastatals, but would appear that our concentration now is purely on divestiture maybe, that is good in itself but what is concerning most of the Members here is that the exercise is taking a turn which perhaps is of concern to the people of Uganda we are seeing a lot of our enterprises being sold cheaply, most of the time we are told those are the market prices, Members have already said maybe, we are getting this poor resource because of the - we are putting to many of them on the market.  There are some enterprises which I feel very strongly that should be maintained by Ugandans even if they are privatized, I am referring to companies like the Uganda Commercial Bank, the Uganda Electricity Board, the Post and Telecommunication and these which are more of a service to the people than perhaps profit making.  

So, I am making a concrete suggestion and I hope that Members will agree with me. I think that it is time that we mobilize people to buy these enterprises, and why not; I think we can do it! Mr Chairman, I am suggesting that Members go out and mobilise people to buy these enterprises, and I am suggesting a method that, for instance, in the last elections for the CA we hah about 214 constituencies, I am suggesting that each constituency be allocated shares.  For instance, we could allocate one thousand shares to each country or each constituency, and charge the shares, say at Shs.100,000/= each.

MR OBWANGOR: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, let me talk about privatisation and what not - owning the property or banks; you will have to be very, very careful.  Who has ability to handle these banks? For example, a bank run as a parastatal body by Uganda Government, present government, called UGADEV being run under -(Interruption)- This House - the Teso Bank - maintain the Uganda Commercial Bank under the government, the strongest government they can have for its ability in running the economy, for high level employment in the country, and having power to command money.  For any government, not because that it is NRM, because NRM Government will go away tomorrow; may change this as a national institution, on a national basis, running a national economy.  Uganda Commercial Bank should remain Uganda Commercial Bank owned by government of Uganda, by State.  In 1986 in Australia, when the Labour Government was there it had no bank of its own, the Labour Government.  When the private banks refused to give them money, then the government run by the Labour Party had to create a bank. 

MR ONGOM: Thank you for the information, Mzee; but I am talking about what is going on Mr Chairman.  I would be very happy to maintain UCB and these enterprises I have enumerated to remain as parastatals under government control, but I am not aware that there is a general move throughout the word to privatise a lot of things.  I am merely suggesting that keep these enterprises in the hands of Ugandans.  As far as management is concerned, the same Ugandans can here competent managers and management teams, whether it is on a joint venture or any other arrangement, to run the services for us.  So, I am suggesting that we mobilise the people if Members agree to collect money and buy these enterprises, and it is possible; and the arrangement I am suggesting is that each county be given shares, I am suggesting for the same of argument, a thousand per constituency.   Then people are mobilised - either each person buys a share, or people get together to buy the shares -(Interjection)- Mr Chairman, can I be protected from Mzee  -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MR ONGOM: The arrangement I am suggesting, Mr Chairman, if we do that we could raise immediately Shs.21 billion, and that could go a long way to put as deposits to some of these enterprises, and I do not see that it is impossible.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Point of information. I wanted to inform the hon. Member that what he is suggesting, thought it did not go by constituency, it has been tried with NYTIL but it did not attract the shares which were required.  Secondly, with these enterprises it is not only capital but also the incentive to manage one’s enterprise which you need; if you spread so thin the shares you may not have the few people like a private company which sweats and sacrifices to manage the enterprise to ensure that they make profit.

MR WANENDEYA: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I do hope that this will not deprive of the opportunity to contribute, but on this particular point which I want to inform the hon. member that where they are privatising, in the United Kingdom, it has taken longer to privatise so that natives are given opportunity to buy shares in those companies.  You will find that most of the shares are bought, or the companies are bought by the Americans, Arabs - and in Germany they specifically have a law, after the purchase of Volkswagen, they now require only Germans to purchase those shares.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR RWAKAKOOKO: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to, while agree with my hon. Colleague that it is possible to mobilise a country, I think care must be taken because when you go around you are acting like a trustee and it would be very dangerous if you mobilise the population and they gave money and the companies subsequently to not make profits.  Now, I would like to agree that if a situation of a voucher system, i.e. where payment is not going to be made for those vouchers immediately it is possible to mobilise maximally.  But in this particular case, the government of Uganda wants to exchange its equity holding against payment.  So, therefore, that may be a problem! 

I would also like to comment on the hon. Minister of State’s statement about NYTIL shares; NYTIL share were, actually, floated to the shareholders, not to the public; and the shareholders could not respond because the amount involved was massive.  After five consultancies were carried out, it was found that the minimum amount required of NYTIL to be viable, to able to match the previous loans taken was Shs.7 billion.  There are reports in the Ministry of Finance; the government could not raise that because it was a majority shareholder.  That was the problem.

MR ONGOM: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I still would like to suggest, Mr Chairman, that we try this because I think it is feasible, I am not so worried about the management of the assets because in any case if these banks or these enterprises were put in stock exchange people would buy the shares and they would have so many share holders and they will still be private company and run as a private company and run as a private enterprise, and that is the line I am merely suggesting a way of raising money so that people can buy these enterprises.  I am concerned that it must belong to Ugandans.  The other is, of course, to make it open like through the stock exchange, but that is taking time and that will only be given, perhaps, to people who are enlightened and have large sum of money.  The way I am suggesting you do not have to have a lot of money in order to invest and have shares in these enterprises.  It is up to Members that I think it is possible and as far as I am concerned, I am asking for your support that if we agree we can go out and mobilise people to buy these enterprises.

I would like to say a few things about Northern Uganda Reconstruction Programme.  You will remember that when this programme was conceived, the idea was to correct the imbalance in development between the areas concerned and other parts of the country. But, it will appear that this is not likely to happen for a few reasons.  One is that in order to correct this imbalance it was estimated that you require over 600 million dollars in order to cover this, and actually, just to start and let the area concerned come to a level which we would call a balance.  

As you know we have not been able to solicit and get that money; what we have got is something like a hundred million dollars; and even that the experience you already know and as you are also part of the head of the programme, is that even of that now 40 per cent we were told last week by the hon. Member who is now the Deputy Prime Minister, that 40 per cent of the money has already been consumed on administrative overheads.  It means even what was expected to cover the little that was going to be done is not going to happen; and the programme was also to take a limited time -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: Would you like to get information from the Chair? 

MR ONGOM: Yes.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: Well, I think the correct information at the time I left was that, up to September last year only 71 million dollars had been mobilised under that funding, not a hundred million; then again up to September last year total disbursement and total expenditure added up was less than 2 million dollars.  So, I do not know 40 per cent of the whole money went! That is the information.

MR ONGOM: Thank you Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

BRIG. MOSES ALI: Point of information. Mr Chairman, the 40 per cent I am talking about is what is available, the 40 per cent of what has been disbursed, and whatever will be disbursed later I am sure will also be eaten in the same way, because the system has already been set to spend 40 per cent of what is available.

MR MUHAMMAD MAYANJA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I beg to give some information, and I find it is very difficult to give it; but let me collect the guts to give it, nevertheless.  You are aware that initially NURP was supposed to mobilise as the hon. Member has been able put it, about 600 million US dollars.  This expected mobilisation raised people’s expectations in the region, but unfortunately when it came to getting this money the amount got scaled down to around 80 million dollars.  From 600 million dollars to 80 million dollars, and the programme was supposed to address the problem of equity in the distribution of development in the region.  We who are managing the programme and, I will be coming to you to seek NRC to make a ministerial statement on NURP, maybe, on Thursday, if you will allow.  To us in the programme we feel that the programme is on course, because most of the nine components of this programme, for instance, school component is moving on very, very smoothly; the urban water rehabilitation, most of the machines have been secured the urban centres which are supposed to benefit, work is already going on in those urban centres; and I would like to allay the worries of the hon. Members and, indeed, the nation that I think what is missing is adequate information to the hon. Members and to the general public. But NURP on its part has tried, because recently we distributed progress reports on NURP and if you are to peruse those reports very well, you will realise that the programme is 75 per cent on course; nevertheless, I will be coming up with a ministerial statement, with your permission, this week so that this issue of 40 per cent money eaten does not really arise.  Thank you very much.

MR ONGOM: Thank you, Mr Chairman, but you will now realise that the project has a problem.  Only this afternoon we were told by the Minister of State for Works that there was some problems with the awarding of tender to part of the programme.  People who issued the tender, we were told, really knew that it was just venturing into road construction, but they went ahead and gave him a contract, I do not know how that happens! the information some of us have is that they were not even pre-qualified, but maybe they had some God-fathers behind them and they were given this contract, and obviously the result is what we are seeing, and this is how the money get wasted! Obviously, I do not know why the minister here disputes the fact that money is being wasted in the NURP Programme; it is being wasted.  He has given us some reports on the papers which some of us have read, but on the ground if you compare the results on the ground with those on the paper, they are not exactly the same  -(Interruption)

MR MARWAS: Point of information. Mr Chairman, I want to give this information to say one has to present a statement to ensure that things are good on the ground, I think he should be quested now, because we had PAPSCA that had very elaborate explanations, and the Minister of State in the prime Minister’s Office knows in the North PAPSCA died without putting this on the ground, except on paper; another one is KDA which had very good programmes on paper but on the ground there was nothing.  So, to tell us that you must come with a statement to clear the doubt when things are not on the ground and Members of Parliament from this area are complaining that things are not happening, is absurd to this House.  

MR KARUHANGA: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, I rise on a point of order that the hon. Member holding the Floor, hon. Absolom Ongom does clarify further to this House the information he has given to this House, which is a very serious piece of information, that the contract which Wed Adams won for the construction of that road was not pre-qualified and that there was a big man behind the awarding of that tender, when we know that that project was being run by a whole Prime Minister and the Prime Minister’s Office and if such information is true, then this really calls for a lot of very serious investigation in this House, and I would like him to make a substantive explanation to this House and disclose further these grounds upon which he bases himself to make such a very serious and grave allegations.  Can he substantiate?

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: Maybe, hon. Ongom will come to substantiate later on, but I think, as a far as giving this thing to Wade Adams was concerned, to the best of my knowledge, Wade Adams concerned, to the best of my knowledge, Wade Adams never qualified at that time.  But later on he got it, but I think, let him clarify.

MR ONGOM: Mr Chairman, thank you. I think if somebody disputes the rumour I have heard, and I said it was a rumour I heard, then let them come out and say it was not true; let them challenge this rumour that the rumour was not true, that the contract was properly awarded and the fellow qualified, and yet only today we were told the fellow was just venturing. Now, you do not give such a big contract to somebody you know he is not really qualified, he is just venturing; you heard this yourself.  So, let people dispute that the rumour is not collect. (Interruption.)

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member that much as we know from the government that the contract was properly awarded, the weakness with the company was mainly that in the schedule of mobilisation they underestimated the time they required, because they were really not on the ground in Uganda as far as road construction was concerned.  The machines were across in Tanzania, and to make arrangements took them longer than what is in the contract.  However, according to the professional information when they award contracts, there are ways where they can penalise the contractor.  But this does not come until a specified period of time in which he has to accomplish the piece of work has expired. As far as Adams is concerned, this has not expired; so, he is pulling up to catch up.  We cannot say he did not complete the project in the given time, for all of us who are using that road and know the state of road, we are concerned that Wade Adams is slow, but technically he is on the right track; should time arise where he could be penalised, he would and penalty in road construction awards is very serious, in such a manner that all the equipment and materials he might have mobilised by that time has to be left on the site and walk out and is awarded to a different person.  Be patient.

MR ONGOM:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I do not want to answer that any more because it is taking a lot of my time.  The other reason which I think the original objective of the programme is not going to meet is that inspire of the knowledge that we have a serious short-fall in the money realised to uplift the affected area, it would appear that most line ministries now tend to rely on this project as a means of uplifting the project areas so that even in this very Budget I have not seen much that is allocated for the area to lift to the level that this project was meant to do, and that is a lot of concern. I am merely bringing this to tell the ministries concerned with the areas that we should not depend entirely on NURP, on this programme to uplift the imbalance or to correct the imbalance in development, which we all agree it is there, but we should not depend on this entirely.  On the other hand we are happy that a start is being made, and must be appreciated.

I wanted also to say something about the poverty that many people have referred to.  May I quote from the Minister’s statement; he says; ‘Mr Chairman, while we should be encouraged by our achievements so far and recognition which he has received, this should not district us from a sober view of how far we have to go and the obstacles ahead.  Our ultimate economic objectives are not stability or even growth in itself, but rather an increasing standard of living for all Ugandans and the reduction of poverty; and he goes on to say that; although the economic growth which we have experienced since 1986 has increased real per capita income by 20 per cent, this level is still 23 per cent below the level enjoyed by Ugandans 25 years ago.’ I think it is important that the government has recognised this and we must agree that that is a first step towards correcting the situation.  We must agree that our objectives, our policies must be directed towards alleviation of poverty and increase of standard of living in this country. (Interruption)

MR OBWANGOR: Point of information. I want to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor of the House that we in this House, including the government, we failed to attack object poverty in our rural areas, because we have failed - no policy whatsoever, through agricultural policies to increase rural welfare.  So we shall always be with poverty; secondly, bring cheap money policy - pour money out, let people have money! I will tell you why; because currently, if I may tell the hon. Member and the House, an egg is Shs.100 each, a newspaper is Shs.50 a piece, then for 365 days; those papers which are bi-weekly, that is in 52 weeks, 104 papers - each Shs.600/- how should it cost - even us Member in this House, very few who read newspapers. (Laughter) 

So, the policy for the student of economics - I am one of them, when we built the 22 hospitals we had no money, Bank of Uganda we had no money, Uganda House we had no money, but we had money here ‘okufumba mutwe.’ Bring the money policy and then you - there is though Act 104, distribution of goods crisis, you will have to rule Uganda, but do not leave laws.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: Could you wind up, please.

MR ONGOM: Thank you.  Mr Chairman, I take the information given as a very serious one.  In fact, what I was going to say is that this is where we should work out how to alleviate this object poverty; because there is no argument that the majority of the people in Uganda are very poor.  Recent reports from UN bodies indicate that, in fact, only about 20 per cent of Ugandans earn over 70 per cent of the revenues of this country. In other words, about 80 per cent of the people - and it goes on to say that 80 per cent of the people are, in fact, getting poorer and poorer, and the indicators are there.  We are told by the same report also that infant mortality rate is one of the highest in the world; this is a result of poverty and ignorance, Mr Chairman.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the Member who is speaking now that, first of all that statement of the world bank was refuted in newspapers, therefore, it is not correct, first to take that one.  We are expecting that the minister concerned will come with a proper statement to refute that statement.  Therefore, we should not take it that the world man was giving proper information.  Secondly, many people are talking of poverty in rural areas. I would like to tell them that we the working class we are not even sending our children to school, and our children do not read; we have got a chance to speak English, we do not know whether they will speak English.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: Could you wind up, Mr Chairman, on the same point.  Mr Chairman, I am aware that the Minister refuted some of the statistics, but I thought he was being very selective, he was praising only what was praising us and refuting what was, perhaps, a fact but was against us.  I think, perhaps, that is not the way to go about these things.  I think we should admit and they have admitted here that we are poor and we need to do something about it, those statistics are only helping us to show that we are really poor.

I wanted to say something about -(Interjection)- Okay, thank you Mr Chairman.

ADJOURNMENT

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: With that we come to the end of today’s Session; we adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.

(The Council rose at 4.45 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 19 July 1995 at 2.30 p.m.)






