Wednesday, 13 July 1994

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Chairman, Mr Ekemu, in the Chair.)

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE ARCHITECTS REGISTRATION BILL, 1993

THE MINISTER FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr E. Adriko): Mr Chairman, allow me to be honoured to present to this august House, a long awaited Bill entitled, ‘The Architects Registration Bill, 1993’ for its First Reading.  I beg to move Mr Chairman.

MOTION

(General Debate continued.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, before you begin, I would like to remind you that we shall restrict the Debate to ten minutes in order to allow as many Members as possible to contribute.  So, please, restrict your deliberations to ten minutes.  Thank you.

MR FRANCIS BUTAGIRA (Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Chairman. Before I comment on the Budget, I would like to raise a matter, which also touches on the issue of development. The Rt. hon. Prime Minister was in my constituency over the weekend at a school called Katukuru for fundraising.  It was reported in the New Vision of July 11, 1994 that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister had this to say on NRC Members from Mbarara and maybe on me in particular.  He is quoted as saying that he criticised the NRC Members from Mbarara for ‘allegedly disassociating themselves from developmental activities.’  He further said that CMs ‘should transcend petty differences in political affiliation for religious denominations.’  This was a serious allegation to the effect that the MPs of the area do not associate themselves with development activities.  

I am the Member of Parliament for Rwampara where the Rt. hon. Prime Minister went.  The Rt. hon. Prime Minister’s visit was arranged in a clandestine manner without my knowledge.  We respect the Prime Minister because of his position, but it is good manners that if he is going to somebody’s constituency, that Member should be informed officially. That particular fundraising was unfortunate.  It was arranged by certain politically bankrupt politicians. (Interruption)

MR KATO WAMBI: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that even in our own constituencies upcountry elsewhere, we have had ministers and the National Political Commissar and they have never even informed us that they are visiting our constituencies.  What the Member is saying is actually true.

MR ASIKU DRATRATROU: Point of information.  Mr Chairman. I think it is a habit of NRM Government ministers to disregard Members of Parliament particularly us Back Benchers, even up to Arua, there was a proposed visit last week where a whole responsible Minister was going to address a meeting in my own place.  He made sure I was not informed.  I was taken by surprise.  I think this is not to be taken that NRM ministers tour constituencies without the knowledge of the responsible representatives.  Thank you very much.

MR BUTAGIRA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman and thank you for the information received. (Interruption)

MRS BWAMBALE: Point of information. Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform my Colleague on the Floor that I note his concern and I think we should have communication more effective.  But the procedure is, when one is visiting the district, it is normally the Chairman RC V who is actually more effective communicator, politically. (Interjection)  I am about to finish Mr Chairman.  

The chairman RC V in normal circumstances should do the communication.  Now, the second person - I thought we are trying to improve - the second person should be the NEC representative of such a district.  They should know that an important visitor is in a place.  Then the Central Government Representative on the side of security should be able to inform Members.  Now, in the Ministry of Women in Development, we have tried our level best to inform the women representatives of districts where we are going whenever we move in their districts.  We are trying our level best.  It is a pity but let us improve.

MR BUTAGIRA:  Mr Chairman, let me proceed.  The information I got from hon. Bwambale is really not useful.  It is really wrong and absurd for the Member of Parliament to be informed on radio, to hear it from radio that a certain important person is going to a constituency without his knowledge. This should be condemned.  I do not care about which method of communication they are going to employ but the Member concerned should be informed and he participates in the arrangements to welcome the big man.   

Allow me to say this.  As far as development of Rwampara County, for instance, is concerned, I have done quite a lot for this constituency.  I have six subcounties and I have in those sub-counties eight senior secondary schools, which I helped to set up.  I have two technical institutes, I have an agricultural farm school, and I am instrumental in putting up dispensaries.  Right now, last year, I put up a water project in a rural area to trap water by gravitation, which is supplying a bigger area.  I can challenge the Prime Minister if he has done so much for his Kwania Constituency. (Interruption)

MR KASAIJJA KABUUBI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor, I think Mr Chairman and hon. Members, you will recall it is not a long time back when the hon. First Deputy Prime Minister, out of sheer - he did not get the proper information, he went and said that all Members of Parliament who hail from Bunyoro-Kitara that we were endangered species. Actually, I have been forced to bring this up because this is a serious issue which reflects the inconsistencies of the senor government officials of this Movement.

MR BUTAGIRA: Mr Chairman, what I raised I think was a matter of importance.  Now, let me say this in reaction to hon. Kasaija; that I am not a sycophant.  I want to commend His Excellency the President for his tireless efforts in promoting investments in this country.  I think we have to put this on record that a Head of State who takes upon himself to undergo these regular trips in order to attract investments in this country, this is really commendable.  I can only hope that those of his ministers and the rest involved in this business are going to take up the challenge and really pursue the matter vigorously in the same manner as His Excellency has done.  While talking on investments, I notice from the budget speech that as of March 1994, 690 projects were licensed by the Investment Authority.  Of these, 268 are on the ground.  I would like to know what has happened to the rest; that is 422? Why have they not taken off? Is it because of bureaucratic red tape?  I would like to know from the Deputy Minister of Finance.  

I am restricted to the ten-minutes rule but let me say one or two things.  First of all, I would like to know whether this government has taken as a matter of priority a field like health; the health of the people of this country. If you go to the rural areas, many people are dying of multiple diseases we do not understand.  But the sad thing is that when they go to hospitals or dispensaries, they do not find medicine.  I cannot see any meaningful programme that ignores the health of people of this country.  I notice that there has been in this Budget Proposal that 15 per cent of resources - increase for 15 per cent resource for priority programme; 15 per cent according to this but really I would like to urge the government in putting priority for certain activities that health should be formal.  

The same goes for education. But we understand why these things are played down.  It is because our donors really do not put social services first.  They are emphasizing other things to the detriment of social services. There have been upheavals where there have been denied essential services, essential human rights that they are entitled to.  

So, it is meaningless to talk of the growth domestic product as increased or this thing, inflation has gone down. I would like to see it practically for a man in the village; all these figures are meaningless.  Unless he can go to the hospital and get medicine, he can travel from his place in the village to a town, he can get a road through which to pass.  These are the things that should really make meaning but not figures in the books.  

We have talked of improving agriculture.  What do we mean? What are we going to do in the field? Right as I speak now, the inputs are not affordable.  The acaricides for animals have tripled, have gone up.  The other day, I inquired about hiring an excavator to make a dam for my animals.  I was shocked when I was told by the veterinary department in Mbarara that it would cost me 20 million shillings.  These are, I understand which belong to the government but were given to a certain company and they hire them at that rate! Now, why can the government not hire those to the farmers.  Members can subsidize by paying petrol and other small maintenances but to talk of 20 million shillings - okay, Butagira maybe, I can afford it but how many can afford it in the villages? So let us be realistic.  Let us not talk from the air.  Let us go down on the ground when we are talking about improving things. 

So, what I am saying is that there should be subsidies to agriculture, to veterinary if we have really to promote the rural areas.  Along with this, our population must be really enlightened if they have to absorb these policies.  But I am amazed; the Deputy Minister for Culture and Community Development is here, what programme have they put in place for literacy campaigns?  I am asking. Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

MRS LOYCE BWAMBALE: Point of information.  I am glad Mr Chairman, that hon. Butagira is demanding that a programme on literacy campaign be implemented.  I am glad to inform him that, that programme is already in place and it is being implemented by the Ministry of Local Government under the department of community development. My Ministry is only coordinating.  I think many of you have been seeing vehicles in town here written on literacy projects.  And now that we have decentralisation in place, I would urge my colleagues hon. Members to get more in touch with your districts and see that the little that comes from Local Government is supplemented with more funds from the budget of the district.  Thank you.

MR BUTAGIRA:  Mr Chairman, I would like to recommend on this issue of literacy campaign that the effort that is being put in mchaka mchaka; that now more efforts should be directed towards literacy campaigns; less of mchaka mchaka and more of literacy campaign exercises.  I want to end, although I had many points to raise here but I would like to appeal on the Minister for Finance and Economic Planning to widen the tax base, to explore means of widening the tax base and not always to concentrate on the obvious ones; taxing drinks, taxing housing.  I think the taxes on things like drink should really be a bit lower so that they are spread and you can have more consumers and gather  taxes.  I think that is common sense.  

I would also like to appeal to the Minister for Finance and Economic Planning to reconsider having a sum reduction in the taxes that have been imposed on second-hand clothes.  Now, in the absence of other affordable sources, these second-hand clothes have been a Messiah of the villagers - even ministers I am told.  What I am saying - I do not mind taxes on them but there should be a reduction on these so that the ordinary man does not go naked.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

MR RWABIITA (Ibanda County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like comment a few points on the budget Speech of the Minister and I will start with famine and drought.  I know there exists a committee of disaster preparedness, which is supposed to be consisting of members from the Ministry of Finance, Internal Affairs, Labour and some other bureaucrats. But I wonder, every year, we have problems of famine and nobody has ever taken the seriousness of taking statistics or advising government in time to avert such seriousness of famine in our country when we sing of fertility and production in this country.  I think there must be a sincere and seriousness in trying to avert any problem in famine because Uganda - when the north is dry, the south is wet, when the south is dry, the north is wet.  So we can always exchange our food produce from one side to another but what is lacking is proper planning.  

So, I hope the Ministry of Planning plus the Ministry of Agriculture will help us not again to be heard on the world news that Uganda has got famine when we have got surpluses of food in other areas of this country.  It is a question of arranging transport and marketing information so that food can be transported from one corner to another. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Will you take the information, hon. Rwabiita?

MR RWABIITA:  Yes, Sir.

MR MUKISA MUDIRIKATI:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform hon. Rwabiita that it is not true that the Committee of disaster preparedness did not warn government in time.  When the Committee on agriculture, Animal and Fisheries Industry met two Ministry officials from both Labour and Agriculture.  We have evidence to show that the officials did a thorough job and did alert government way back in November that there were going to be a disaster.  

We have also got evidence from Members of this House, especially I have seen letters from Kitgum and from other areas way back in November, alerting government of the booming disaster.  So, the officials have actually done their work, and they even gave statistics as to how many people will be affected with this famine and made proposals how government would handle it.  I think at this stage, it would be very fair to acknowledge the work that has been done by the officials and information is available if you desire to get the facts.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR RWABIITA: Thank you for the information. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  More information.

MR ELYAU: I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that unless we have a Minister who is well versed with the people of Uganda, who have seen people of Soroti eating grass, we will never achieve objective of our interest.  Because, for example, what is the use of those silos in Jinja if the government does not take trouble to stock the food and when crisis comes that food is brought from government and is taken to the areas.  

Recently, the reason why they blamed the Minister of Relief, these people have put orders to the people in Kampala who refused to supply the food.  They would have brought the food with the money when the time for buying the food is ready that money should be delivered and food is sent to places concerned.  So, we do not have somebody who is concerned in Agriculture, he is so boastful.

MR RWABIITA:  I think that information has been received.  Mr Chairman, another concern of mine is that although we have got some storage facilities, but either they are not used or they are under utilised.  What are the stores in Jinja doing?  In Kyazanga, and in Nalukolongo?  Is there food in those stores and if there is food why can government not utilise that food, to supply to the needy?  

Another point on famine -(Interruption)

MR OBWANGOR: Point of information. I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor of the House, that in January 1993 on the occasion when the hon. House wad debating The Trade Union Bill sponsored by the Minister of Labour and Social Welfare, I did estimate on the Floor of this House to the effect that there was a silo in Kaberamaido which should be filled with food and another one in Soroti Municipality, county of which the current Minister of Labour and Social Services, he should be in a position to fill equally 12 empty go-downs warehouses in Soroti.  Government is sick, and it is high time we packed up. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please. 

MR RWABIITA:  Mr Chairman, if I could continue.  We know that the role of a body like -(Interruptions)

THE CHAIRMAN: Cries of order.

MR RWABIITA: Mr Chairman, we know that the role of a body like Produce Marketing Board would be able to buy a lot of produce when the harvest is on and they buy cheaply, keep it, and sell cheaply to the farmers or the needy when there is scarcity.  But it seems that role is not being utilised in Uganda, the stores are empty, no produce is bought and sometimes the produce from farmers rot and is eaten by weevils because of lack of system of marketing and storage.  

My third concern, is on irrigation.  For many years this has been a song, that we will start irrigation, irrigation is irrigation.  We have got so many fresh waters in this country; we do not use the water, for example, in Kasese, there is a small irrigation scheme at Mubuku River, it is about 20 years old, it has never been extended to even five miles away.  So, what is the use of that irrigation scheme if it cannot teach the people how to utilise it?  (Interruption)

MR MWANDHA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman and hon. Members, I would like to inform the House that despite the fact that we think that irrigation is going to solve our problems, it is not true.  The irrigation schemes, which we have, like the one in Mubuku has broken down completely since FAO left. The Uganda Government has never added anything to what FAO left, if anything, everything is in destruction.  So, when people talk about irrigation, to me, who is seeing what is happening, I just think they just making a song.  

MR RWABIITA:  For some of you who have been in Israel, the Sea of Galilee and River Jordan, those two waters are tapped after about 200 miles away and when get there; there is rocky soil and they have fantastic production.  We have little water here, and we cannot use it.  I think Government must be serious and start on irrigation.

I want to talk on decentralisation.  In the Minister’s speech, he talks of decentralisation and I want to report that the common person has started realising the benefits of decentralisation, but the problem is this, if Central Government is going to give effective decentralisation, it must not resign the responsibility to supervise and audit these districts; because what is happening today is that the districts now being decentralised are so much excited about the big monies they are going to get.  Unless there is straight supervision of these monies, they could end in thin air.  Just as money has been getting lost on Central Government it could easily be worse when it goes up-country. For example the 50 per cent of the education.  I do not know whether all Members are satisfied the way that money is utilised in the districts.  Now, last Budget we said that 50 per cent of the Poll tax paid in each subcounty should remain at the sub-county.  

But there are some districts where the executives have refused to release that money. Yes it is true.  Now, what do we do? And, therefore, the people, these days, they know their rights, the do not want to be taken for a ride, you go and tell them to pay tax and yet, they do not see that money.  So, I think Central Government especially Local Government should make sure that what we pass here as legislators is efficiently executed up country, otherwise people can riot especially about taxes.

Another problem we have with decentralisation, is that some districts are making exaggerated Budgets. They are paying in terms, of billions and for that matter, it causes them to give high targets to their chiefs.  In our own area Mbarara, the Financial Year of 1972/ 1973, people were paying Shs6, 000/= as one of the lowest taxes, have now up to Shs 20, 000/=; that is three times the money they used to pay and there is a bit of resistance; while here in Parliament authorised the doubling of Shs 40,000/= to 80,000/= as the highest tax.  Now, this can be caused by too ambitious Budgets by districts, which again can involve exploitation of the poor peasants.  So all that, should be supervised and accountability should be demanded from the Headquarters in Central Government.

I want to talk about external funding.  It is a very big challenge to us all, when we see His Excellency the President going to various countries requesting people to come to invest here.  But then, the ball is in our hands, especially the entrepreneurs.  If Uganda has to improve its performance in development, in industrialisation, we cannot do that with our small monies, we need what we call joint ventures to allow big companies from industrialised countries to come and invest here as long as they are assured of the returns of their investment.  

For example, if you go to China now, within the last 10 years, when there has been a lot of door policies, there is a tremendous change in their economy because of those ventures; have come from Japan, America, Italy, Britain and invested in Japan and today, Japan is not producing the so-called China, the so-called poor quality goods, but now they have international standard goods because of these international companies.  

So, let us not be too selfish, think that we can do it alone when outsiders can help us, as long as we can make proper agreements and leave them some projects in industries, Uganda will improve faster in its development rather than try to use her small monies.  The benefits of joint venture are that we get availability of capital, there is transfer of technology and then we get high standards of goods produced in our country and this can increase our export earnings, because these big companies when they get cheap labour, for example, here in Uganda, they can easily produce goods that they can export to their original countries.  I would advise that we follow that policy which will help our country to develop.  

Let me end with a point on coffee production.  From the Minister’s Budget, we expect to get 14.2 billion from the coffee from the tax above threshold and sales from sales of coffee.  But, our disappointment is that for many years now, coffee has been neglected by the Ministry concerned.  You will never see any extension staff having farmers - there are no new crops in the system, no coffee sambas, yet we are not again reaping big monies from coffee, therefore, we like a man, who milks the cow without feeding it.  I will call upon the Minister for Finance and Agriculture in particular to assist us to make sure that coffee industry is improved because it is still the first forex-earning product we have in this country.  Therefore, neglecting it, is a wrong move and mistake for our development. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Your time is up, please.

MR RWABIITA: I am winding up with a discussion on excise duties. Mr Chairman, it was good that the Minister reduced excise duties on beverages, but could even be cheaper so that more people can drink sodas, can drink beers and give more revenue by selling turn over.  But my concern is, the retailers, the bar people, the hotels; many have not reduced their prices.  I think, this is sabotage to the policy; because if they could reduce their prices in the bars and hotels, more people would drink and therefore, the country will get more income or revenue.  so, we would like the Minister for Finance to put some investigations and even penalise those who try to sabotage this policy. (Interruption)

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform my dear Friend hon. Rwabiita and through him, the people in the industry of soft drinks that if Government finds no benefit to the consumers, Government will have no cause not to revert the old tax base, because that will be the only way Government can get money and the consumers can benefit.  So, I advise them to take advantage of the reduction; otherwise, we shall be back to the old tax levels.

MR RWABIITA: Mr Chairman, with those few observations, I thank you very much.

MR ZABASAIJA (Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Allow me to make some observations in the remarks made yesterday.  Yesterday a lot was said about Uganda Commercial Bank.  Uganda Commercial Bank has not been performing well; there are reasons, but some of them are because Uganda Commercial Bank was not sufficiently capitalised. All along, Uganda Commercial Bank has been operating on a very, very small capital and whenever officials of the Uganda Commercial Bank went out of the country, on bank business, they feared to mention the capital of the bank; because if they did, the paid up capital that is - if they did, Uganda Commercial Bank would withdraw. 

Two, Uganda Commercial Bank, most of the time was run by people who were not experienced in Commercial Banking. Those who were experienced, were not strong enough to manage the bank. It is a fact that most of the branches of Uganda Commercial Bank were working on a loss; they were making losses, but also this has the management and Government to blame; because some of these Branches were put in places where there was no business at all and most of these upcountry branches -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  You will realise that you are repeating what most Members deliberated upon yesterday.  So, you should move a little faster to other points. (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I want to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that the issue of Commercial Bank is a bit complicated.  It is not actually the issue of capital; it is not the question of people, but actually mismanagement.  

Last year there was an Industrial Court Award, which actually in their conclusion said, that it was a post-mortem for the Government to act.  These people, in fact, it has been in Paper everyday, that they have been giving themselves loans and unknown banking terms, they say doubtable loans - clean loans, safe loans, to a member of management in terms of 100 million shillings and this is put on record.  

Last week, there was in the Monitor Newspaper, where a picture of a mansion was demonstrating that, in that paper, costing billion of shillings unoccupied for a whole year and half, completed, guarded by finances contributed by taxpayers and this is the money you are talking about.  It is not a question of capital.  Recently, they embarked on - they call it reducing operative costs by dismissing people who were not party to that mismanagement and they leave people who are responsible for mismanagement and continue to mismanage the institution.

THE CHAIRMAN: Your information is enough.

MR MWANDHA:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, the hon. Member is touching on a point obviously which has been discussed before, but which is very important, the Uganda Commercial Bank is a major organisation in the economy of Uganda and we as a House cannot simply allow the Commercial Bank to continue to be misdirected. 

I would like to request the Minister of Finance that in view of the concern of this House and the country at large that the closure of many of these branches, perhaps, is not very well conceived that the Minister of Finance, actually gives a statement to this House explaining what in the first instance, cause Uganda Commercial Bank to open so many branches only a few years latter now to close them and the inconvenience of very many people in this country.  I think this House is entitled to getting a full statement from the Minister of Finance.

MR ZABASAIJA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman. I fully support the policy of liberalization, especially, in the field of agricultural products but, when it comes to cotton, I think, cotton should have a special treatment.  Farmers are not going to plant cotton if they do not know the price at which they will sell cotton.  Those who can plant cotton before they know the price are those who have no alternative crops, but those who can grow simsim, groundnuts and other crops will not plant cotton unless they know the price.  So, Government had better look into this one.  You should not simply leave it to the businessmen as a liberalized commodity.  

The Seconder of the Motion yesterday mentioned about unions, he said this time unions should not frustrate the farmers.  In regard to Crop Finance, I would like to inform this House, that unions do not have money there ready to give to farmers as Crop Finance.  In any case now cotton and other crops have been liberalized.  If a union must give Crop Finance it must go to the bank and get a loan.  Now, many unions have lost money this way, and they are avoiding going to the banks to get money to lend to the farmers.  So, I would like to assure this House that unions are not going to go to banks, most of the unions, are not going to get bank to get money just for Crop Finance.  Interruption)

MR OPIO: Point of information. Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member who is a very prominent player in the Cooperative Movement as well that, it is because of the inability to get Crop Finance that Government is liberalising the marketing of cotton.  Thank you very much.

MR ZABASAIJA:  Mr Chairman, production; Government and all of us Members of this House are encouraging production, especially in the rural areas.  In the rural areas most of the people are sick.  Most of the people in the rural areas are sick, some are suffering from simple ailments, others from serious disease.  

Now, I am talking about the health of the people and I am talking about that people are so sick that they are not able to produce as effectively as they should expected.  We are not very, very clear of the policy of the Ministry of Health.  Time must come, when people are actually dying because they luck medication.  People can no longer afford medication. I feel it is high time the leaders of this country designed an Insurance Policy, so that people can be treated against insurance.  Because even the middle class - the working people are failing to treat their people, because the cost treatment is very high, and this is hindering production, people are sickly, they cannot work as hard as they should. 

When I look at the Budget, at the figures at proposals, I see that the Ministry of Defence is still leading in the expenditure of the nation.  It is about Shs72, 000,000,000/=. Now, that is the highest, next I think, is education.  I think it is high time we seriously asked ourselves why are we spending all this money on defence?  Why is defence taking all this money, are we building the Army everyday?  When you look at the history of the Ugandan Army, you will find that the Ugandan Army has never fought to defend Uganda from external aggression.  The wars are always civil wars  -(Interruption)

BRIG. KYALIGONZA: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to inform the hon. speaker holding the Floor that the Defence expenditure is accounted for; this involves the maintenance of equipment, salaries and maintenance of human beings.  In some Ministries they have Budgets where there are only catering for services, there are always differences between servicing of Government institutions and servicing human beings.  

Now, again regarding the historical fact that we have never fought a war, we have been fighting wars both psychological and physical.  Because if we are fighting internal wars, we have been fighting Lakwena war here! We were one time about to be attacked by Kenya.  If our country was weak enough we would have been run even by Kenya, but Kenya was advised do not attempt because Uganda is so strong if you do you will be ashamed.  So, it is that strength on which we as a country we are progressing, we are enjoying the peace and we have the capacity to appear that we are strong enough and, therefore, developmental.

MR ZABASAIJA: Mr Chairman, my point is even if we are fighting psychological wars I would not like to see Ministry of Defence spending more money than education, for example -(Interruption)

MR EKWARU:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform the Member holding the Floor and the whole House that it is not an accident that the Ministry of Defence had a lot allocated to it during the Budget.  I can remember very clearly when war broke the civil war broke in Teso, all the hospitals all the schools even the people were displaced.  The people who went or the force which went to the rescue of the schools; the rescue of the lives of the people was the army.  The army had to go along with foodstuff, medication, with clothes, utensils, blankets and what have you.  So, we cannot say that the Army has got a more in its Budget.  

Similarly, during the liberation war, during that time when we were being liberated, people got displaced in Mutukula even in Luwero.  So, the army had to have more money so as to help the people who were in problems!  So, I support the idea of the army having added more Budget.

LT COL BESIGYE:  Point of information. Thank you Mr Chairman, I would like to give two pieces of supplementary information; one is in respect of the statement that in Uganda the armies have not fought wars with other countries but have fought wars with their own nationals.  Fighting wars with other countries in our case it would mean that either we would attack other countries or they would attack us.  

I think one of the reasons we have not been attacked is because we have had a strong army.  A strong army is deterrence of from being attacked, even as an individual if you are a weak individual some of you were in school as weaklings you will always attack attacks.  Therefore, we have not been attacked or we have not been attacked frequently because we have been strong.

Secondly, on the question of the funds allotted to defence in the Budget, I would like to remind the hon. speaker and the House at large that -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: I am seeking clarification, please.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please. Take your Seat; give the Member a chance to finish.  Go ahead, please, hon. Member.

LT COL BESIGYE:  Mr Chairman, I would like to remind the hon. speaker and the House at large that the National Resistance Army and its Members is, I think, the Institution - the only Institution which is living in Government Institutions whose subjects are living in appalling circumstances.  I do not think there is any other department with Government workers who are living in the houses you know called Mama ingiya pole or having over their heads, who walk and do their jobs sometimes with torn uniforms and their buttocks outside, who carry their luggage for hundreds of miles and so on and so forth, all to defend this country.  

It also ought to be remembered that when the tasks that the army had to face decreased, the army embarked on a reduction in strength exercise; and as we talk we have already reduced by about 30,000 soldiers, and this exercise is still going on.  Therefore, I think that the hon. speaker on the Floor will be misleading the House to suggest that the money which is given to defence is excessive compare to the other services required elsewhere, in case without defence you cannot have a education, you cannot come here and speak even for that education nothing can move.  

Therefore, I think that he would be informed that the money is still far inadequate the Shs72, 000,000 is still far inadequate!  The soldiers who are guarding him in his district and elsewhere are still walking bare footed, without clothes, without houses and the money is inadequate, Mr Chairman.

MR ZABASAIJA:  Mr Chairman, maybe, the last informer is helping to drive my point well, because if we are spending so much money on defence and the soldiers are gong bare footed, they are going necked; where is the money going, is it being misused?  But my main point is this, it is absurd for the tax payer to contribute so much towards the maintenance of an army or Ugandan Armies which only engage most of the time in civil war.  (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Wind up your point, please.  Your time is up.

MR ZABASAIJA:  I beg your pardon?

THE CHAIRMAN: Your time is up, hon. Member.

MR ZABASAIJA: Mr Chairman, therefore, I would like to appeal to this hon. House that we should be fair in allocating monies to these ministries.  Because some ministries are taking too much money; and the example I am giving is that of Ministry of Defence.  The Ministry of Defence or the Army has been engaged in -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please, hon. Member, you are going round, round with your speech.  Will you please take your Seat?

MR LUBEGA WAGGWA (Butambala County, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Chairman, for allowing me to comment on this Budget presented by the Minister of Finance. I would like to thank the Minister for having presented this Budget, which has really pleased the manufactures, the manufactures whom I have talked to are happy, and they have started reducing the prices of their commodity.  

I would like to go straight to the Shs6, 000,000,000/= put aside in this Budget.  Some time last year the Minister when he was representing his budget he proposed that he was going to set up an agricultural bank, and now in this Budget Speech nothing has been said and yet he has put aside Shs6, 000,000,000/= to assist the peasants and the youth.  

Now, I am wondering where this money would be channeled to reach the lowest peasants farmer in my constituency.  I feel embarrassed or confused when the Minister comes in with new policies without commenting on what he promised this House.  This agricultural bank has been on for a number of yours, now the idea has been dropped and we have not been told why he is dropping this idea of coming out wish an agricultural bank.  I think the Minister when he is winding up will be able to explain as to why he has not said anything about the agricultural bank.  The farmers are eagerly waiting for that bank so that they may be assisted.  

I will go to the Ministry of Trade and Industry, the farmers are bit happy with liberalization policy especially, the coffee growers, now they are getting something about Shs1, 000/- per kilo. But the problem here is with quality, the quality of Uganda Coffee has dropped and in the near future our coffee on the international market may lose value. 

I just want to appeal to the Ministry concerned, especially the Uganda Coffee Development Authority to look at the quality of Uganda Coffee, otherwise our economy as far as coffee is concerned will be in trouble.

Secondly, on the same issue, the Coffee Marketing Board has been very, very unfair.  We passed a Bill here and instructed Coffee Marketing Board limited to extend its services to the coffee exporters, especially, those using the Bugolobi facilities.  It is unfortunate that the Coffee Marketing Board because they are in competition with the exporters they have been - the exporters have not been given the facilities as and when required.  

Going to UCB, they are supposed to give clonal coffee to the farmers and they have a programme.  They always tell the farmers on radio that coronal coffee is available, but my people whom I represent here have come to me asking me where they should get the coronal coffee, unfortunately they have very, very little coffee in the district farm institutes.  So, I think the UCDA should try to help the farmers and I see no reason why they go on Radio and call people that they have plenty of coronal coffee when it is not there!  It is better they keep quite -(Interruption)

MRS MUGARURA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the hon. Member is not sincere when he says there is not enough coronal coffee because two months ago I was in Kawanda Research Station and I carried as much as my pick up could carry and there is so much remaining.  So, it is just a matter of finding our where the crop is.

MR LUBEGA WAGWA: Mr Chairman, that is a good piece of information but the hon. Member must understand that people have to travel long distance. The question of coronal coffee, the people have to travel distances to go to Kawanda and it is very expensive Shs 300/= per -(Interruption)

MR WAGWAWABI: Point of information.  Thank you very much.  I would like to give supplementary information to hon. Member on the Floor that the Ministry of Agriculture has established coronal coffee nurseries in the coffee growing areas and these are many it is not only at Kawanda.  Let the hon. Member find out where they are in his constituency.

MR LUBEGA WAGWA:  Mr Chairman, I hope I will get more time to contribute. I cannot allow such information.  Let me say something about the Cotton Unions, I think Government have been very, very unfair to Cotton Unions that they have been mismanaging their affairs.  While it is Government that has made those unions fail; how?  Because they have been selling their cotton under-priced.  The agricultural secretariat in the Bank of Uganda has been feeding the Government with wrong information; and there are letters written by unions that they are selling their cotton at very, very low prices; and Government has been quiet until recently when it came out and said the unions are mismanaged this is wrong. (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information. Mr Chairman, the information I would like to give is that the point raised by the hon. Member on the Floor is very important.  Sometime back, I raised the same issue here, how Government is failing unions. A case in example is the area in my district. You remember Rwenzori Growers Co-operative Union. Its coffee was taken long ago and this coffee had been bought on loans from the bank, this union has never been compensated; and the loan has accumulated such that now the union is actually left to the tune of over Shs 200, 000,000. It cannot afford to operate.  So, the Government should rescue these unions whose coffee was taken.

MR OKODI:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, the point the Member is labouring is very important and it is valid.  Last seasons, farmers from Lango sold their cotton to private buyers from Tororo.  These people were offering as much as 400/= per kilogram of seed cotton: while the government recommended price is very much below that and therefore, the member has given in a very valid point.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR OLUM: The people in the Agricultural Secretariat in the Bank of Uganda are professionals.  They do take a lot of research and surveys and I would rather advise the hon. Member on the Floor to come out with alternative costs of production so that we can arrive at the right cost.  It will be wrong for us here to take it that government is deliberately trying to under price Uganda cotton.  I think, at this point, I would rather caution my Colleague holding the Floor that unless you can produce really concrete figures to show that you have a better cost of production to arrive a better figure; I think it will be wrong for Members and the public to take it that the government is deliberately under pricing Uganda cotton.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR LUBEGA WAGWA:  Mr Chairman, I was with the cotton ginners.  I presented their figures and they have never agreed with the Agricultural Secretariat.  They have figures, until recently, when the government liberalised this crop.  So, the figures are there, I can give a copy to my Friend who is the chairman of the Agricultural Committee to compare.  Now, Mr Chairman,  -(Interjection) 

Let me talk about the Ministry of Agriculture very briefly. The Ministry of Agriculture has not facilitated its field staff.  They have been posting people to our constituencies - those who are not facilitated and they cannot stay there.  For example, if you post somebody in my Constituency, there is no house!  I think the Minister of Agriculture should now consider putting up houses for the field staff.  The services are wanted there but the people cannot render the services because they have nowhere to live.  

Secondly, they should be given transport, simple transport like bicycles.  Because if you post somebody in the subcounty, he cannot walk on foot for about 8 miles and expect him to do some work.  They should be facilitated.  

Another point on agriculture.  I think time has come to reconsider ordering tractors.  People cannot use the ordinary hoe to do anything for them.  I think it is high time for the ministry to consider that area.  

Now, let me talk about the national economy.  (Interjection) Let me talk about the national economy.  I tend to agree with the Minister that the economy is improving but the question with my people is that, I have seen people putting up houses that are very good.  I have seen people buying bicycles and what have you but some of them when you talk to them in another corner; they say they are very poor.  I think this idea of saying the national economy is growing - there must be something wrong because some people in the same area are very rich while others are very poor.  I think there is an imbalance in the economy of our country.  I want to ask -(Interruption) 

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, as Members have noted, I do not want to interrupt anybody’s speech because I am busy taking down the strong points which you are making but allow me to give information on one basic thing which may help us to understand our figures so that you can know about growth and how the figures are collected so that you can start appreciating the reflection of these figures.  

First of all it is not correct to say that the statistics, which indicate economic growth, are drawn from the towns of Kampala, Mbarara, Jinja, Masaka and Mbale.  Economic growth is measured by changes in Gross Domestic Product at constant prices.  These statistics are calculated on a nation-wide basis.  For example, estimates of crop, livestock and fish production are obtained from the points of operations under the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.  Coffee Production from Coffee Development Authority.  Manufacturing Production form returns from a considerable number of industrial establishments spread across Uganda.  Education and so on measured all-over Uganda.  In addition, a great deal of information is derived from Household surveys to get this growth - is on Household surveys: how people have lived within their own houses.  In addition to household surveys of income, expenditure and consumption, more over, they cover both monetary production and also non-monetary production.  

So, these figures are not collected to measure inflation.  They are collected as a household in order to reflect whether there has been any growth.  Maybe, 4 per cent growth in a recovery programme like this; may not materially show on people compared on their old style of life; but that one does not mean there has been that minimal change.

MR LUBEGA WAGWA:  Mr Chairman, let me thank the Deputy Minister for the piece of information he has given.  But the fact is, there may be some defects in the surveys.  So, the government must look into it again.  

Finally, let me end by saying that the people of my Constituency have been hit by a water problem like other Members who have already said.  Two of my sub-counties, there is no water, namely, Ngando, Buloba and Buddo.  So, the Ministry should look into it.  Again, I go back to my request that electricity is a problem. I want the Minister to look into it and take at least a line to some of these sub-counties so that people who are planning to put there small scale industries may use that facility.  

Finally, the close of UCB is unwelcome idea.  People are opposed to that idea because of the time given to them. They should be given ample time to raise the Shs 200, 000,000/= as deposit.  Then, these - (Interjection) - I am sorry to say that before this Bill is debated here, it is being implemented according to the speech of the Minister.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR LUKWAGO:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I was perturbed yesterday when I read in the newspapers a minister attacking another minister.  The fact is, the Minister of Labour is not responsible to control the African Mosaic in cattle. The Minister of Labour is not responsible for the early warning system.  The Ministry of Labour is not responsible for storage of foodstuffs in this country.  To me, it seemed as if the Minister of Agriculture wanted to be a scapegoat about this matter of food production. 

I would like to bring to the attention of this House, that in this country we have six irrigation schemes, which are closed; unoperational.  I can even mention them.  Atera is in Apach, Nabori is in Soroti, Ongom in Lira, Kige is in Kamuli, Mobuku in Kasese and Kibimba Rice Scheme in Iganga.  The country is already in problems I can assure this country - Namalere Mechanised Research Station is abandoned: as we speak now. (Interruption)

MR MUKISA:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform the speaker holding the Floor that as we talk now, Kibimba is actually bleeding to total death.  Right now the management there has resorted to selling each and every asset they found there in the name of paying debts and they are not paying any debt.  Some people have expressed interest in buying it are being discouraged by management for fear of losing their jobs.  The situation is pathetic and I think if nothing is done, we are going to totally lose everything that we have there.

MR LUKWAGO:  Thank you for that information -(Interruption)

MISS ALIU:  Thank you Mr Chairman. I would like to inform the speaker holding the Floor that we should stop even thinking about Kige.  It is in bed waiting burial.  I would further like to inform this House that on the 30th of November, 1989; the President directed the Kige Citrus Scheme, Kasule Stock Farm and Buyinde Stock Farm be divested from government - 30th November, 1989.  The Ministry of Agriculture agreed and had done nothing.  So, there is nothing in Kasolwe; Buyende Stock Farm - there is no Stock.  Please, there is nothing in Kige.  Forget about it.

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform the speaker on the Floor for his out of dated information.  Because Ongom Citrus is sighted as an example - is long dead and Atera Scheme is not there and furthermore, I would like some clarification from him; whether what irrigation schemes he is quoting, are operational at the moment to make it very realistic?

MR LUKWAGO:  I thank all the information. I was aware that these irrigation schemes are not operational and yet the country invested a lot of money into these irrigation schemes.  When you happen to go to Namalere and what you will see in Namalere, there are four brand new D3 Bull Dozers acquired from Japanese Grant.  3 brand new Bull Dozers handed over to the Ministry in 1991.  They are not working and they were acquired for bush clearing.  Then, we as a Committee of Ministry of Agriculture, we have addressed all these problems but to my dismay - maybe, some of these ministers do not read our reports and no action has been improved upon.  We have addressed ourselves -(Interruption)

MR NASASIRA:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I wanted clarification from the hon. speaker holding the Floor when he says D3 Bulldozers are not working. Does he mean they were not working when they visited Namalere.  They have never worked since they came from the Japanese grant or they have never worked because there has been no work for them?

MR LUKWAGO:  I will clarify this one.  These newly acquired machines are just stationed in an open space whereby they have never been utilised at all.  The farmers, cannot even afford the cost these people have put it up. (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  May I inform the speaker on the Floor and the House that actually I am one of those who visited Namalere and was told that new machines are old for this country.  That is why they are not being used.  They cannot be used here.

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information. I would like to inform the House that Ministry of Works and Transport is a very varied question and maybe for clarification, I would like to say that these tractors since they were acquired, they were just taken to Namalere and put to - since then they have never been used.  They are brand new. Nobody knows.  Well, I brought this to the attention of Government for the last two and half years; but these tractors can be utilised even for ploughing especially the sugar estates can use them for ploughing.  They can be used for dam making but all these tractors are depreciating at a very high rate.  In fact, if they continue to sit in that position as of now, they may as well be written off and all that money will just be thrown out into the ocean.  Thank you very much.

MR LUKWAGO:  Mr Chairman, I am right.  The issue of food security was addressed by the Committee.  In our last two reports and our recommendations, we addressed this food security - that the country will be in trouble and we even asked the Ministry of Finance to avail funds to stock some of these stores but to our dismay, as we speak now - there is no any grain to be given to the people of this country.
ADJOURNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, this Debate will continue tomorrow at 2.30 p.m. I now adjourn the House accordingly.

(The Council rose at 4.45 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 14  July 1994 at 2.30 p.m.)


