Thursday, 15 July 2004

Parliament met at 2.46 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this meeting. Today, Parliament is hosting district speakers, deputy speakers and chairpersons of committees in the districts of the Central region for a half-day seminar, which has been organized here in Parliament. I want on your behalf to welcome the distinguished speakers and deputy speakers to Parliament. You are most welcome. (Applause) I believe they will be able to report to us whether we are carrying on our work favourably.

Honourable members, we have also in the strangers’ gallery the students of Kabojja Junior School. Among them is Festus Simon Walube, son of our Editor of the Hansard; their teachers accompanied them. You are most welcome. (Applause) I think the father will be able to record that in the Hansard. (Laughter)

This is to inform you honourable members and Parliamentary staff that today there will be the official launch of the Parliamentary Co-operative Savings and Credit Society, by His Excellency the President at 5.00 p.m. at the International Conference Centre, Room C. You are all invited to this ceremony. Tomorrow there will be the annual general meeting of the society in the members’ lounge and a dinner dance thereafter, which will be attended by the patron of the society.

Perhaps before you begin, hon. Otto, I have to adjust the Order Paper so that item 4 becomes item 3.

STATEMENT

2.52
MR ODONGA OTTO (Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to make a statement on the headline of today, which reads, “Kony’s top planner captured”. As a Member of Parliament from the war affected areas, I want to publicly and officially congratulate the UPDF for such an achievement. (Applause)

I give my compliments because I have been keenly following the leading role Brigadier Banya was playing in the LRA. He is the main man with a sound brain that was in that LRA business, and you have seen his profile in the paper. And if he surrendered to the UPDF because of pressure, this is a commendable job because personally I know what it takes to encounter 135 LRA fighters and escorting the 15 in command.  

In the newspaper they quoted him saying that the UPDF was highly trained. But what disappointed me a little bit, Mr Speaker, is that he blamed collaborators who were telling him not to come out because the Government would kill him. I want to make a special and public appeal that we want peace at any cost. For those who have vested interests in war, we have already lost a generation in Northern Uganda; we beg them to stop and desist from such activities. (Applause)

Finally, Mr Speaker, I have spent 18 years of my 27 years in war. But there are also those who have spent 18 years of their 18 years in war, and in the next election they will vote. So, they have no reference to any peaceful background. Unless we end this problem now, we are breeding a whole generation of those who do not see the benefits of peace. I urge Government to make good use of Brigadier Banya, who was the second-in-command to Kony, to demobilize the entire LRA fighters so that they may come home; they should make good use of him.

Specifically, I want to thank Brig. Commander, Lt Col Isaac Ndaula, who commanded this operation and made them come out with a high profile person. We pray that the war ends and we have peace so that we may do other things the way other people from Kamwenge and other places are also doing. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Otto, thank you for this positive statement. I hope it will impact positively again.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE, WATER (Mrs Maria Mutagamba): Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, I stand here to make a statement to Parliament on the alleged payment of Shs 750 million and the new contract of Shs 2.5 billion to Messrs Basangira Building Contractors.  

Mr Speaker, reference is made to the press reports, which appeared in the Monitor newspaper of Monday, 5 July 2004 on page 1 entitled, “Government pays Shs 750 million to Messrs Basangira Building Contractors Ltd by the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment. Ministry defies the IGG, pays Shs 750 million on a botched project.” And the Monitor newspaper of Wednesday, 7 July 2004 on page 1, entitled “Valley Dam farm gets 2.5 billion contract.” Sir, I got instruction from the Prime Minister to make this Statement.

I wish to state that this payment is in respect of the project, which was part of the water component of former livestock services project under the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF). Its objective was to improve the production and productivity of the livestock through the provision of adequate water by constructing and rehabilitating surface reservoirs in selected, strategic areas of the drought in the cattle corridor. Construction contracts were awarded by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and work commenced in December 1997.  

Mr Speaker, Messrs Basangira Building Contractors, in brief, BBC, was contracted to rehabilitate and construct seven dams and two valley tanks in the districts of Nakasongola, Kiboga, Mubende, and Sembabule, for a contract sum of Shs 1,817,292,883 only. 

Messrs Afro Building and Electrical Contractors Ltd (ABEC) was contracted to rehabilitate and construct six dams in the districts of Mbarara, Ntungamo and Nakasongola, for a contract sum of Shs 944,805,801.  

Following the concerns raised by Parliament - that is the Sixth Parliament at that time - the Inspector General of Government carried out investigations on the valley dams and tanks constructed by Messrs Basangira Building Contractors, among others. The IGG made a number of recommendations including the following:  

(i) That the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries re-negotiates with Messrs Basangira Building Contractors Ltd to undertake the completion of the contract. 

(ii) That Messrs Afro Building and Electrical Contractors be terminated. 

(iii) Procure another contractor to complete the remaining works of Afro Building and Electrical Contractors. 

(iv) Government strives to recover overpayments made to Basangira Building Ltd Contractors amounting to Shs 544 million. Of course I am referring to Basangira, Afro Building and Electrical Contractors Ltd also had its overpayments but this time I am concentrating on Basangira.

Mr Speaker, hon. Members of Parliament, in addition to that, Cabinet through its minute 114 (CT 2000) recommended the transfer of the livestock services project from the Ministry of Agriculture to my Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment. Following the hand over of the project, cash balances of US $12,000 and Shs 248 million were transferred – and the transfer of the water for production portfolio was made from the Ministry of Agriculture to the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment. My ministry took the following action in order to continue with the implementation of the activities that were handed over by the Ministry of Agriculture:

(a) We disbursed funds totalling to Shs 245 million to 26 districts to construct 49 small valley tanks in accordance with the recommendations of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.  

(b) We undertook the procurement of services to rehabilitate Mabira and Kodukul dams, Mabira is a valley dam in Mbarara district and Kodukul is a valley dam in Kumi district, which were completed in September 2001 and September 2003 respectively.  

(c) We engaged, through the central tender board, a consultant to do the following in respect of the former livestock services project:  

1.Carry out the evaluation of the works done.

2.Carry out assessment of the final accounts.

3.To prepare a report of the consolidated recommendations, strategy and action plan for resolving the outstanding issues of the previous contract and reviving the project in order to complete the 15 dams that begun under the former livestock services project.

The study of the consultant made the following recommendations:

1.Observed that work stalled for one year for reasons that were explained by the IGG report;

2.Prepared a status report and further observed that most of the regional work will have to change;

3.Recommended changes in designs of the dams;

4.Prepared new bills of quantities in line with the new designs;

5.Recommended that Messrs Basangira be paid Shs 528,784,544.00 for their completed works, their other outstanding claims and counter claims against them (by Government). This total sum was verified and assessed as outlined below. I hope, honourable members have this one but I will go through it one by one. So, this is how we arrived at the figure. 

Those were the dams that were constructed by Basangira and he had done a job, which had exceeded the contract sum because the total contract sum was Shs 2,139,503,690. The original contract sum was Shs 1.8 billion of which by the time the IGG intervened after the instruction of the Sixth Parliament, Basangira had been paid a total sum of Shs 1,709,509,759 only. After all the deductions that you see below -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Why do you say, “only”? Anyway, proceed.

MRS MUTAGAMBA: After all the deductions, we came up with a figure, or the consultant came up with a figure of Shs 528,779,544 only. This was the money we were instructed to pay.  

I wish to note that the contractor proceeded with work on the basis of the recommendation of the IGG. If I may put it clearly, Mr Speaker, after the contractor had been made to stop for one year, the recommendation of the IGG was that the Ministry of Agriculture should re-negotiate with Basangira so that he completes work and this is what they did. Basangira went back to work and he completed the work by verification - I will explain that later. So, he proceeded with work on the basis of the recommendations of the IGG under the supervision of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. The engineers of the Ministry supervised the work and the work they did was on Wabale dam, Kasejjere dam, Rwamakara dam, and they were verified and certified as substantially completed.  

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF) inspected the three dams and recommended payment for the work done, plus the release of 50 percent of the retention money for the three sites. By the time of compiling the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment technical adviser verification report in 2002, that is, three years after the Inspector General of Government (IGG), the above certified payment had not been effected. 

Basangira Building Contractors also had been instructed by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to work on Kyambidde, Rwemitongole Dam and Dyangoma dam. Again, it was found that he had substantially completed. And by the time of the completion of the technical advisers’ verification report in 2002, payment in respect of his works had not been effected. It is these unsettled payments, which had led to Government at that time, that is 2002, to be in debt as opposed to being owed by Basangira Building Contractors, which the IGG had identified.  

It is also important to note that as per the construction contract between Basangira and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, these delayed payments would attract interest and special damages, which were left to be computed and presented to the contractor at a later date.

Clarification on alleged payment of Shs 750,000,000 to M/s Basangira: Mr Speaker, I wish to clarify that the Ministry did not pay Shs 750 million as alleged in the newspapers. It is also not correct that the payment is in respect of the “botched project” as stated.  

The correct information is that the payment in question is in respect of monies due to Messrs Basangira Building Contractors Ltd for works executed under the livestock services project, transferred to the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the recommendation of the IGG, the MAAIF Parliamentary Select Committee, 1999, and Cabinet through their minute of 114 (CT 2000). What I am saying is that, what we are effecting as a ministry is the transferred debt from the Ministry of Agriculture on the recommendation of the IGG, the Parliamentary Select Committee and the Cabinet under the various documents mentioned here. This was intended to give my ministry a situation -(Interjections)- may I be protected, Sir? Can I continue?

THE SPEAKER: Order, please.

MRS MUTAGAMBA: The report of the consultant was used as the reference in a joint meeting that was held in June. In fact to be precise, it was held on 21 June 2001 between the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. I remember there was a representative from the Office of the Prime Minister, although it is not put here, in charting a way forward to complete the project.  

The meeting also considered the recommendation of the IGG. The IGG’s report and that of the consultant, therefore, formed the basis for the Solicitor-General’s advise to the committee, which was as follows:

(i) That Messrs Basangira Building Contractors be allowed to complete the remaining 10 percent works. 

ii) That Government should pay the outstanding dues to Basangira Building Contractors Ltd and;

iii) That Government should terminate the Afro-Builders and Electrical Contractors’ contract.

iv) We procure another contractor to complete the remaining works of Afro-Builders and Electrical Contractors.

Honourable members, arising from the above advice, the following was done:

Messrs Basangira Building Contractors was paid his outstanding dues amounting to Shs 409,117,817 on 22 August 2000. The sum of Shs 119,366,727 had been retained or was retained as a performance guarantee, which should have been paid in six months or one year after the completion of the contract. Members, I wish to note that it is about four years since the last certificate was paid and retention fees should have been accordingly paid to the claimant, but have never been paid.  

Furthermore, it is in accordance with contract No. 17/2097 signed between the Government of Uganda and Messrs Basangira Contractors Ltd for construction and rehabilitation of valley dams and tanks and related works dated 27 September 1997. Section 4(3)(1) states that: “If the employer” - I want the honourable members to note that, “If the employer makes a late payment, the contractor shall be paid interest on the late payment in the next payment.  Interest shall be calculated from the date from which the payment should have been made to the date when the payment should have been made at the prevailing rates of interest of commercial borrowing for each of the currencies in which payments are made.” This is in the contract agreement, page 22.

In view of the above, my ministry was merely complying with the conditions of the contract on dams and valley tanks’ construction under the livestock services project awarded to Basangira Building Contractors by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. Accordingly, Messrs Basangira Building Contractors wrote to the ministry threatening court action.  

In view of the above, my ministry sought for legal opinion on this matter from the Solicitor-General’s office. In their letter, Messrs Basangira Contractors’ lawyers were protesting delay in completion of the works and demanding Shs 756,067,436 being deductions of previous payments, that is, retention against performance bond, interest on delayed payments, and the payment of Shs 119 million. They also wanted special damages for costs incurred during the unlawful disruption of the contract, which amounted to Shs 249 million, and were threatening legal action to proceed with hearing civil suit No. 299 of 2001 in case of lack of response. The legal advice from the Solicitor-General’s office instructed us to pay the said money.  

Mr Speaker, honourable members, this is to indicate to you that the said amount of money is legally owed to the contractor by the Government, and Government is under duty to pay. I, however, wish to point out that the payment of Shs 750 million was not effected. In fact, the correct amount due to Basangira Building Contractors Ltd is Shs 756,067,436 only. So far my ministry has issued a cheque of Shs 500 million to Messrs Basangira Contractors. I want to stress that this payment was made before the IGG intervened. It is, therefore, not correct to say that the Ministry defied the IGG, because the order had at that time not been given. 

The balance of Shs 256,067,436 was yet to be prepared by the Ministry when the IGG intervened. I want to point out here that this money was sourced from other programmes in the water sector – while it is a domestic arrear. I hope that the Ministry of Finance will release a supplementary request to make a refund to the programmes affected.

The alleged Shs 2.5 billion contract to valley dam firm - Ms Basangira Building Contractors: In the Monitor newspaper of 7 July 2004 there was a story: “Valley dam firm gets Shs 2.5 billion contract” by Grace Matsiko, Kampala. The controversial valley dam firm, Basangira Building Contractors Ltd has won another, very big contract totalling Shs 2.5 billion …” 

Mr Speaker, honourable members, the Ministry wishes to clarify that:

Arising from the concerns raised by the Sixth Parliament and the public over the construction of the dams, the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment engaged a consultant to review the design, assess works already completed without supervision, and related costs of the completed dams.

In view of the IGG’s recommendation for re-negotiation with MS Basangira Building Contractors to continue and complete the works, a request to negotiate with Ms Basangira Building Contractors was presented to the contracts committee in their 26th meeting, which was on 16 May 2003, and it was approved.
 
A document of the new bills of quantity for nine valley dams and tanks was sent to MS Basangira Building Contractors to quote after which negotiations with the ministry followed. The report of the negotiations with Ms Basangira Building Contractors Ltd was approved on 4 February 2004. The contracts committee approved the award for completion of works of the nine dams and valley tanks under the former Livestock Services Project No. CR 2176 - UG-IFB 17, to Ms Basangira Building Contractors at a contract sum of Shs 2,523,193,938 only. The foregoing amount arises out of the following circumstances:

(i) Increase in price of fuel and that of the dollar, which is almost twofold.

(ii) Deterioration of works.

(iii) Poor original designs that have been fundamentally improved.

(iv) Inclusion of a contingency and taxes not provided for under the original contract. 

However, to date no contract has been signed between the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment and Ms Basangira Building Contractors. Reason being that the political leadership of the ministry feels that this is a new and bigger job with new design and therefore tendering should be open to competition whereby Basangira is free to participate.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, honourable members, -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Order, please.

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Mr Speaker, honourable members should note that: 

It is not unusual to overpay a contractor in the interim, and I want to emphasize “in the interim”, provided balances are reached at the end of the contract. So, what I want to bring out here is that Basangira may have been overpaid at the time the IGG made the report but the contract had not been fulfilled.

After the IGG’s report the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries was instructed by the IGG to: 

(i) Re-engage Basangira Building Contractors to complete works, and as such the Ministry of Agriculture authorized Basangira Building Contractors to go back on site and complete works under the supervision of the Ministry of Agriculture engineers. They verified works on Wabale, Kasegyere and Rwamakara. 

(ii) Again the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries instructed Basangira to complete Kyambidde, Rwemitongole and Dyangoma dams. Basangira Building Contractors did the work but verification documents were not provided by supervisors.

(iii) The portfolio of the Livestock Services Project funds was transferred to the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment with the sum of Shs 248 million and a dollar account of US $12,000. 

(iv) I want to state further that to date the contract is not terminated because we have not paid Basangira fully.

The way forward:

My ministry recommends to the IGG to defreeze the cheque of Shs 500 million to Basangira in order to stop further loss through courts of law or litigation. 

Mr Speaker, as I speak now I have a written communication from the lawyers of Basangira giving me seven days to act or they will go back to the civil suit.

We are asking the Minister of Finance to originate a supplementary to this House to cover domestic arrears as the funds in question are encroaching on the water sector’s current financial year budget, and we all know water is life. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Sorry, we have not yet rectified the problem of the public address system so you have to come down here again.

3.15
MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI (Ibanda County South, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I need a few clarifications from the minister. First clarification; the IGG directed that the Livestock Services Project contract be terminated, not be given to Ms Basangira. I do not know whether the ministry went ahead to call BBC and negotiate so that they take over the contracts of the Livestock Services Project without tendering it? We know very well under our tendering system a contract sum of more than Shs 100 million must go through the tendering system. Under which law was your ministry acting?  

Point No. 2, in contracts the liability period is clearly stated. On page 6 you are indicating that performance guarantee - which I am sure is performance bond - should have been paid in six months or one year. What sort of contract has two liability periods, because usually a liability period is a fixed period?  

In your calculations, the money, which was paid to BBC - this is on page 4 - you went ahead to give BBC the retention money and I am sure this is defects liability money. Usually this is paid after the liability period has expired, which is, in this case I think one year. But you went ahead, before he even completed the contract, to pay the retention money. Under which law were you doing that? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.20
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to pose a question that, does this government have shame? I am asking this because this contract of Basangira almost caused the then Vice-President to lose her position in Government and if this government has shame and respects public opinion, you would not go ahead to re-negotiate this contract and continue dealing with Basangira. Look at President Bush; he had to hand over Saddam because of public opinion, which is very important. Do we have shame; do we respect public opinion?

Two, Mr Speaker, does the Government have a problem in the current contract and procurement legislation, because it seems Government is losing a lot of money simply because I think our team that draws contracts does not measure to the required standards, or our pieces of legislation regarding procurement and contracts are defective. Because if the IGG directed re-negotiation, did it say that we should re-negotiate and Basangira takes the upper hand again or we could have re-negotiated to our advantage? Why did they fail to re-negotiate to our advantage? Is it because of the procurement –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, sorry to interrupt, but let us address ourselves to the statement here; either it is the truth or it is not the truth. Because if you look at the second page of the statement, paragraph 4 says, “Following concerns raised by Parliament at the time, the Inspector General of Government carried out investigations on the valley dams and tanks constructed by Basangira Building Contractors. The IGG made a number of recommendations, including that Ministry of Agriculture re-negotiates…” - I think this was a directive from the IGG. Either it is true or it is not true. That is how I think you have to deal with this statement; either it is accurate or it is not accurate. If it is accurate, then you address the issue. But according to the statement, it is the IGG who said we should re-negotiate with Basangira. You have to study that one.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, hon. Speaker. If the IGG recommends re-negotiation, do we re-negotiate to our advantage or to our disadvantage? I think the re-negotiation has been to our disadvantage, that is why I am seeking clarification from the Minister, do we have a problem in our procurement legislation or the capacity of our team that negotiates? Thank you.

3.25
MR BADRU KATONGOLE (Kyaka County, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am wondering why the intended construction of valley dams and tanks by Government normally tends to end up in trouble. In this case I am referring to intended provision of water to my constituency. Reliable information indicates that the budget for the Department of Water for Production in the Directorate of Water and Development has been cut, but already a consultant M/S Norplant had been got and was, this financial year, supposed to carry out design and procurement in respect of the project. 

However, I understand that one has now come to naught and the consultant may end up taking Government to court. So, I am wondering as to what Government is going to do to make sure that it does not always land in trouble whenever it is intending to construct valley dams and tanks? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.27
MS ALICE ALASO (Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like clarification from the Minister, arising from page 7. The Minister talks about the last paragraph where the IGG intervenes, and before that she gives us a chronology of events. She says the IGG made recommendations and then payment was made. Then the same IGG came up to oppose the payment; he intervened. I am wondering, what is missing in this statement? 

Because, if it is the IGG who recommended and then the same IGG wakes up one morning and says “stop the payment”, is there something wrong that the Minister is not telling us? Or has something gone wrong with the IGG? Is there some underhand dealing somewhere, which is not being put to us?  

Secondly, on page 8 the Minister says, “I want to point out here that this money was sourced from other programmes in the water sector.” Could the Minister be kind enough to tell this House, which programmes in the water sector have been affected by this payment so that it is easier for some of us to, at the end of the day, explain that the money the House passed in the last financial year was diverted to the payment of some debt, which is not very clear?  

Lastly, I want to know how or what happens when a contractor exceeds a contract because she said the contract exceeded. What was being done then? Was he doing some work, which he was not initially authorized to do? And then who gave him the mandate to do work, which was outside the contract? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: It maybe necessary to clarify this to direct the trend of debate. The Minister can now respond to these points so that we continue with the debate.

3.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE, WATER (Mrs Maria Mutagamba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and honourable members for raising the questions so far.  

Hon. Byabagambi was doubting whether the IGG recommended that we re-negotiate with Basangira. You saw me getting up, I thought I had laid the report of the IGG on the Table, but I will call for it, and I will lay it here on the Table. 

In the executive summary (xiii), page 8, the IGG summarized his recommendations. In the same report on page 49, those of you who may have a chance to look at it, you will look at the recommendations of the IGG. As I put it in my statement, at the time the IGG inspected and made a report on this work, there was seemingly overpayment to Basangira, of over Shs 544 million. But when the consultant went to evaluate - and I want to point out that when he made that statement, he also recommended in that report that in order not to lose time and money, the Ministry of Agriculture should re-negotiate with Basangira to complete the ten percent work that had not been done. You will find that one specifically in his report. 

As such, on that recommendation the Ministry of Agriculture went ahead and instructed Basangira to go back and do the work. He started with the first three dams, which I have mentioned in my report, and he was supervised by engineers from the Ministry of Agriculture. They verified his work, certified it and the certificates are there. But to date, those certificates are not paid. 

They went further and instructed him to continue with another three, which I have also mentioned here. Basangira went back on site and did the work, and was supervised again by engineers from the Ministry of Agriculture. Unfortunately, they have put it here, by the time the consultant made the report in 2002, the verification and certification of the last three dams could not be traced. As such my ministry that had taken over the portfolio had difficulty verifying them and that is why we had that delay. Although the money was transferred, we had to get all the necessary documents and when we failed to get them, that is why we referred the case to the Solicitor-General.
 
Again, hon. Byabagambi talked about liability period. Yes, there were differing periods of liability, some were six months depending on the size or the volume of work, others were one year and during that period we hold a certain amount of money of the contract sum until we are sure that after that period, nothing has gone wrong. We held that money for Ms Basangira until the year expired. When it expired, because that was a year that was stipulated and we had not paid, of course they started calculating interest and the damages. 
Hon. Ekanya, my son, asked whether the Government has no shame. Good enough we are in this government and we are all in it. I would actually feel ashamed to stand here and say anything that we are not ashamed, but the law is law. Yesterday, hon. Sabiiti was accusing Government that we do not respect institutions. My ministry has been respecting institutions, we are between the IGG and the Solicitor-General. The IGG recommended and we are implementing; the Solicitor-General advised that we pay, and we are paying. So, we are all in it. (Applause).  

Hon. Katongole is wondering; what is the problem with valley dams? Of course the problem is that this is something new with us, it was done in the 1960s by the colonial masters and unfortunately it has taken me to the global arena to demand for that information that was taken away by the colonialists because we do not have that information anywhere. So, whatever is being done now is something that we are trying to act on afresh. However, it also involves –(Interruption)

MR BASALIZA ARAALI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform the honourable minister that I was RDC Mubende and there were a good number of valley dams, which were constructed by the Kabaka and not by the colonialists.

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Thank you very much, honourable member. And you are right, but I do not think it was the Kabaka who constructed those valley dams. It was some other engineers and they were colonial engineers and I want to challenge you and anybody in this House to find me records of those valley dams and valley tanks, because -(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As far as I know we have qualified engineers in this country; we also have some in this House. I would like to understand better from the Minister, whether there was something unique about the designs that the colonialists used in construction of dams, and whether in this case of the terms under quotation, there were no designs at all that were used to carry out the construction of that work?

COL. OTAFIIRE: Mr Speaker, there is an old saying that it is only a stationary car that does not raise dust. In the process of doing these things, even engineers make mistakes. Those of us in charge politically make mistakes, the engineers make mistakes, and occasionally even the House here has omissions. Perhaps what we would like to share with our hon. Members of Parliament is that there were two firms, which were being investigated by the IGG: Basangira Building Contractors and Afro Building and Electrical Contractors. Those were the firms involved in the then Ministry of Agriculture saga. 

One of the firms was condemned and dismissed by the IGG, but Basangira was vindicated, and there is no way we could condemn a man who had been proved innocent. That is why the IGG recommended that this man be paid, they should not be prejudiced in the contract, and indeed the Ministry of Agriculture did exactly that and handed it over to us. 

It would have been prudent if maybe those who are anxious about this payment had crosschecked with us because what the IGG recommended should be recovered was overtaken by events. Maybe the IGG should have crosschecked with us about what was going on and there would have been an explanation, and the matter would have ended there.  

Members of the press, it is very good to highlight issues of wrongdoing in Government, but please, we are around; before you write, before you cause anxiety, talk to us. Before you print a bad image of our government and our country, please talk to us. I would not want somebody to write something that is going to be a bit unpleasant to look at later on. We are partners in this country; we are not enemies. Uganda was here before us, it is here with us, and it will be there when we are all gone. (Laughter).

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Mr Speaker, honourable members, I want to thank my senior minister for that intervention. I am sure members –(Interjection)- on which one now, on him or my statement?  

MR GAGAWALA: Mr Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the Minister who has been on the Floor. It can be to both, because it is something, which I think will benefit the House. When the Minister was vetting these contractors, was he basing it on a list of classified contractors according to the grade, which had been gazetted by the Ministry of Works? Can I repeat, Mr Speaker? It appears the Minister has not got me properly?  

For the sake of clarification and making it abundantly clear that the ministry is executing its obligation, I would like the ministers to clarify something to this House. Did they actually seek for the list of the contractors who have been registered by the Ministry of Works, and who have been classified in different categories, to take work of different volumes? If that was done, then that would be okay.
Secondly I would like to be clarified by the Minister, this contract started some time back, maybe more than a year or two ago – or even five years, why has it been necessary for this subject to be discussed today in this House? Has this contract been going through the committee, which supervises this ministry, or has the committee not been doing its work? I would like the Minister to clarify to me.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us be fair to this subject before us. There is a statement by Minister Mutagamba, of a different ministry. From her statement, the account as given, the work was started by the Minister of Agriculture, who is not answering this question. The Ministry of Agriculture - we had problems in the Sixth Parliament - detected a problem, complained, and then a report was given here. This was followed up by the IGG. 

Meanwhile, the work of carrying out this kind of work, according to the statement, was transferred from the Ministry of Agriculture to her ministry. When you ask a question of how they initially came to contract Basangira, whether he is on the list, I think this question should be fired directly to the Ministry of Agriculture, which initiated the programme. This ministry found an on-going programme –(Interjections)- order, order - as I have gathered. They picked up something, which was going on, then the IGG investigated it as a result of our complaints and then directed that we re-negotiate. 

So, the question of checking whether Basangira is on the list does not arise because already the IGG had identified him. I think he must have been appreciated that he is capable. So, the question of going back does not arise here. It is a question of perhaps talking and finding out whether the negotiations were good and so forth. That is clear.

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think the hon. Member from Bulamogi has got the answer. 

There was a question from hon. Ekanya again whether we have a problem in the procurement committee. I would not say there is a problem in the procurement committee. The problem actually originated here when we politically intervened in the contracts, and this has taken us all that time. In fact, the problem I have now is that the technical people feel that we politicians have cost Government money because of the political intervention that came in then.  

So, there is no problem in procurement. The procurement process is okay but the process of verifying has taken so long and when eventually it was completed the funds were not there. You will see later that we have been trying to get this in the mid-term budget framework. We managed to get it in 2001/2002 but because of the budget re-allocation we lost that money. That is why it is appearing now. Pressure has been mounted by Basangira to recover their money through court action and because we do not want to lose any more, we decided that we should at least make some down payment.

There is a question: if the IGG directed payment, then why is he coming in now? Of course you know how the IGG gets his information. If any member of the public reports to him a case, which he or she suspects is illegally done, the IGG has got the mandate and duty to follow it up. So, it is only when we called the office of the IGG and the Solicitor-General and ourselves, we had a meeting, we looked at all the documents together; the IGG actually realised that the recommendation that he had made had been followed to the letter until now.  

Mr Speaker, I hope Members of Parliament have satisfied themselves with the statement and answers given and I believe that the recommendations that I have made on the last page that, “my ministry recommends to the IGG to defreeze the cheque of Shs 500 million to Basangira Building Contractors in order to stop further losses through courts of law/litigation” is accepted here. I also hope that the request to the Ministry of Finance to introduce to Parliament a supplementary to cater for the domestic arrears so that my water sector funding for this financial year is not perturbed, will also be honoured. I beg to move, Sir. Thank you.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to recommend that instead of the House adopting the proposal of the Minister right away, we refer it to the relevant sector committee to look at it so that things are done procedurally. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I thought the Minister was just making a statement as a result of our inquiry about the payment of Basangira. What she has done is to tell you the circumstances under which the reported payment was made. It is up to the Ministry and the IGG because I think the IGG intervened. If they are satisfied with this – I do not think she came here for us to authorise. I think the intention was to give us information relating to this payment and she has done it. So, it is up to her and the IGG to sort out their differences.

MR MUSISI: This is just to help out the honourable minister. Mr Speaker, I find that maybe the contract was not read well. I cannot find in the same contract where we have got periods of retention ranging between six months and one year.  When I perused through the figures, I did not find any big money and any big contract, no differences in between. Therefore, if this bit of the contract was again misread, I find that it will bring more litigation for the ministry concerned.  

More so, on page 5 I note that there are delayed payments. The honourable minister told us that the computation for the same is being worked out. I realise and I pity them for one simple reason. The problem is not the computation of the figures; it is a question of telling us how much is actually involved. It is so simple to calculate at a commercial lending rate on an outstanding figure.  Commercial rates have been ranging between 20 and 24 percent, and 24 percent of any figure can never be difficult to compute.  

This is just another bad deal on part of Government and it is only prudent that we expeditiously pay, because the little that I have read from this without even getting the contract documents, I find that Government cannot do anything else other than paying. One thing is that any delayed payments here would attract other court costs. You know very well that we have been very funny that we are losing cases day by day, and I see this is another one that we are going to lose in case Basangira happens to go to court. 

THE SPEAKER: We are not dealing with the calculations ourselves. It is a question of knowing the circumstances; more competent people will do the calculation. We deal with broad issues rather than these details. And that matter ends here.

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS DELIVERED TO PARLIAMENT ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT ON 4 JUNE 2004 

 (Debate continued.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is no debate continuing because the mover concluded and thanked you. I am supposed to have put the question yesterday and I said I would put it today. But again, as I see, we do not have the numbers for me to put the question. I will put it at an appropriate time. But the debate ended, it is a question of pronouncing ourselves on the motion.

I want to take this opportunity to talk about the issue of quorum. The speakers from our constituencies were here and I did not want to exploit it but they have gone –(Interjection)– okay if they are here, fine. Anyway, we are expected to be at our place of work here. We have to account for our time to our constituents. We are about to start very serious business and it will require our commitment and intelligence to attend to that work.

You saw the roadmap, which was given to us being scrutinised and people expect us to complete work so that by 2006 we are in position to transit from one step to another. But this will not be possible if we are not raising quorum to transact business. I do not intend to transact business say on constitutional programme when there is quorum. But then the people we represent will ask us, “What is happening?” We shall have to give them an answer, and I do not see an answer. So, please, I am appealing to you to be diligent with your work as Parliamentarians. I know you may have some programmes but if you have a programme, my office is open. Come and register with me so that you can tell me the problem, then I will know what to do. Do not go anywhere else, just come to my office so that I know your programme. This question of lack of quorum should not continue. I do not want to talk about it because if I do, you know what happens. Do not force me, when I am on this Chair to say, “There is no quorum”. Please, I beg that you save me from that. I do not want to do it.
  
MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, this question of quorum has come up many a time. Even when His Excellency the President was addressing this august House I indirectly raised it with him that indeed, we have that problem. And I clearly, not in a joking manner but a straight forward one, said members of the Cabinet, we do understand they have some serious work to do elsewhere. But, let us look at various categories of members who constitute this august House. The people who rarely attend this august House are as follows: 

One, UPDF. As I talk now, I do not know how many members of UPDF are in this august House at this material time - nobody. 

The second category, the composition of the Cabinet we approved in this august House is about 62. How many are here at this -(Interjections)- definitely there are less than 50 percent of the ministers we expect to be here -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Order! This is a serious matter, let us officially put it on record.

MR AWORI: Yes, we are looking at various categories of members of the august House, who rarely attend our proceedings. As I have said, the UPDF rarely attend. If I count how many are here today, zero.  Out of a Cabinet of 62 members, Mr Speaker, we have less than 20. 

I am proud of the youth; I think a number of them are here. (Applause).

Mr Speaker, another category of Members of Parliament is women. We should have at least 40 – I know the maximum number is 56 plus, but how many are here today? I am looking at various categories so that we know. Some of us have just been carrying them, we give them the numbers, we cover up for them. When you look at the august House, when you look at the composition, the quorum is 90 and the other people are not here.  

Mr Speaker, sooner or later, constitutional amendments will come here for us to look at various categories or special interest groups. It is a fact that we will have to look at how many of the special interest groups should continue to be members of this august House. If they cannot attend meetings of the august House, why should we continue to support them as members of the august House? I raise this issue so that we look at it in a microscopic fashion; we see who is who. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

CAPT. BABU: Thank you very much, Sir. I want to thank, hon. Awori, except when he talked about Members of Parliament, he played it down and I think we better be fair. There are 304 Members of Parliament. If you remove the Cabinet, which is about 62, you should have at least 240 something. I would like to check here whether we have 50 percent of 240. It is not there! (Interruptions)- therefore, Sir –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Order, please! Let us listen to him.

CAPT. BABU: I think, Sir, before we blame any particular group it is the whole Parliament and all of us. Those who are here, I would like to thank them; those who are not here, they should help us so that they are here next time. I agree with you entirely that we should never allow you to pass that word through this microphone for the purpose of other people. Therefore, we should ask all our members, whether front or back benchers, youths, women, they should be here so that we can debate and make this House as respectable as it is supposed to be. Thank you very much, Sir.   

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable Member, my concern is not about categories of ministers and so on. My concern is the 304 Members of Parliament.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of clarification and of concern. This Parliament has an office of OPPD to co-ordinate the activities of Parliament. But in recent times we have had so many functions taking place at the same time and these functions are taking most of our members. 

Just an hour ago I had to leave Munyonyo in a function organised by the Ministry of Finance. There was an activity for the United Nations at the Conference Centre - two activities. There was another one of invigilation. At least, those are the ones where I have been invited –(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, those voices that are adding on to mine are just making my point stronger. May I request that those who organise these functions should use this office so that the activities of Parliament are co-ordinated to increase our attendance here? I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, that will be dealt with. That is very easy but I do not think that is the main reason for the – maybe for today but that cannot be the main reason every day. Honourable members, take this matter seriously because I do not want to repeat it; it hurts you if I do. Let –(Prof Nsibambi rose_) - okay.

4.05
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also believe that it is not good to blame the front bench or other groups, we must take responsibility collectively. That I think is the best way of approaching this problem. I want to refer you to Article 83 (1)(d) “A Member of Parliament shall vacate his or her seat in Parliament, if that person is absent from 15 sittings of Parliament without permission in writing of the Speaker during any period when Parliament is continuously meeting, and is unable to offer satisfactory explanation to the relevant parliamentary committee for his or her absence.” 

I want to pledge that I shall work closely with the Speaker to ensure that the frontbenchers and also backbenchers fulfil this requirement. (Applause).

I want to add that there is another problem, namely that some colleagues are improving their academic credentials. As a professor I welcome this trend. I want people to study but the problem has been that we lack a good policy. For example, we could recommend that if you want to improve your studies, you should take evening course, something like that. 

Government has directed the Ministry of Public Service to come out with a policy and I have written a circular to all ministers - as a technocratic Premier, not as a Chancellor of Makerere University - to indicate those who are studying, where they are studying, what time they are studying so that we can have a clear policy on this. I have copied that letter to the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker and the Clerk to Parliament. When we eventually, and it should be soon, get a policy on people who are enhancing their academic credentials, I suggest that we should work closely to implement the policy ruthlessly.  

May I also point out that there will always be other programmes requiring your attention but what is essential is to manage your time properly because when you go to a function and you know – for example, today I was opening a major conference - before I open a conference, I insist to have a timeframe and if the timeframe disrupts my work, as Leader of Government Business here, I disallow it. They have to perform that function in accordance with the time, which will enable me to be here. Otherwise, I simply get out. So, that is a question of time management. 

And I regret to inform you that many people in this country at times are poor managers and that also contributes to the quorum because at the time we want to have a quorum they are not there. But I have also noted many people who come but they do not stay; they lack the capacity to stay. (Laughter). One of them informed me that he has a backache but I do not think that we have all those medical problems. The capacity to stay means you are highly disciplined. May I request all of us to become more disciplined? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, this is exactly what I have said. I also support those people who want to continue with their studies. I did not want to mention it but he has mentioned it. So, what you do is to register with me in person so that I get the details and I know how to manage you, I mean so that I know where you are. This is a very simple thing. You just come into the Speaker’s office and register with me so that I know. I think we have exhaustively dealt with this matter. We shall improve on this progressively so that work does not suffer but because now I see you have another programme, maybe this is a convenient time to adjourn the House until Tuesday.  

Yes, you have a point. There is the other point of coming in briefly and not staying. I have observed people who after they have made their contributions just walk away. This is not courteous and if others have listened to you, you should stay around to listen to them too.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, yesterday I raised an issue of great concern on this Floor, but I did not get an appropriate answer. I am still on the issue of the security of our diplomats who are working outside this country. The person I am referring to is a person who was beaten up in Brussels, who happens to be my voter. Ambassador Rwabita was invited by His Excellency the Ambassador of Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) to attend celebrations of their national day. He did not know that his counterpart had actually staged lumpens to attack him as soon as he arrived at the function.  (Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Byabagambi, you should not suggest that it was arranged by the host, as that might not be correct. Your concern should be to find out the position and measures that are being taken to protect our ambassadors. Those people could have been acting on their own. So, you can study a case but do not implicate others because we may not know.  

MR BYABAGAMBI: I thank you, Mr Speaker, for that advice. But he was attacked at the gate of the Embassy; that is where he was humiliated. He was actually saved by young women, I think Belgians, who were just passing by and they made noise and attracted the attention of the security personnel to save him. But I raised this yesterday. I told you that really I am receiving a bombardment of calls from my constituency regarding this matter. To-date I have not got any satisfactory explanation from the Government regarding this.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform my honourable colleague that yesterday in the course of our meeting in the Committee of Foreign Affairs we indeed had the same question put to the Minister of Foreign Affairs and he gave us a very balanced statement. And if my honourable colleague wishes to know the details, I think he is free to approach the minister, who can give him a similar answer. 

However, over and above what I have told him, as a former ambassador in Brussels, I know Brussels and I know the large number of Congolese who live in the place. There is a place called Matonge, which is almost - if you were there you would think you were back in Kinshasa. It is solid Congolese territory with over a million Congolese. However, speaking as a former ambassador, generally we have what we call internal intelligence. These anniversaries for every nation, you know which nation will have its anniversary when; and for a person who is serving in a multi-lateral city like Brussels you have the option, if you know you have some difficulties with the Congolese, on that particular day you can go to the Netherlands or Luxembourg and conveniently avoid them, without causing a problem.  

It is a common practice, Mr Speaker. I have seen it here in Kampala, I have seen it in New York, and I have seen it in Washington. And for us it is quite obvious that our relations with Congo, although superficially settled, they are still – even Sudan - we are still simmering at the bottom. So, I would like to inform our honourable colleague that, please, the hon. Minister in charge of Foreign Affairs gave us an answer and probably he might give us an answer through the Rt hon. Prime Minister.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, I am not a member of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, and our deliberations in the committees are not captured by the Hansard. That is why I raised this matter here so that I can be on record and I get a satisfactory answer, which I can give to my people in Ibanda South.

THE SPEAKER: It is okay.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am equally saddened by that event. I have no hesitation in requesting the Minister of Foreign Affairs to make a statement next week. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, again I remind members of the Co-operative Society to go to their function at the International Conference Centre. I received a note here that some people are still complaining about the air-conditioning; that it is too cold –(Interjections)- now it is okay? Okay, with this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until Tuesday next week at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 4.18 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 20 July 2004 at 2.00 p.m.)


