Thursday 13th July, 2000

Parliament met at 2.27 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Ayume Francis, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE LOCAL LOANS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr. G. Opio): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I wish to move that the Bill entitled "The Local Loans Amendment, Bill 2000" be read for the First Time.  I beg to move. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE TAX TRIBUNAL (AMENDMENT), BILL 2000

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr. G. Opio): Mr. Speaker, I wish to move that "The Tax Tribunal (Amendment), Bill 2000" be read for the First Time.  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE STAMPS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr. G. Opio):  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that "The Stamps (Amendment) Bill, 2000" be read for the First Time.  I beg to move, Mr. Speaker. 

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECICSE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS OF THE STATE OF THE NATION BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT TO THIS PARLIAMENT ON TUESDAY 6TH JUNE, 2000

(Debate continued)

MR. BANTARIZA (Buhweju County, Bushenyi):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I join others to thank the President for the speech he made on the 6th of June, 2000; and I would like to congratulate the people of Uganda for the referendum exercise completed to choose a political system of their choice.

I want to speak a little on the land reform.  The Land Act has never been implemented due to a lack of funds and the delays have caused the people suffering; tribunals have not been formed ? I wonder why Government has not implemented this Land Act!  I would ask the Minister concerned to take heed of this and there should not be any further delays in having this Act implemented, because a lot of farmers and peasants have started quarreling, because of land cases not being heard.  Government should also remember the land fund which was promised to be given to areas where there are problems of mailo ownership ? that is Buyaga, Bugangaizi and Kasese, without forgetting Buhweju because Buhweju was also affected - and I would like to see to it that this land fund is available.  The Land Act is now two years; and we thought that this was something affecting the whole nation.  It should really be considered as first priority in easing the sufferings of the peasants.

The modernisation process may not happen overnight, the indicators show that the economy may not be easily improved but the peasants in the rural areas are still very poor.  UPE has done wonderfully but the buildings of the class-rooms is slow and the building of teachers? houses has not been tackled by the parents themselves due to the financial constraints;  and education will suffer if teachers do not have where to be accommodated.  

Farmers still depend on weather and a lot has been said about irrigation. The ministry should make effort to make sure, especially in the dry areas where rivers are available, that at least irrigation is tackled with speed.  We have been told that only 100 irrigation pumps were given as a donation from India, but that should be just a drop in the ocean.  

On roads;  I would like to thank Government for trying their level best especially with roads in Buhweju. A promise has been given for a road which Governments have been promising Buhweju since 1960 but at least the Minister of Works visited the area and he promised people that this road is going to be done.  

On Health Centres, we would like to thank Government for trying to equip one of our Health Centres at Nsika with a theatre and equipment though there were a few bits of  equipment which were not given and the Minister has promised to take action.  The three sub-dispensaries which were built on self help basis, the bigger part of them is almost finished and we hope that Government will make sure that these Health Centres are equipped.  

Poverty in the rural areas is still persisting. All our hopes are on the action plan Government is planning, we hope it will be put in place and Buhweju will benefit more.  I would like to thank Government again for helping Buhweju with the gravity water project schemes.  That is mainly in three sub counties where some people - especially women - were drawing water from five miles away. The President promised to ease the distance travelled and I am glad to report that a survey is being done in those areas, that is; Kyenjogyera, Karungu, Rubara in Nsika and Rutehe in Ruhanga.  

Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, when I mention a few things that have been done in Buhweju, some people may think that most of the things have been done but we have a lot of problems and Buhweju was neglected for a very long time by the past regimes. We are indeed very grateful for the time being for Government to have taken interest in developing our area.  Mr. Speaker, I thank you for giving me an opportunity to debate.

MR. BAKKABULINDI CHARLES (Workers' Representative):  Thank you very Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity to join my colleagues in supporting the Motion on the Floor and so congratulating the President for his elaborate speech he made on 6th June.  Mr. Speaker, I am going to be brief.  I will not comment too much on the achievements because my colleagues have done so but I will also make some observations in this elaborate speech.  Mr. Speaker, I cannot go without commenting on the achievements of UPE which, to me as a worker, has even benefited the children of these poor workers who could not afford to go to school and indeed, we need to encourage it.  

Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, on the issue of security, I think the UPDF have set up a good mode of discipline.  That one can easily be seen even by small children but, however, much as we were enjoying the security within Kampala and nearby places, we should not forget that some areas, some corners of the country are not yet covered. When I perused through this elaborate speech of his Excellency, he is talking of having modern soldiers, well equipped with high skills. Then we are talking about ADF as being these small indisciplined boys. The question comes to my mind, ?If our soldiers are well equipped with modern machines and skills from abroad, what has been stopping us eliminating all these people who are just disturbing us all these months?? 

I think hon. Members, the Minister in charge of defence has a lot to answer to the nation why it is taking us so long to protect our sisters and brothers in the western and northern regions despite the fact that we have got modern machines as we were being promised.  And not only that, I was of the view that having penetrated into another country for so many miles, that was enough for us to cover the ?wanainchi? from further attacks from ADF but I am surprised they are still continuing.  Either we need further training - the ADF have got what we do not have and we accept that they are more trained than us - or we go and confront them and save the citizens of this country.

MR. KAVUMA ( Minister of State for Defense):  I thank you Mr. Speaker and hon. Bakkabulindi.  I only want to give this information which should be simple and understandable.  Fighting terrorism and insurgency is not a simple matter.  There is no defined frontline like in aspects of a conventional war. Guerillas have tactics and behave like some of these insects; you look for it here, it bites there, it runs away so really it is unfair to think that it is because of lack of training that we still have remnants of these negative forces.  

The facts are that the threat was much greater than what it is today and the UPDF, through their training and through the modernisation that you, this House, has managed to enable them to acquire in terms of equipment, have greatly reduced that threat to the level that even top commanders of these forces are voluntarily coming up and surrendering because it has become a very hopeless adventure.  I want to assure Members of this House that the UPDF has the capacity and it will continue to deal with these remnants until every part of this country enjoys the freedom the grater part of this country id enjoying.  Thank you very much sir.

MR. BAKKABULINDI:  I thank you hon. Minister for that information but, however, I would like kindly and politely remind that when you talk about terrorism and insurgency vis-à-vis our current army, they have got enough experience. If I recall my years well; I think these  are  the people who started  it and who know the tactics who should be the first ones to confront the other.  But leaving that topic aside, you know what matters hon. Members is the impact down not the theory we normally get from Ministers and papers.  What does that person in Bundibugyo feel, does he get contented with what the hon. Minister has said?  We in Kampala we may be contented from the papers and from what he has said, but is it what is happening down, I think the most important thing is what the wanaichi are feeling down.  

Leaving that aside I would like to congratulate the Government for the steps it has taken in as far as handling the issues of Karamoja are concerned. When I read through this elaborate communication from the Chair and I found the programs on page 29 about the drilling of bore hole, the up grading of Sirironko/Moroto//kotido road, the construction of the water dams and valley dams, I was really impressed to the extent that I am now sure the neighbouring districts the Mbale and others at least we now survey from these attacks of our colleagues during the dry season.  And this should not stop there our Colleagues in this House who are presenting these areas you have no other excuse to give us that it is the water problem that normally force your colleagues to go and attack other districts now that we have constructed these dams I think that habit will stop and I congratulate the Government for those steps taken.

MR. ILUKORI: Point of information. Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the hon. Member for giving way.  Mr. Speaker, the information I would like to give is, as ever we Karamajong  are happy for whatever is given to us, we would like to acknowledge the undertaking of some dam construction in the region and we would like to see this realised in the financial year so that this particular ever closed area ceases to be and we can continue to be in that part of the country throughout the year.  Given the opportunity I will say more thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. BAKKABULINDI:  I thank you very much for that information.  Mr. Speaker, having commented briefly on what I think are the achievement so far, I would like also to make some observations in this elaborate communication from the Chair. When I looked at page 4, His Excellency was talking about urgency of the certain Bills that we need to look at, he talked about Uganda Peoples Defense Forces and he talked about the deployment of troops outside Uganda which I think is overdue we can do without.  He talked about the Condominium Property Bill and then me as a workers representative I was asking myself is the Excellency aware that we also need an Employment Bill in this country as a matter of urgency, do we not need occupation and Safety Bill as a matter of urgency, Mr. Speaker, and hon. Members you are ? constructions taking place in this country more so in Kampala here where we are seated and a lot of brothers and sisters have died and nothing has been taken and that law which  should have been in place to protect them is not taken  to be an urgency.  He has talked of  peoples defence forces he is not talking about the minimum Wage Bill and they are not looking at it the executive has being of importance.  

As I continue  perusing through this report they are talking about investors, if the investors come they are going to create employment and we shall be okay.  But, Mr. Speaker, and hon. Members, we do not expect serious investors in this country without having a wage policy in the country that one is totally out.  And it is one of the reasons why we are experiencing a decline in receiving serious investors in this country since 1997, I am using the word ?serious investors? I am not talking about these crooks who just come pretending to buy UCB and then they go I am taking about serious investors.  Without a Wage Policy in this country there is no serious investor would like to inject or put his capital in this country.  How does it come, Mr. Speaker?  

In other neighbouring countries like Tanzania, Kenya, Ghana and what have you where they have got a wage policy in place, a serious investor would first look at it know the financial regulations, the tax regulations within the country and then he can project the future of investment by knowing what is the wage policy of that particular country. If there is no wage policy he does not know what will come the following day, about if tomorrow you come with a policy he cannot comply with when he has already put  a lot of his money in an investment. That is why I am saying that as a matter of urgency we need a  minimum wage Bill in this country or a wage policy in this country.  

Mr. Speaker, you will recall that when I talk about serious investors and how to have a standard policy can assist some investors, I draw you to an example of the AES when we had the debate of the Electricity Bill.  While we were trying to protect that poor gentle man that we should put the Act in place first, for him his interest was to get a licence, but if we had passed a licence without putting the Electricity Act in place, and then  we produce an Electricity Act which was contrary to the licence we would have found it rather difficult to operate.  That is why I am saying that to have a Wage Policy in place is a good sign for attracting serious investors in this country.  

I would like to comment on poverty on page 2 to 23; His Excellency talked about good plans about poverty eradication action plan, how we can eliminate poverty, how he is going to empower and he gave some good measures here.  But, Mr. Speaker, and hon. Members, I am wondering how we can eradicate poverty  when we are retrenching day and night without giving enough retrenchment package and at the same time even the little retrenchment package you are giving you are over taxing it.  

And not only that, Mr. Speaker, we have got a list of civil servants since 1997 who have been retrenched and have never been given their retrenchment package and then you talk about poverty eradication plan.  How do you expect it to perform when people have gone without anything?  We have got our colleagues of the former east African Community, of recent during the Budget speech they are talking of phases of paying them these are the guys majority of them have died, some of them can even not afford to come back in Kampala and you make a plan of three years to pay them is that fair, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members?  

In addition to that, even that little retrenchment  package going to get is subject to taxation despite the fact that their money was being used by the government and accruing a lot of interest in favour of the government and one instead of saying your money has delayed and we need to add in something for you they are exposing it to taxation and we say we are not going to eradicate poverty and I am wondering how that one is going to work as far as these retrenched workers are concerned.

We are so lucky if it is not unfortunate that we have got a Ministry of Disaster Preparedness.  Mr. Speaker, with due respect, one wonders if the Ministry itself is not disastrous. I mean, we talk about disaster areas including prolonged drought, we talk about labour activities, cattle rustling, religious fanaticism. What does this Ministry of ours have in place to combat what I have just read?  Apart from creating a Ministry, condemning it from January to January for nothing, poor as they are, they have no single equipment to combat prolonged drought, to combat labour activities, that is why can even continue in the area where the Minister in charge comes from. I do not condemn him because he has no tools to use.  So, Mr. Speaker, and hon. Members, I am -(Interruption)

MAJ. KAZOORA:  Thank you hon. Bakkabulindi, thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Hon. Bakkabulindi has said he wonders if the Ministry of Disaster is not disastrous itself; and I can see the hon. Minister for Ministry is folding his hands and he has just kept quiet and hon. Bakkabulindi is going to another point. Is that a sign of acceptance that the Ministry is actually disastrous?

THE SPEAKER:  I think the Minister is still thinking as to how he is to respond.

MR. BAKKABULINDI:  Thanks very much hon. Kazoora for that; and having made that comment, his keeping quiet is a sign of accepting what I am saying.  Mr. Speaker, and hon. Members, lastly, I would like to comment -(Interruption)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. Member for giving way.  As you know the department is in the Prime Minister's Office, and I think, although my colleague is weighing his answer, I think it had been sufficiently incited to say a few words. First of all, we do have a clear policy on disaster management, and does distinguish between a problem and a disaster.  Secondly, we have even disaster committees at district level; thirdly, we have actually helped many areas which have experienced problems and disasters.  For example, we sent food, we sent clothing in Katakwi when there were problems and we stood here, and even to other areas; and I was greatly animated and hurt in the way many Members did tribute to us when we responded to those disasters.  

We have also made it clear that regarding the problem of hunger, the Minister of Agriculture is quantifying the problem and that as soon as we have the figures, we shall hold urgent inter-ministerial meeting, we have also alerted some of our helpers and we are also helping ourselves.  We have also made it clear that we are going to invest in water for production in order to have a durable solution to unreliable rains.  The sky shall be the limit, I could go on and on, but I want to make it clear that Uganda is disaster prone and we are trying to skill people to manage some of their problems; but we have been addressing disaster despite the scarce resources; and I want to pay tribute also to our development partners who have assisted us.  We are not disastrous, on the contrary we avoid disaster. I thank you. 

MR. BAKKABULINDI:  I thank very much the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for his good elaborate plans that seem to be floating in darkness.  You see, what I am trying to say about this Ministry is as if you have constructed  Namboole, there are good seats there, but you do not have a team that can perform to the standards. In brief this is what I was meaning. All the plans you have mentioned we know they are in existence on paper, but the action cannot be done.  People are dying.  

Lastly, I would like to talk about the big arm of retrenchees in this country.  Whenever the President is talking about plans on the youth, on the women, what-have-you, He has never addressed an issue of retrenchees in this country; and yet the number is increasing day and night; and I wonder what policy did we have in this country as far as the retrenchees are concerned.  Are we going to continue like that and we are talking about poverty eradication and yet we do not know that there are some people who are going back disgruntled and they have nothing to do?  

Of recent we have been talking about investors, and me I wonder at times when I look at some Members from the Front Bench, they come with figures of what number of jobs the investors have created; and the question I normally pose, how many jobs have their destroyed?  Is it logical
to say that an investor went in a certain existing parastatal which was employing about say 800 workers and now because the investors done it well, they are remaining 200 workers so is Your Excellency, this mister so and so has 200 jobs.  That is not creation.  What about the 600 who have gone back to the rural areas?  What do you talk about it?  Has he created or destroyed? I think it is high time we start differentiating what is creating jobs in this country and what is destroying jobs.  Mr. Speaker, with that observation, I beg to stop there.  I thank you.

MR. DOMBO EMMANUEL (Bunyole County, Tororo):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, to have given me this opportunity to join the rest of the House in congratulating the President for a job well done.  I will however not spend much time on the congratulations, I will wish to raise some of the concerns of my people which I feel should be given due attention by all the responsible persons.  

First and foremost, Mr. Speaker, yesterday some Members did raise, I wish to repeat it here.  That when you look at the policy statements coming from the various Ministries, they have been well compiled and well presented.  Something emanating from the Office of the President, it should be made to appear like President himself and what he intended to communicate. We would wish that in future this House be taken seriously and it is communicated to in a manner that really represents the Office of the President; but this photocopy here is not anywhere near to that Mr. Speaker.  

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, in the issues raised in this speech by His Excellency the President, he mentioned liberalisation as one of the success stories of his government. I must thank him for that, but liberalisation itself has had a few problems which I will want the concerned parties to get note of.  

When the President talked of liberalisation and people buying produce in the villages and being paid cash, I want people to note that it is not the first time liberalisation is being practised in Uganda.  In the olden days, Indians were here buying cotton, they were buying coffee and were buying all sorts of things, but at the expense of the farmers themselves. Therefore, the emergence of the Cooperative Movement in Uganda was intended to safeguard the interests of the farmers and just yesterday, I was reading Bukedde that the farmers in Bugerere are almost getting up in arms and they are saying, unless they revive Cooperative Movement in the country, this thing so-called liberalisation has not benefited them.  It has been given a trial and I wish the people on the Front Bench originate policy for people, should seriously consider how best we can serve our farmers.  There is no way we are going to fight poverty in this country if the farmer is not facilitated enough, because, after all, the farmers are the biggest bulk of the population and unless they are well off, they cannot be able to pay school fees, they cannot be able to pay fees, they cannot be able to buy their necessities and they cannot even be able to pay for their medical expenses. 

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA:  Point of information.  Mr. Speaker, I am aware that you would like us to make some contributions to the debate but I think I should make this intervention at this point in time.  Ma ybe hon. Dombo may be a bit too young to remember what happened to -(Interjection)? yes, what is wrong with a person being young?  I am reminded every day that I am an old man!  So, Sir, there is nothing wrong with hon. Dombo knowing that he is young and vibrant, but many people including myself had to uproot our coffee because the Cooperatives would not pay, that is a fact of life.  We, yes, we did.  Today, if I can speak on behalf of Rubabo County, - (Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. you are giving information, you are not contributing.

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA:  Yes, I am giving information.  If you look at the price of coffee before liberalisation and you look at the price of coffee today and you compare what the farm price get of coffee was then and now, you will find today that a minimum a coffee grower gets is 60 per cent of export price.  In those days of the Cooperative, they would be lucky to get 10 per cent and they would even be lucky to be paid.  That is a fact, hon. Bigirwa is also a coffee farmer, she can help.  I thank you Mr. Speaker.

MR. DOMBO:  Thank you very Mr. Speaker.

MAJ. KAZOORA:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I would like to agree with hon. Kagonyera that hon. Dombo is young, but luckily enough in this House, we have a relatively not young person and who is in the names of hon. Anthony Butele and has got a lot of experience in matters of Cooperatives.  Probably he could use his wisdom to assist us in this House in matters of what hon. Dombo is saying.  Thank you.

MR. DOMBO:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I wish whole heartedly to agree with hon. Mondo Kagonyera but I was quoting the quotations in The New Vision and these were farmers talking and besides that, when the President visited Jinja, the hon. Member for Jinja Municipality, hon. Kamusala did raise to the President that the collapse of Jinja town is partially associated with the collapse of the Cooperative Movement in the country.  

I am surprised that the very people who are saying Cooperative Movement has been doing bad, they are encouraging our women form groups and this is nothing but co-operation.  There is no way a farmer is going to stand as an individual and stand to benefit he ought to, if he was organised.  All these countries where we are getting aid, they are marketing and doing things through Cooperative Movement; go to Denmark, go to the Scandanavian countries, I have visited them but whereas we go there to visit and we cannot study their models, we come here to say the contrary because IMF and World Bank has said.  Mr. Speaker, it is high time that we started thinking for our people and making provisions, because when the coffee prices increased the other time, the Minister of Finance hurried to put a coffee tax and when the prices slumped, everybody shies away.  The situation would be different if the farmers were more organised.  

That brings me to this topic of privatisation. 

MRS. BIGIRWA:  Point of clarification.  Mr. Speaker, the clarification I would like from hon. Dombo is; did Government stop Cooperatives from working or because of the liberalisation policy out of necessity the Cooperatives could not compete and therefore, they just felll by the wayside?

MR. DOMBO:  Mr. Speaker, I do not know whether you are a neighbour of Banyankore Kweterana but if you come from Ankole where Banyankore Kweterana is a very prominent Cooperative Movement, you would have known that Government was highly indebted to many Cooperative organisations and they collapsed because of that.  So, it is high time that Government seriously considered putting good what went wrong so that the farmers can best be organised.  

I was talking of the issue of privatisation. I want to thank the President and his team for a job well done in the privatisation process, but I want to say that I am surprised that one of the success stories which the President has been telling everybody that privatisation has done very well is now crumbling.  One of them had been the Nytil Picfare, every where that the President has stopped, he has quoted Nytil Picfare, saying, you people see, those who think privatisation has not worked.  On the contrary, yesterday we were being told that now Government must  come in to salvage the same process.  

This reminds me of what hon.  Nkuuhe raised yesterday and Mr. Speaker, may I beg this House that at an appropriate time the responsible Minister or a committee investigates the issue of privatisation of the 51 per cent of UTL.  Just yesterday we were being told that with the same market capacity as Tanzania, ours somebody paid US $30 million  and Tanzania for the same, is it 35 per cent, the same people paid US $120 million and they are taking the step in Kenya Telecommunications and they are paying something like US $500 million.  We shall want to find out what caused the difference and if anybody ate the difference, who must that have been?

MR. NASASIRA:  Thank you hon. Dombo for giving way.  I know hon. Dombo has combined all these privatisation processes but has not given whether each form of privatisation is the same between Tanzania, Uganda and Kenya. First, I know you will get the details from the Privatisation Unit, but I wanted to give this information lest the House is misled.  In Tanzania, there is a monopoly and any investor takes that in account.  There will be a five year monopoly of one operator.

Secondly, the money that the investor is paying is going to be re-invested in the investment, in the telecommunications.  In the case of Uganda, there is a diopoly here, there is competition.  We chose competition as one way to regulate and we are more interested in the customer who is a beneficiary of the price competition rather than just investment alone.  So, first, there is competition here and therefore, in any investor who is coming here to compete with somebody else who is already here will pay less but secondly, the cash that was paid went straight to the Government  and the Treasury rather than to be injected back in the investment. So the investor has got to look for more money to invest in the Telecommunications and fulfil the role out obligations.  That is one of the major differences.  But I think PU will give more details.

MR. DOMBO:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I think when a Committee is set up finally; it will help us to come up with the details about that.  Because me what I know in Tanzania is that there is no monopoly in Tanzania, there are mobile telecommunication companies which are going to compete.  But hon. Minister is well informed, I think we shall verify that information later. 

One thing I do not understand about privatisation and liberalisation again is whether when we privatise and liberalise, whether we mean abdication of Government responsibility? We stand a risk if Government does not take interest in the service that is being delivered that, we maybe driven by profit motive which most of the private investors are being delivered by, at the expense of delivering of service to our people.  

Right now in Busolwe town we need telecommunication service and when I tried to talk to somebody he said, what is the market coverage?  Are we going to recover our investment?  For him he was looking at profit.  But as the people, we are entitled to a service.  Must we not get a service as people if privatisation and liberalisation is taking place? This is one area where Government must seriously consider and find out how best it can protect the interest of the Wanainchi.

MR. BAKKABULINDI:  Point of information.  Thank you very much hon. Member for clearing the way.  The small information I wanted to give about the issue raised that we stand a risk under these effects of liberalisation. You are talking about communication, but I want to remind you that as we talk now, Petrol will continue raising the petrol prices simply because of the liberalisation process and the Minister in charge will tell you they are free to control themselves because the Government has nothing to do.

MR. DOMBO:  Hon. Members can you imagine, that is the plight of our people.  Mr. Speaker, the other thing I want to raise which has been the concern and also raised by the President is environmental protection.  Mr. Speaker, I speak this with particular reference to River Manafa.   I come from Mbale where the source of water is basically River Manafa.  This River has been dangerously polluted and silted that if Government action does not come in strongly, we may have a big disaster in the near future.  The low lying areas where the River flows, we have so many rice schemes including Doko Rice Scheme, which is in my Constituency.  But because of uncontrolled cultivation at the banks of the rivers, the whole river is silted, the water works in Manafa which supplies Mbale and some areas in Eastern Uganda is at a risk of being silted and extinct.  It is high time either through legislation that Government comes up strongly to protect the rivers and water sources because this is likely to cause a bigger problem in this country. 

On the issue of education and health, I want to thank the President for the wisdom in starting UPE.  So far the biggest achievement about UPE is in the numbers I must say because that is the only thing we can quote. The numbers which were this, they are now this.  That is good and excellent.  It is also good that we have got partners who have helped us to construct the schools, but it is high time we started addressing the issue of quality in these schools.  Through UPE the child can read and write; those are the basics.  

Yesterday one Member was saying that research has shown that, if you want to invest in education for development it is better you begin with primary.  Very good.  But I want to show you that in my Constituency I have had more difficult problems with the youth that are partially educated than the illiterate people on the ground.  Most of the youth that are partially educated think they know a lot when they actually know nothing, that it is high time that the Ministry itself started one, addressing the issue of quality.  

Then secondly ?(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Are you taking that information?

MR. DOMBO:  Yes, I will.

THE SPEAKER: No, you have exceeded your time.  But, you are not so advised.  I am now going to advise people on what time allocation is.

MRS. BITAMAZIRE NAMIREMBE: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I want to give information to my Colleague who is on the Floor, that the issue of quality in Education has already been addressed in the steps which we are taking so far and which we have taken so far.  The first step we have taken is to multiply the number of classrooms so that the children can sit in proper classrooms.  And I am happy to report that by this time we have covered over about 4,000 classrooms countrywide. And in the particular constituency where I come from, quite a number of constructions have been going on.  So, I think many of you Members of Parliament where you pass, you have seen the newly constructed classrooms.  That is to address quality. 

Then secondly, we are recruiting teachers.  Right now we are going on with the recruitment and we hope to reach a target of 125,000 teachers countrywide which will reduce the teacher-pupil ratio from the current 110 at the lower infant classes to 80 children per teacher.  And then reduce the ratio upward from primary three to primary seven to one teacher to 55 children.  And we hope at the end of the recruitment exercise we shall have attained that ratio.  So, that is also addressing quality.  

Thirdly Mr. Speaker, we have addressed the curriculum and I have the pleasure to announce and I believe many of you have already received copies of the Primary Curriculum.  I wanted you to have copies so that you know what we are teaching your children and the children of this nation.  And I believe if you have read them you know exactly how we are moving (Laughter).  Thank you.  I think with that information you know how we are moving.  Thank you very much.

MR. DOMBO:  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker and the hon. Member for the wonderful information.  Mr. Speaker, that is a very good submission from a seriously hardworking Minister.  

The other thing I wanted to raise about education which has been the concern of everybody especially in my constituency, is that people have been asking me that with this high cost in tertiary institutions, if this cost had been around ten years ago when I was in school, they were wondering whether I would be able to come and represent them here in Parliament.  We know that most of us here were a product of peasantry background and were able to make it because of the opportunity that was available at that time.  It is high time Government seriously considered shouldering the biggest part of the cost of tertiary institutions, Makerere inclusive as a way of liberating the peasants of this country.  

Otherwise, most of the people if you went to Makerere during exam time Mr. Speaker, you would shade tears.  Many people register, they try to attend, but fall out at the end of the day.  They cannot afford the exorbitant school fees in Makerere University for instance.  A son of a peasant teacher in the village being asked to pay 900,000 a semester.  When you compute a salary of a teacher in a whole year, it can never pay school fees in a semester. Now the question is, how shall we be able to transform our rural areas if the peasant children are not properly provided for by Government? I know it is expensive but it is high time government started seriously considering making a provision. (Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Can you make your last and only last point?

MR. DOMBO: Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to request your indulgence of two minutes just to conclude, strictly two minutes, Mr.Speaker.  (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You can make your last point in less than that.

MR. DOMBO:  Mr. Speaker, in a summary I wanted to raise concern. Recently when I was reading the Speech of the President, I read where he was changing the names of certain historical sites like Nalubaale from Owen Falls Dam.  I wanted to say this that in a bid to put history right we are likely to distort the origins of history for our children and in so doing, may I request that in
future before -(Interjection) Mr. Speaker, since you told me to make the last statement, I will not take the information.

Lastly, Mr. Speaker, the issue of GDP growing from 1 percentage to - up to about 6 per cent, I think the people of Bunyole are grateful to have participated and shared in part of that cake in the way of construction of Budumba Bridge. May I at this time thank the hon. Minister of Works hon. Nasasira and his team in the ministry for a job well done.

As I end, Mr. Speaker, there is one thing I want to appeal to government.  When I looked at the voting partner in the recently concluded referendum, I would naturally expected the biggest voter turn up to be in Luwero because this where the Movement was born.  When you look at the statistics you would be surprised that actually the voter turn up in Luwero was less than in so many areas.  To me in my own conclusion I thought that could be the Movement was born in Luwero but it is actually living elsewhere.  This is something food for thought of the people in the Front Bench and the President that this thing should be evaluated why after all, should Luwero where the Movement was born and everything conceived be least and in Ankole and in a great Kigezi where I presume could be the Movement is living for now this may call for the creation of the equal opportunity commission.  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Let us have the hon. Member for Bulisa, Bulisa is in Masindi District for those of you who do not know.

MR. LUKUMU (Bulisa County, Masindi) Thank you Mr. Speaker. I rise to support the Motion.  I would like Mr. Speaker, to begin with the President's conclusion in his Speech and more specifically with the last sentence.  In the last sentence the President talks about Uganda as being one family and he stresses the need that we recognize ourselves as one family.  It brings me to the point of national integration.  We have had so many problems in Uganda, we have tried to explain these problems but it would appear we have missed the most important point.  For example, we have been talking of poverty, we have been talking of insurgency, endless ethnic conflicts, all these are a result of the problem of mal-integration of this nation, like many other African states and unless and until we address ourselves seriously to the problem of national integration - we call it mal-integration which has been the root cause of the problems that have plagued this nation for years and years since after Independence we shall not go far.   

A lot has been said about poverty alleviation, you can link all the problems of Uganda, you can list them, they are all related to lack of ethnic harmony in this country.  Talk of the going insurgency; what is it all about? Power struggle.  Based on what? Ethnic considerations. I am sorry, if I misinterpret the previous speaker, when he talks of the Movement being born in Luwero and now living elsewhere.  I think this is an insinuation that ethnicity is still at play.  So I think we need to address this problem very seriously and I would rather leaders of this nation take it upon themselves to face this problem squarely because we do not seem to address it and if we talk of - (Interjections) - Mr. Speaker, may I be protected.  There is a lot of heckling. (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Is you neighbour disturbing you so that I can direct my efforts to him?  Your neighbour on your right?

(Prof Nsibambi rose_)

MR. LUKUMU:  I will take it, Mr. Prime Minister.

THE SPEAKER: No, I have not finished with you. I would like the hon. Member to answer me first. Is it your neighbour to your right disturbing you or is it the hon. Anthony Butele, so that I can deal with them?

MR. LUKUMU: I heard noises from my right but did not specifically know where it was.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, Rt. hon. Prime Minister proceed.

PROF NSIBAMBI: Point of information. Thank you Mr. Speaker and I thank my Colleague, the hon. Member for giving the way.  That is an excellent point which he is making and I wanted to refer to him a study which I made on that topic and the findings are found in Makerere Institute of Social Research where we dealt with territorial integration, where we dealt with social integration
and cultural integration.  It is an excellent point. It is a matter we could discuss for a whole day but I want to refer you to the findings of that study and I do thank you.  It is in Makerere Institute of Social Research.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member proceed and you have four minutes more.

MR. LUKUMU: I thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for recognizing the importance of this point I would be most grateful if this study was availed to this House for serious study because really it would appear we are coming up with solutions which do not seem to address the real problem and with a renown scholar like the Rt.  hon. Prime Minister, I think the substance of his study will guide this House and indeed the whole nation maybe to get out of this problem which has been on for so long.

I would, since I have limited time, like also touch on decentralisation.  Decentralisation has been highly praised and indeed I am one of those who believe in the decentralisation but it is indeed being overtaken, decentralisation is going to fail if we do not take collective measures because as of now performance of government, the success of government will depend on how successful decentralisation -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Order please.  There is too much murmuring around.  Can you consult in such a way that your colleague is not interrupted in his address?

MR. LUKUMU:  It would appear this matter has excited a good number of our colleagues.  I hope - (Laughter)- So Mr. Speaker I was on the point of decentralisation. On which the performance of this of this government will entirely have to depend. The delivery of decentralisation, under-decentralisation will determine whether the Movement government is judged as having performed or not.  My fears are, Mr. Speaker; presently this decentralisation unfortunately has also tended to decentralise corruption.  Corruption at the grassroots is terrible.  You have heard cases of embezzlement, wrangles in district local government. It would appear the centre is not prepared to monitor and guide decentralisation properly as of now. We need urgent measures to correct the decentralisation problem, which have already cropped up at the grassroots.  

And in this connection, Mr. Speaker, I am of the view that much- (Interruption)

MRS. KERWEGI:  Can I give you information?

MR. LUKUMU:  Mr. Speaker, I hope with your indulgence you will provide for -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You have one and half minutes.  But she can give you information I mean.  That is not to say that you should decline

MRS. KERWEGI:  Mr. Speaker thank you very much.  I want to inform the speaker holding the floor that one other thing, which is so disturbing about decentralisation, is the budgeting process.  I do not know who decides whether some sub-counties should announce or organize their budgeting because particularly in Apac I always hear some sub-counties announcing theirs, others quiet.  Some districts announcing theirs, others are quiet.  What happens?  What is supposed to happen so that we are all aware?  This is the information I wanted to give you.

MR. LUKUMU:  I thank you for those remarks.  Mr. Speaker since I have limited time, I would like now to go to the points hon. Kweriga has raised of the budgetary process.  And in my case it is connection with the centre.  We have a problem Mr. Speaker with the budgetary process at the centre.  What happened to the Musumba Budget Bill?  What happened to it because the Budgetary Process as it is now, take it Mr. Speaker because it is really mostly irrelevant.  

MR. OPIO GABRIEL: Thank you Mr. Speaker.  The last time we were about to go on recess, the Cabinet through the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development requested for time so that the Cabinet should have a look at the Comprehensive amendment of the Budget Bill.  And the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has already presented the position to Cabinet for discussion and within a short time most likely next week, Cabinet will have a position and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will appear before the Session Committee over Finance, Planning and Economic Development to present government position.  From there, the Committee will make its recommendations to this floor and we shall start the second reading of the Bill.  I thank you.

MR. LUKUMU:  I thank the hon. Minister for the information and I hope this Parliament under the Musumba Bill will be meaningfully involved in resource allocation of this nation.  Because as of now, much as under article 155 of the Constitution, the President is empowered to do the budget for the nation.  The role of Parliament to approve is merely a rubber-stamping.  We are not at all involved in really helping or guiding in resource allocation, influencing effectively priorities and so forth.  I hope this will be addressed under that.  

Mr. Speaker let me now quickly touch on infrastructure.  With infrastructure -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You have one more minute:

MR LUKUMU: I will try my level best Mr. Speaker.  With infrastructure, I have concerns over the continued lopsided nature of facilities of infrastructure in this country particularly the road networks.   I come from Masindi district as you heard and this is in Bunyoro Kingdom.  This Kingdom has no tarmac road in all the three districts.  (Mr Nasasira rose_) I do not want you to talk.  Mr. Speaker, if one talks of the Gulu Road, you know that one just goes sort of, as you know, accidentally passes a bit there but it is intended for - (Interruption). Since you will answer, Mr. Speaker is not being fair.  He is telling me that I am time barred (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: That information might be very useful to you.

THE MINISTER OF WORKS, TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATION (Mr. Nasasira): Thank you hon. Member for giving way. I just wanted clarification from the hon. Member whether the size of Bunyoro Kingdom has been reduced.  Because I know the Bunyoro Kingdom boarders with R. Nile and between Masindi and R.Nile starting from Karuma all the way there is a tarmac road from Kafu to Karuma; which goes through Bunyoro Kingdom which is 90 kilometres.  But for further information, there will be another road for Bunyoro Kingdom starting this year from Kiboga to Hoima.  Thank you.

MR. ONGOM:  Thank you Mr. Speaker and thank you Mr. Lukumu for giving way.  The information I wish to give is that although you call that road as Gulu road, in fact Gulu has only 21 kilometres of it.  The majority is in Bunyoro.  

THE SPEAKER: Now can you make your last sentence?

MR. LUKUMU:  Mr. Speaker, this road the Budget song which has been going on for years and years, the Busunju-Hoima.  It was actually up to Butiaba has been now reduced despite that long delay.  It is no longer Busunju-Hoima- Butiaba road.  It is now only referred to as Busunju-Hoima.  What has happened to Hoima-Butiaba?  No explanation!  The President, the Minister has made several pledges to the people of Bulisa but no explanation has ever been made about cutting this portion.  What is the explanation?  These people also really deserve!   Really it would have connected well with the new West Nile Ferry from Wanseko to Panyimuru, which is supposed to be an alternative route.  You are killing it by not connecting Butiaba to Hoima.  And lastly Mr. Speaker -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Your time is up.  I am sorry hon. Member.  His time is up but you inform him.

MR. AWUZU: Thank you Mr. Speaker for allowing me to speak although the hon. Members who was on floor, whose time is actually up.  I think the hon. Member is being caught in the same trap of referring things like Gulu road and lastly he has referred to West Nile Ferry.  In fact there is nothing like West Nile Ferry.  The Ferry from Wanseko to Panyimuru is not a West Nile Ferry.  The people of Bunyoro are gaining so much from this ferry because they use it to transport their fish across to the Congo and therefore it is not a West Nile Ferry (Laughter).  And I think the hon. Member perhaps forgot.  He should have actually thanked the government very much for putting that ferry across the lake.  

And I would like to inform him that the Hoima Butiaba road is still on and it is being done in stages.  This is phase one just like the road from Karuma to Arua is being done in phases.  We are currently doing, we are going to do Pakwach-Arua phase and then we shall do the Karuma Pakwach and we are not complaining.  Therefore he should not complain.  Thank you very much.

MR. LUKUMU: Mr. Speaker, with your indulgence, I am just to thank ?(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Your time is up.

MR. ONGOM (Omoro County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for allowing me to say something about the address of the President to Parliament on the state of the nation.  It is not quite sure whether this really talks about the state of the nation.  But all the same we are going to comment on some of the issues raised in the paper.  Mr. Speaker, I leave part of the paper dealing with the economy and talk about it when we have time to discuss the Budget. 

But let me for the moment deal with one aspect, and that is security.  Mr. Speaker, from Page 40 to 41, the President had this to say, and I quote: ?The desire on our part to accommodate our way-ward brothers and sisters should not be taken as a sign of weakness?, and then at the end of Page 41, he says in parts, ?Although it is the bad news that makes news and is the stock in trade of the media, most Ugandans live peacefully in their beds and go about their work without looking over their shoulders in fear of their Government or their Army?.  I am not sure whether it is true that most Ugandans live peacefully without looking over their shoulders.  When you consider that the President himself constantly is looking over his shoulders wherever he is going with an Army of protectors, I do not know against whom, I do not know whether he is protected against his Government or against his Army.  But that is not the major point I would like to make, Mr. Speaker.  

The points here are two: Is that the President thinks about most Ugandans, but we think that Uganda is one and the people in it should regard themselves as one people.  Very often even on the Floor of this House, people have commented and said, ?Uganda should be looked at as one body, one person so that if a toe of a person is not well, the whole body is affected?.  It will appear that the concern here is of the rest of the body; but not the small part.   

We know that about five per cent of Ugandans, that is occupying what is known popularly now as, Acholi Land, constantly are not sleeping; and they are constantly looking over their shoulders and that really should have been the concern of Government.  And that Mr. President appears to indicate here that it is the media which is over emphasising the problem here, and that if it was not because the media was exaggerating things, may be things would not be looked at as they are.

I would have thought that if this was a state of the nation statement, the President should have come out clearly and said, ?Over there, we have a big problem.  So many people are in camps?, the so-called, protected camps!  They have been there now for over three years and very poor conditions, and this should have been the major concern which should have been properly highlighted, but not even a single mention of it has been made; it is talked about in passive as if most of these people are not people of Uganda.  As I said we form about five per cent of the population of Uganda and we are in trouble.  We are always in pain, and Uganda should feel pain because of this.

Somewhere again, and this has been really now the song of the Army and the Movement Government, that the problem in the North is persisted because the UPDF has been building capacity.  Now in this paper, it says, we now have enough capacity to contain the problems there.  I do not know what capacity we are talking about.  Mr. Speaker, the implication is given here that actually the LRA has bigger capacity than the UPDF because the LRA has been there ever since while the UPDF has been building capacity.  So, if that is the case and we know that UPDF has not had capacity, why did the President of the Country not call on some other people to assist with capacity to throw out the LRA from the areas that they are bothering at the moment?  I am concerned about this because my people are not sleeping.  They are sleeping in camps, every day they have got to look over their shoulders.  We are living as if we not in this Country.

I am talking about this capacity thing, we as the people of Acholi, have tried our best to help the Government.  We have gone over at one time, although some of us did not agree with the exercise, we even had to arm our people with arrows and pangas and so forth to fight against the guns.  This is a show of desperation.  It is not because we think arrows and pangas can fight against guns, but we are desperate, and as a result we committed a lot of our own youths to assist the capacity of UPDF, because we were always told they were under capacity.

But what is surprising me, and we have been asking this question, we have never got an answer, is that as we recruit, and I must say now we have recruited in Kitgum and Gulu probably a total of nearly 20,000 youths when you start from the beginning ? to LDU and the home-guards, but where are these people?  No sooner have we recruited, then they are grafted and taken elsewhere and yet we recruit them to protect our people so that they do not live in camps, so that they can help the UPDF to protect the population.  But where are these people?  We have never got an answer.  I hope now that the Minister is standing up, he will tell me where they are.

MR. KAVUMA: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker and my Colleague the hon. Member holding the Floor, Mr. Ongom.  I want to say, Sir, by way of giving information that hon. Ongom and a few others may conceive the recruitment exercise as if it is restricted to a particular area.  But I want to inform him that by our own Constitution and the Laws governing the UPDF and all our Forces, recruitment is done for a national purpose.  That means we cannot recruit somebody from Wabulenzi, in Luwero, but if duty cause for that person to go and serve in Kitgum, definitely he will go and serve there. So, it is not correct to think that all the people recruited from a particular area will always serve in their local area, we are building a national army, we are managing a national army not a tribal army.  

With regards to the capacity of the UPDF, I think we also have to remember what were the original plans of these rebels?  It was not to be in the suburbs harassing civilians alone, the intention was for them to over run the Government of the Republic of Uganda as established by Law.  They have been trying this, if you judge the capacity of this army, see how much territory these bandits are controlling.  The fact that we still have remnants here and there should not be misconceived as a fact to prove that there is no capacity.  Your army has been able to withstand all the pressures of these bandits who wanted to come and take us back to tyranny, which we managed to control when we took over the realm of Government in 1996.  They have not managed and I can assure you they will not.  Mr. Speaker, we should always fully appreciate the threat before we condemn what has been done by the forces in serving this Country.  I thank you Sir.

MR. ONGOM:  Thank you for the information, Minister.  I think you have made my position worse.  As long as your Government is not overthrown, it does not matter how many Acholis are in the camps because your Government is intact.  I thought one of the cardinal duties of the Government is to protect the population, not just the Cabinet.  Our people are not protected; they are living in camps, they are living in the bush at night for fear of the so-called remnants and that according to you the capacity is okay because the Government is not overthrown.  I think this is where perhaps we do not look eye to eye. I think the Government?s duty is to protect us, not to protect the Cabinet and the State House only.

As far as recruitment is concerned, Mr. Minister, I was talking about the recruitment of local defence ? (Interruption)

MAJ. TOM BUTIIME: Point of information. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Before the people who are in the camps today went to those camps, when they were still in their villages, they were being killed day and night.  Putting them in camps was at least an improvement as far as the death of those people was concerned and hon. Ongom knows that very well.  Secondly, hon. Ongom goes to his Constituency often, he meets many Commanders, those Commanders he meets do not speak Acholi, many of them are from different tribes.  What are they doing in Acholi?  Since he wants only the Commanders and fighters in Acholi land to be Acholis ? yes that is what he actually wants.  In other words as hon. Kavuma has said, when you recruit and you are deployed, you are deployed all over the Country. That is why there are other fighters of the UPDF in the North including Gulu and the Acholis are in other districts of Uganda.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. ONGOM: It is obvious that we have a capacity problem to understand each other ? (laughter).  Mr. Speaker, I was talking about the recruitment of home guards and local defence unit.  I am referring to the information given to me by the Minister of State for Defence.  I was not talking about recruitment for the National Army.  I am sure there are many Acholis in the National Army but that is not what I am talking about.  We are specifically asked by the Government to assist in recruiting home guards so that the home guards are trained specifically to guard their homes and that is why they were called home guards.  They are not supposed to be called Uganda Army and I am saying ?where are they? because they are not there, the purposes for which we recruited them is not valid any more because they are not protecting us ? they are not protecting the people the way we intended it.  Because if it was for recruitment for the army, me as a Member of Parliament would never have got involved.  It is not my duty.  But we got involved, you asked for our assistance, we did commit our young people.  Those are the people I am asking.  Where are they?  Why are they not protecting us? (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think many of you would like to speak.  If we go this rate then we are going to have a problem.  Let the Minister give you the information, then I will request you kindly to come to your concluding remarks.

MR. KAVUMA: I thank you Mr. Speaker and I again thank hon. Ongom.  With regard to the home guards I must re-state here clearly that the UPDF does not forcefully recruit anybody in it?s rank.  People come voluntarily.  What experience has taught us in the areas of the districts of Kitgum and Gulu; and it is commendable.  Whenever we want to take people in the UPDF, the youth come voluntarily to change from one ? you know sector of service to their people, the vigilante and they prefer to nationalise their service by joining the army voluntarily and we think that is commendable.  We have not said ?you close the tap from the source of recruitment.  You can continue recruting, we can continue assisting you to train them, but as long as we voluntarily receive Ugandans who are willing to come and serve at the national level we will continue to encourage that positive development.

MR. ONGOM: I sorry Mr. Speaker to be dwelling over this, but this is because I am not satisfied.  You know we have asked many times.  This is the first time that the Minister is saying  ?we are absorbing them in the army? and yet when they were asking us to help them recruit, we were told they were going to strictly remain at home and guard their homes.  Now, at no time have they come back to say that ?we have now re-absorbed this people, we have absorbed them in the army and we have given them numbers'  In fact some of the concern we have is that they are taken away to fight in other places without actually properly being absorbed!  These are people without the so-called numbers.  This is the information we have and that is what also makes us concerned.  Because in case they die, nobody will have real responsibility on them.  So, I am sorry you have got to satisfy us on this. Mr. Speaker, you are talking about time but I wanted to say a little bit something about environmental as a final point.  Thank you.

Everybody should really be concerned about the state of our environment.  The President refers to it some how but I wish he could have gone a bit further to tell us how we are going about to protect our environment.  We are destroying our forests, which forms a big part of the environment protection at a high rate/at an alarming rate.  

I was surprised yesterday, Mr. Speaker, a very high ranking person of the Movement questioning a Member of Parliament, of what use the environment protection to him personally is! Honestly, these are the people who are planning for us; these are the people who are supposed to plan for us.

DR. NYEKO:  Point of order.  Mr. Speaker, I was very clear yesterday.  I simply asked for clarification from a Member on the Floor what does he want from the environment?   That was a very simple question, I did not ask him why he wants the environment protected. I asked the Member what he wants, how does want to use the environment.  This was my humble point. Now is it in order for an hon. Member in this House who was not even in this at that time to come up and label that simple clarification I sought as being hostile to the environment?  And is it in order to label a simple person supporting the movement as being a high ranking?  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Let me begin with the second one which is very easy if it is true that you are not a very high ranking movement, then he is probably misleading the House he would not be in order if it is true that you are not a high ranking movement.  But as to the first one, indeed I was in the chair, and I think the impression I got of your question was genuine was innocent and you wanted to get educated and therefore it is not in order to insinuate a bad motive on that one.  Hon. Ongom, can you wind up please?

MR. ONGOM:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  You ruled me out of order on the first one but I know that the gentleman is a high ranking therefore it is true. You said it is true but it is true so I am not out of order.  

The thing I was going to say about environment is that, really if we do not do something about charcoal burning then we are destroying our forests and environment at an alarming rate.  I learnt recently that in fact the famine that  they have constantly in Ethiopia is because they have destroyed the environment to the extent that they can not even find wood for fire.  They have to use cow dung.  Even cow dung which fertilise the soil is now being used for energy and that has the effect of deteriorating even further the soil content; and unless we do something really serious and this has to do with energy production and I see the minister looking at me very intently and I am happy, and this question of rural electrification must be taken very seriously.  Really the reason why forests are being destroyed extensively is because of the high cost of electricity.  The majority of the urban people , the peri-urban people can not afford to use electricity and that is why they have to resort to charcoal and because there is a big market for charcoal, the forests will continue to be destroyed.

THE SPEAKER:  There is information here, you are prolonging us with your submission now it is being interrupted.

MRS. BUMBA:  Point of information.  Mr. Speaker, government is concerned of the high rate at which our forests are being destroyed; and therefore, Mr. Speaker, government has come up with a number policies for providing energy or saving energy in order to reduce on  bio-mass consumption.  Right now we have a programme of introducing energy stoves, quite a number of pilot projects, they have been implemented in a quite a number of districts and, Mr. Speaker, it is the intention to spread this programme throughout the country. 

Government also has programmes to introduce tree species which grow very fast and at the same time they provide wood without being cut, as they grow they drop branches which can be harvested to provide energy.  Mr. Speaker, I have said it time and again on this Floor that the programme for rural electrification is a priority programme for government. 

Under the poverty eradication programme, rural electrification is among those which have been put on the forefront for implementation.  Mr. Speaker, government has gone further ahead of the rest of the developing world to convince our lenders to start a pilot project for rural electrification in this country.  Under this programme, government is going to get between 375 million dollars and 500 million dollars for implementing the rural electrification programme.  Mr. Speaker, government I think is being supported by Parliament.  When Parliament enacted the Electricity Act where there are several provisions, enforcing government to make this programme a priority programme, I think Parliament also endorsed  the government prioritisation.  

I therefore want to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that government is doing everything possible to ensure that further destruction of our forests does not continue.  On the cost of electricity Mr. Speaker, electricity in Uganda compared to other countries in the region is the lowest.  I know some people will say that it should be cheaper here because the source is here.  But the capital cost in hydro projects  is intensive Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, we are also looking at other energy sources.  We are already harvesting solar, we have a programme for that and because government is committed to introduce other sources, I want to inform the hon. Member that government has waived taxes on solar.  Mr. Speaker, thank you for giving me the opportunity to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor. 

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, I want to advise the hon. Minister - I hope she is listening - that when the Speaker is talking, she should stop and sit down.  I am very sorry about that.  I am not being rude but these are the regulations you made.  I respect ladies and I do not want to hurt them.

MR. MWANDHA:  Point of clarification.  Mr. Speaker, thank you very much and I would like to thank hon. Ongom for giving way.  Now hon. Ongom is pleading for rural electrification.  This was soon after he had said that the fact the forests are being destroyed because people urban and peri-urban areas cannot afford electricity.  Does hon. Ongom expect people in the rural areas to afford electricity while people in the urban areas cannot afford?

MR. ONGOM:  Let me start with the clarification that hon. Mwandha asked.  I was coming to that but because of time, maybe I will talk to you privately on the matter.  But I was coming to the point that the Minister hinted to and that is the introduction of fast growing trees.  I hope that this will not just be talked about and that this will be introduced quickly and urgently and the proper programme made out for multiplication.  Very often we are told, plant trees, plant trees.  

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Ongom, your time is up.

MR. ONGOM:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Nsibambi):  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Copies of my speech will be circulated to all Members of Parliament today.  Mr. Speaker, ordinarily, I speak last having listened to all Members of Parliament.  But as you know, I shall be leading a delegation to another country where we shall be examining issues of investing in water for production.  Mr. Speaker, the President?s address ?

MS BYANYIMA:  Procedure, Mr. Speaker.  Is the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister winding up this debate?  Is he giving the concluding remarks or is he making a contribution like a Backbencher so that we also continue debate?  Exactly what is this speech meant to be?  Mr. Speaker, can I be guided?

THE SPEAKER: I think we all know who moved the motion and at the end of the contributions, I will give that person who moved the motion an opportunity to respond to any issue or issues raised on the Floor.  I take it that the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister is contributing like any other person.  But as a Prime Minister, I think it is proper that he can address himself to specific issues which he thinks are of concern to government and to the country.

MR. OKUMU RINGA:  Point of clarification.  Mr. Speaker, I thank you for the clarification you have given.  But I am seeking further clarification in respect of Members who have the desire to express themselves on His Excellency?s speech but so have not had time.  If you could guide the House whether or not we should conclude our discussion today or next week.  I am asking this in good spirit  Mr. Speaker because some Members were given 30 minutes, 40 minutes and it will not be fair ?

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Okumu Ringa, why do you not leave this to me?  That is why I am here.  That is why I am Speaker.

MR. OKUMU RINGA:  I thank you Mr. Speaker.  That is why I am seeking clarification.

THE SPEAKER:  Well, why do you not leave that to me?  Otherwise I will have no job.  (Laughter)).  I am supposed to allocate the time.  You are supposed to catch my eye.  Now if you take away all those, what do I do here?  I have no business.

MR. BAKKABULINDI:  Point of clarification.  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker.  I am just seeking a simple clarification.  When the hon. Rt. Prime Minister took the Floor, he talked about leading a delegation assuming outside the country and immediately he gave copies of the speech I hope the one he will be delivering in the other side.  Now my clarification is, is he contributing to the current motion or he is briefing us on the speech he is going to present in the other country?

MR. ETIANG:  Mr. Speaker, I was intrigued by your comments to the effect that the Prime Minister as Prime Minister would be making his points now in view of the fact that he is due to travel.  My understanding is that the Prime Minister in this House is mainly the Leader of Government business.  Mr. Speaker, do I take it that when the Prime Minister leaves the country that there will not be any Leader of Government Business in the House speaking on behalf of the government?

THE SPEAKER: If you are asking me, am I right?  Are you directing that question to the Chair?

MR. ETIANG:  I did indicate, Mr. Speaker, that I was intrigued and it could either be answered by you or by the Prime Minister.  Thank you.

MR. ETIANG:  Well, I will give the Prime Minister an opportunity to answer. 

PRO. A. NSIBAMBI:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The President?s address on the State of the Nation -

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Prime Minister, there is a specific question whether after you have made your contribution and gone away for the conference, whether there will be no other person looking after your portfolio ? government business.

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was intending to answer that question after a while, but it be being urgent that I answer it, let me say that even in the circular I have given out, I made it clear that the First Deputy will take charge of the portfolio and in his absence the Second Deputy ? hon. Prof. Kagonyera Mondo, will take charge of the routine matters of the officer;  and, Mr. Speaker, as you made it clear, hon. Otage will be the person winding up and in addition, hon. Members are to answer questions regarding their ministries.  That is why I am going to make my interventions extremely short.  I am going to give a few fundamental and persistent issues.  I thank you Sir.

DR. OKULO EPAK:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I did not want to come on a point of order, but if I understood the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister correctly, he says he is reading a speech, and you have given him the Floor to contribute to this debate. According to our rules, I do not think anybody contributing to the debate is supposed to read from a prepared text, unless he wants to refer to his notes copiously.  Mr. Speaker, what are we having, is it a contribution from the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, or is the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister making or debating the presidential address of which he should have been a party in preparation.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, should I deal with that one first?

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Speaker, in a debate of this nature, the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister in his capacity as Leader of Government Business, has to give his contribution at the very end before the person who moved the Motion winds up, so that he deals with the issues which Members raise in the course of the general debate.  Even if the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister was to leave the country today, and having said that after all that the First Deputy is going to perform the duties of the Leader of the Government Business, why can the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, not leave the matters of responding to the debate from Members by the person who is going to act in his place;  rather than answering now and then later on may be leaving issues which will be raised that he will not be here to answer!  So, Mr. Speaker, I would have preferred that the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister could have allowed the debate to proceed and brief his successor when he is away to wind up on behalf of government.  Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER:  Now, hon. Member, first of all let me say this;  that let us deal with the first issue raised by the Member who raised the issue of the manner of presentation or contribution.  Hon. Okulo Epak, yes.  As far as  I am concerned, when the Prime Minister stood up, he did not say that he was going to read his speech; he said his speech would be distributed;  that is what I understood, if I did not understand him correctly, then I am sorry;  but I understood the Prime Minister clearly saying that he is going away, his speech will be distributed to hon. Members, that is what he said.  

Now, if the Prime Minister stood up in his presentation to read his speech, then under our rules someone can stand up and say look ? he can raise a point of order.  But the Prime Minister had not even started reading his speech.  Now, it is possible that the Prime Minister was giving his speech to be circulated and he was going to stand up to either summarize or talk about it, or use it as talking notes, alright?  There is nothing wrong about that!  That is what I can say on that one.  Now, as for hon. Mwandha?s position ?(Interjection.)  

MR. OBIGA KANIA:  Mr. Speaker, as the guardian of our rules, I think, it is important that when an issue relating to a particular rule arises, that particular rule is quoted verbatim so that we know exactly what it says, rather then relying on generality.  May I, therefore, get it from you, what rule you are referring to and what are the applicant words relating to reading speeches in this rule.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Do you want the actual words?  Hon. Obiga Kania, I think, it is rule 7 which reads as follows: ?A Member shall not read his or her speech, but may read extracts from written or printed documents in support of his or her argument;  and may refresh his or her memory by reference to notes.  The Speaker may in exceptional circumstances permit a Member to read his or her speech.'  Now, hon. Members, what I was saying on this one was that, until a Member decides or begins to read a speech, there is no problem!  That is the point I was making, and as to the hon. Mwandha?s point;  yes, it would be desirable for the Leader of the Government Business to speak towards the end of the debate, it would be desirable, right?  But as the Prime Minister says, he is travelling, he would like to make his contribution, but that in no way stops the people he will leave behind here to speak on behalf of government, particularly if somebody is acting as the Prime Minister or leader of Government business.  It does not stop that person from winding up or speaking towards the tail-end of the debate.  I think there is no problem with that.  Now, Rt. hon. Minister, you can now make your contribution and I would like to remind you that you are making a contribution.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Having taught for 30 years, I have no problem speaking without a text but it was here just in case I wanted to refer to figures.  Let me say that the President?s address has many important achievements and these are attributable to the following factors; one, good leadership, two, non-psychopathic followership and three, God?s blessing.  These are important pillars which we must nurse assiduously.  When I speak of leadership, I do not only refer to the President alone.  I also refer to all of you as leaders because you need leadership with a vision and also you need non-psychopathic followers who can, from time to time, tell the Emperor that he is naked, but you must be loving critics.    We should not only criticise but appreciate where it is necessary and I wanted to pay tribute to his Excellency, the President, senior colleagues, hon. Members of Parliament, mass media, religious leaders, civil society, tertiary institutions for contributing to good governance we are enjoying.  I will not waste time on our achievements, I will only deal with challenges ahead of us and I will be very short. 

The first challenge is of course to broaden our tax base because, as you know, our revenue is 11.5 per cent, and here I can refer to the text, of the gross domestic product as opposed to the average 16 per cent of the gross domestic product in Sub-Saharan Africa.  So, we need to strengthen the Private Sector and we have taken steps to assist the Private Sector by creating a propitious environment and we have addressed the infrastructure; roads, water, telephone, electricity, etc, as you have amply known.  

Second, we have to address the financial sector because many of you have rightly said that the lending rates are very high.  They range from 25 to 30 per cent per annum and they are very high and steps you have taken to address that matter, first of all, was to close weak banks and reduce the burden of non-performing assets and some have been isolated, for example, from UCB and given to NPART.  We have also increased capital adequacy requirements so that banks are sufficiently capitalised and also improve the capacity of the Central bank to supervise Commercial banks through proper staffing and other measures.  We want also to increase the rate of savings and we want to encourage people to invest.

MR. ONGOM:  Thank you sir.  With regard to high interest rate, the Prime Minister has said that steps are being taken to reduce this but of course he has talked on global terms and he does not tell us what steps are being taken.  Now, how can he do this when, as I read somewhere, that the Bank of Uganda itself that is supposed to do something about controlling this is actually lending to other banks at 23 per cent already.  How then can you address this when the controlling authority themselves are the ones that are actually causing this also?  

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  Thank you sir.  First of all, there is a Minister in charge of Finance and I did economics for part one of my economics and my recollection in answer to that question goes as follows; that even the Bank of Uganda, when you have bad debts and a number of problems in the banking sector, it is also encumbered by those problems.  They affect it but I want also to add that the Bank of Uganda does not always lend at those rates of interest.  That is a correction and the Ministry of Finance will give you the exact figures at which they lend depending upon the issue at hand.  

Now, I come to my third issue, to improve the savings and actually invest the savings and this is a critical matter because we have lacked the culture of saving and it is important that you not only save but we invest into profitable ventures.  That is extremely important and I want to mention that to encourage micro-finance institutions, we shall be bringing a Bill dealing with this matter.  

I will go to a fourth point.  There have been a lot of disputes in the commercial sector and unless these disputes are expeditiously addressed, then investors are highly inconvenienced for a long time.  So, this matter is being addressed through the law reform.  My fifth point is about macro-economic stability, as you know we have sustained macro-economic stability through controlling the rate of inflation and we have had a relatively stable exchange rate.  These must be maintained.

MR. NYAI:  Point of clarification.  Mr. Speaker, I thought the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister was addressing himself to his Excellency, the President?s speech and originally, my conception was that the speech read by his Excellency, the President was fully prepared and fully incorporated all the facets from the various Ministries in his Government. Now, the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister is raising new points were these addition points which should have been in His excellency?s speech so that we discuss them at a later time or how do we proceed with them?  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, really let me say this, yes the debate is about the president?s address on the state of the nation, but in course of the debate hon. Members have raised certain issues connected with that speech which may not necessary have been covered in the speech.  Surely, I thought it would be the Rt. Prime Minister or Leader of Government  Business to give answers or guidelines to those issues which are raised on the floor.

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Speaker,  my concern is that the way the Prime Minister is proceeding, it appears that many of the concerns that have been raised in the House since the beginning of these debates are not being addressed.  And the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister his amplifying issues which the President discussed in his address.  The Rt. hon. Prime Minister could have done that at the very beginning, but at this moment in time it is preferable that the issues people have raised should be addressed from no other than the leader of  Government Business on behalf of the President. And I hope that before he finishes he will do just that.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. ETIANG:  Mr. Speaker, thank you.  Mr. Speaker, I recall telling the House that the Prime Minister was going to contribute to the debate but not to anticipate the full list of the questions that the House would raise.  I have sat patiently here and heard  one, two, three, four, points made by the Prime Minister, all in explanation of Government policy which rightly the Prime Minister  should say and as we agreed towards the end of this debate.  It is in fear of that possibility that some of us had raised the point of clarification  that it would be best advised that since the Prime Minister cannot speak in this House in any other way expect as Leader of Government Business, that he be patient towards the end,  whether or not be physically present in the House, that he should wait until the very end of this debate so that the very point he is making now  deserves of course the very high academic presentation which I  had ? that this should actually be presented as the Members have expressed towards the end of the debate.

MR. BAKABULINDI: Point of clarification.  Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Knowing very much the importance of this motion, and also knowing that the Mover is a mere backbencher who has no authority at all to respond to our queries and also putting it into consideration that the hon. Prime Minister is soon moving as he has already indicating and leaving behind the two deputies of which ever since we started the debate they have never appeared in this House, is it in order, Mr. Speaker, to continue debating on this important Motion of which we are not going to get any response at all.

THE SPEAKER: What is the point of order can you repeat it, are you saying we should not debate, because you think you are not going to receive a response?

MR. BAKABULINDI: Mr. Speaker,  my concern is, we know that the Mover of whom we are relying to wind up this Motion is a mere backbencher who can not respond to our queries and we are already aware that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister is moving and according to his contribution he has nothing to do with what we have already raised.  The people he is leaving behind none of them have ever attended since we started this Motion, now what is the purpose of us continuing debating something very important of which we are not going to come with a resolution. And I was asking, is it in order to continue debating on the same without being assured that even the first deputy Prime Minister or the second  are not going to respond to our queries.

THE SPEAKER: The issue you raised was really a point of procedure I do not think it is a point of order, it cannot be a point of order.  What you are saying is the same thing about the desirability of the Leader of  Government Business to speak to the tail end in order to answer questions raised on the Floor, it is desirable I agree.  But, the Prime Minister says that he is travelling, now he has also admitted that notwithstanding that, he is leaving behind some one to take care of his portfolio, that person will obviously make the response that is my understanding of him.  But, notwithstanding that, or rather in spite of that, the line Ministers are here, I can see the front bench is full to the brim, so I am sure they will be able to address those specific issues.  Therefore, I am requesting the Prime Minister to confine himself to his contribution and conclude so that we can see what to do thereafter.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Point of order. Mr. Speaker, with due respect to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, this House is discussing a very, very, important speech, it is a speech which summarises all the activities of Ministries and it is a speech through which the representatives of the people can echo the problems of the people they represent.  Noting that that is so, noting that section 17; of the Rules of Procedure demands that there should be a quorum is it in order for us to proceed discussing this important matter without a quorum.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the hon. Member?s point is well take we do not have a quorum I will suspend the House for 15 minutes.

(The House was suspended  for 15 minutes).

(On resumption_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the situation is worse and therefore, I will adjourn the House until  2.00 O?clock to tomorrow.  (Interjection)- What is wrong with adjourning to Friday?  Okay, I adjourn it to Tuesday  17th July 2000 at 2.00 O?clock. 

(The House rose at 5.5 p.m and adjourned  until Tuesday the 17th July 2000 at 2.00 O?clock).




