Tuesday 13th July, 1999.

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I regret that we did not start on time. It was because we were given an impression that our public address system was not working, otherwise we should have started promptly as expected.  That is the reason why we have delayed.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

MR. OKUMU RINGA (Padyere County, Nebbi):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I have the following questions addressed to the Minister responsible for Finance, Planning and Economic Development but I believe the relevant Minister responsible for the sector who is present will be able to handle it.  

Successive governments of Uganda since independence have pursued various policies and strategies to achieve economic development for the country. Joint venture companies were established by the government with, both local and international investors and entrepreneurs in pursuit of rapid industrial development in sectors such as agro-processing and import substitution industries.  Government's policy now is to divest itself from some, if not all, of these companies.  

Could the Minister inform the House:- 
1)  How many joint venture companies government has divested itself from to date and the amount of money so far received from the divestiture of those companies?  

2) Arising from question number (1), what are the capital structures of the remaining joint venture companies to date? 

3)  What are the proportions of equity and liability in relation to the assets of the existing joint venture companies to date? 

4) Arising from question number (3) above, what are the liabilities, both short-term and long-term, of the remaining joint venture companies?  

5) What are the provisions in the relevant memoranda and articles of association of the joint venture companies in a situation of dissolution of the companies or disposal of shares by any party in the joint venture companies?  Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIVATISATION (Mr. Manzi Tumbweinee):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to thank hon. Okumu Ringa for the question.  Mr. Speaker, I will answer this question in three parts:  (1) will be separate, then (2), (3) and (4) will be combined and (5) will be separate because (2), (3) and (4) actually are talking about capital structure, equity, liability and short term loans. 

Government has divested so far a total of twelve enterprises in which it was holding shares under a joint venture arrangement with other partners.  The total receipts from these twelve enterprises is 37,228,000,000 billion shillings.  These joint venture companies we are referring to are:- 
1) Shell Uganda Limited, in which we had 50 per cent holding as  government, and we sold it to Shell Petroleum Company Limited but basically, it was an equity debt swoop for the 12.8 billion shillings.  
2) Blenders Uganda Limited in which government had a holding of 49 per cent and it was sold to UNILEVER Overseas Holding Limited at 0.5 billion shillings.  
3) Total Uganda Limited - 50 per cent holding by government, sold to Total Atremia at 5.7 billion shillings.  
4) African Textile Mills 49 per cent share‑holding by government, sold to P.S. Patel at 1.4 billion shillings.  
5) AGIP Uganda Limited - Government had a holding of 50 per cent shares, was sold to AGIP Petrol International at 1.7 billion.  
6) Stanbic Bank - Government had a holding of 49 per cent shares, it was sold to Standard Bank International Cooperation Africa holding at 6.9 billion.  
7) Barclays Bank - Government had a holding of 49 per cent shares, sold to Barclays P.L.C. at 5 billion.  8) Bank of Baroda Uganda Limited - Government had a holding of 49 per cent shares sold to Bank of Baroda India at 2.5 billion.  
9) Chillington Tool Company - Government had a 15 per cent share-holding, it was liquidated, zero receipts. 
10) Associated Paper Industries - Government had 25 per cent share- holding was liquidated, therefore, zero receipts.  
11) Uganda Bags and Heshian Mills - Government had 8.14 per cent, it was liquidated, zero receipts. 
12) East African Distilleries - Government had 51 shares, sold to International Distillers Vintners, sold for 0.7 billion.  

Mr. Speaker, there are two other companies or enterprises which are not strictly joint venture because they had several shareholders and there was no arrangement between government and one single shareholder.  Mr. Speaker, I would rather define them as public companies where government had substantial interest.  These are:-  
1) Uganda Leather and Tannery Industries - it was sold for 1.71 billion.  The minority shareholders are being verified and will eventually be paid off;  
2) Uganda Cement Industries - the minority shareholders were holding 14 per cent shares.  The shares in Uganda Cement Industries was sold for 20.5 million dollars to Hima Cement Works and 5.75 billion shillings to Tororo Cement Works. 

Now I come to questions (2), (3), and (4);  Capital structure, liability and total assets of existing joint ventures.  There are 15 existing joint ventures and four semi or quasi joint  venture companies. The companies I am going to enumerate show government equity, their outstanding loans and total book value of their assets.  

Short term liabilities which include overdrafts and other short term operational loans are not included because these change on a day to day basis.  It would be very risky to try to enumerate and calculate overdraft holdings of companies when actually they change on a daily basis.  Therefore, loans we are talking about now will be those loans where government has an interest or government has guaranteed the various enterprises.  These companies are:- 
1) Steel Corporation of East Africa - Government has 23 per cent share‑holding, there are no outstanding debts to which government is responsible.  Total assets- 13.5 billion shillings.  
2) BAT Uganda Limited or British American Tobacco Uganda Limited - Government has a 30 per cent share‑holding, no outstanding debts to which government is responsible; total assets - 50.6 billion shillings.  
3) Cable Corporation - Government has a share‑holding of 51 per cent, government has guaranteed  5.4 billion shillings as loans and the asset holding is 8.5 billion shillings.  
4) Kakira Sugar Works - Government has a holding of 30 per cent. Government has guaranteed Kakira Sugar Works to the tune of 70.3 billion shillings and the asset holding is 147.6 billion shillings.  
5) Kasese Cobalt - Government has a share‑holding of 25 per cent, no loan related to government, asset base is 98.9 billion shillings.  
6) Nile Hotel and International Conference Centre - As a result of the aborted deal, government now has a holding of 99 per cent shares, has guaranteed a 1.2 billion shillings debt, and the asset base is 19.6 billion shillings.  
7) Sino Uganda Fisheries - Government has 51 per cent shares and the company is under liquidation.  
8)SCOUL - Government has a holding of 30 per cent shares, government has guaranteed 38.3 billion shillings, the asset base is 86.6 billion shillings.  
9) Uganda-Libyan Arab Holding Company which actually is the same as Uganda-Libyan Bank - Government has a 50 per cent share, there are no loans but government has never paid for its share holding.  So actually, government is - I do not know what to call it but they are shareholders without a share, without paying for the share.  
10) UGMA Engineering Corporation - Government has 51 per cent shares, government has so far guaranteed 9.5 billion shillings  and the asset base is 12.3 billion shillings.  
11) Lake Victoria Windsor Hotel - Government has 49 per cent share holding, there are no debts guaranteed, the asset base is 7 billion.
12) Development Finance Corporation of Uganda has a share holding of 20 per cent, no debts, asset base is 5 billion shillings.  
13) Housing Finance Company of Uganda - Government has 50 per cent share holding, no debts, asset base is 16.7 billion.  
14) Uganda Clays - Government has a holding of 75 per cent shares, no debts, asset base is 4.1 billion shillings.  
15) Rwenzori Highland Enterprises Limited which is the successor of the Agricultural Enterprises Limited - Government still has 8 per cent share holding, the asset base is 25 billion shillings.

Mr. Speaker, there are four other enterprises in which government has interest but which are not strictly defined as joint ventures because of the number of shareholders and the method under which these were acquired.   These are:- 
1) Uganda Consolidated Properties - government has 53 per cent shares.  Arrangements are being made to finalize the payment for the minority shareholders.  
2) Uganda Crane Industries - government has 97.75 per cent of the shares. This company was relatively dormant but because it has shares in Uganda Consolidated Properties Limited, and in Uganda Hotels, it has been revived so that divesture of both UCPL and Uganda Hotels complies with the Companies' Act.  The minority shareholders are  being verified for eventual payment.  This company has no premises, but is being handled under the Ministry of Finance.  
3) Uganda Grain Millers Limited - government has 28. per cent share holding and this company has an asset base of 17.5 billion.  
4) The divesture of Uganda Commercial bank Limited created a new joint venture where government owns 51 per cent shares.

The last question, Mr. Speaker, regards provision of memoranda and articles of association of the joint venture companies.  Mr. Speaker, dissolution, winding up and liquidation of these companies is carried out according to the relevant sections of the Companies' Act.  So each company is dealt with according to the law established.  

Disposal of shares:  When these companies are private limited liability companies, these companies have pre-emptive - or because they were private companies, nearly all the companies, both sold and unsold, have pre-emptive rights clauses on disposal of shares by any shareholder of the company.  That is, if any party wishes to dispose of his shares, he is required by this clause to offer them to the other partners first.  It is only when the other partners have failed or refused to take up the shares that the shares can be offered to any other person who is not a shareholder, subject to approval by other shareholders.

You will notice, Mr. Speaker, that in nearly all the cases referred to above, the joint venture partners took over and invoked the pre-emptive rights and bought the shares as was provided for in the law.  Mr. Speaker, I thank you.

MR. OKUMU RINGA:  Mr. Speaker, I have three supplementary questions for the Minister with regard to the answers he has given. First, I would like to thank him for the clear and well researched answers he has given to some of these questions.  He has stated that 12 enterprises have already been divested, and he also stated that the total receipt from the divesture is 37.2 billion shillings.  Could the Minister explain whether this 37.2 billion shillings is in the coffers of the divesture account and is therefore ready for utilization for investment in the promotion of industrialisation in this country as provided for in the PERD Statute?  

The second question, Mr. Speaker, is with regard to the remaining joint venture companies which are yet to be divested. Mr. Speaker, could the Minister inform us as to what methodology will be put in place to divest the remaining companies in an efficient manner so as to maximize receipts into the coffers of the divestiture account?  

This question is particularly related to the statistics which we sometimes see in the Ministry's report that as of now, government is spending more money to support the joint venture companies in terms of, maybe, paying for some of their commitments. If you take the case of Mehta company, every financial year, money is voted to pay Mehta. Even in the current financial year, 18 billion shillings has been provided to pay Mehta.  So, could the Minister inform the House as to whether, in the process of divestiture, government will reduce its expenditure?  

The last supplementary question, Mr. Speaker, is with regard to the pre-emptive clause which is usually contained in the memorandum and articles of association in joint venture companies. This pre-emptive clause, Mr. Speaker, is detrimental to the government because joint venture companies take advantage of that pre-emptive clause and kind of rip-off the government.  Could the Minister advise as to the best way of getting out of these pre-emptive clauses so that government does not lose?  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga South,Kampala):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I am most privileged to have caught your eye.  Mr. Speaker, the representatives of the people should by now have known the details of those sales as illustrated by the hon. Minister of Finance.  The supplementary information I am seeking is, are those sales reflected anywhere in the current budget?  We are the representatives of the people,  the parastatals referred to have a bearing on the expenditures and taxes of our grandfathers and fathers.  We would like to know whether what we are doing now with reference to the budget has a bearing to the sales.  

Lastly, Mr. Speaker, aware of the fact that Parliament has taken very tough steps to restructure the sale of parastatals, would the Minister tell this House whether what we have endeavoured to reform shall in future be reflected in the PERD Statute by way of a revision or amendment?  

MR. OKELLO-OKELLO(Chua County,Kitgum):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I have a few supplementary questions.  The first one is; I would like to know from the hon. Minister who determines the values of those shares.  That is number one.  Number two, Mr. Speaker, in the majority of cases, the government shares have been bought by the core investors privately.  Mr. Speaker, could we not expose the availability of these shares to the whole world in order to get a little bit more money?  Thirdly, Mr. Speaker, I do not know what would happen if the government and the buyer who is normally the core investor disagree on the value.  Is there any room for arbitration?  I am saying this, Mr. Speaker, because in the case of B.A.T, I had a look at two valuations by two different international companies and they differ almost by 100 per cent. In a situation like this, what happens?  

Lastly, Mr. Speaker, the pre-emptive rights of the core investors in most cases are subject to certain conditions.  In the case of B.A.T, I think it was subject to a condition that ten per cent of the total shares of B.A.T must first be sold to ordinary Ugandans before that right could be exercised.  But it would appear that government has gone ahead to dispose of the shares in total disregard of the provisions in the agreement. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. BAKKABULINDI(Workers' Representative): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My supplementary question to the hon. Minister is;  how many indigenous Ugandans have enjoyed from these proceeds or bought these shares and what sort of criteria was used?  Question number two: Apart from the ICB, what other banks do you normally use and how much was locked in ICB?  Question number three: Now that we got 37,228,000,000 billion shillings from the twelve joint venture companies which were divested, can you tell us how you used that money?

MR. AWORI (Samia Bugwe North,Busia):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to thank the hon. Minister for giving us the first comprehensive statement on the money we have accrued or received from the privatisation programme.  Mr. Speaker, this being the most comprehensive statement we have received to date from a Minister of Finance, will it be possible to get copies circulated to us at the end of this debate?  

Mr. Speaker, the specific question I have for the hon. Minister is by way of doubting the authenticity of some of the reports.  Number one: Hima Cement as part of UCI. Mr. Speaker, I do not think we have received a full picture on the status of Hima.  At various times, we have been told that the buyer at the material time doubted the reserves of lime at Hima, which means he did not pay us the full amount he was supposed to. Has he since then paid that money?  

Number two, Mr. Speaker, UCI before it was disposed of had kind of discrepancies in income tax payment.  At some stage, we were told they imported some raw materials which were near finished cement and they did not pay the full amount.  Has this situation been cleared?  

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I would like to know about Sheraton or Apollo Hotel Limited.  Apollo Hotel Limited had an arrangement with Sheraton to manage it and they were making a profit.  Out of the blue, bids were put out and in the  process we are told two Ministers and two highly placed officials of government and Ministry of Defence pushed Midroc, one of the bidders, to pay out up to two million dollars.  Now, I see that Midroc is back into the picture and unconfirmed press reports indicate  -(Interruptions) - unconfirmed, not yet confirmed by the State - that you are going to receive nine million dollars only for the venture. Do I assume that two million dollars given out to our people has been taken care of?  Do I assume that the price was actually twelve but because we gave out to highly placed people in the government two million, therefore it has been written off?  And if not, could the hon. Minister tell us categorically that no Minister took part in this scandal and if so, could he name the Ministers responsible? (Laughter).  

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I would like to know; when do we receive in this House the Omongole Report?  We have been waiting, waiting and waiting.  Is it being suppressed again by the State in order to cover up for the corrupt Ministers? Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. ONGOM (Omoro County,Gulu): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have only two related supplementary questions from the Minister's answers. My supplementary question is on the remaining joint venture companies. How many of these are actually making profits now and paying dividends to the government for whatever shares they are holding?  And the related question is; if there are such companies that are making profits and paying dividends to the government for whatever shares they are holding and they are on the market, would it not be prudent to delay divesting the government shares now so that at a later stage when we sell them, at least we get better prices for them rather than rushing them now when the market is virtually saturated with this divestiture?  

MR. KARUHANGA (Nyabushozi County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I want to thank hon. Okumu Ringa for asking the question and to thank the Minister for a comprehensive answer and maybe still on that, I should generally thank the Leader of Government Business, who is the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs, for putting a lot of emphasis on answering backbenchers' questions because this is going to improve the environment of our working relationship. My only worry is that the questions which come out as supplementary question are almost too complicated for the Minister individually to tackle and answer correctly on the spot. So, I would love to see the government backbenches full of support staff with lap-tops and passing questions and answers to the Ministers so that the country can be properly informed, and I am sure that is going to be handled.  

Now, some of my supplementary questions were picked up by hon. Aggrey Awori, especially on Hima cement but I want to ask about UCB. The Minister who has given us a comprehensive answer for which I have complimented him was, while he was in the Backbenches, very involved with the future and the fate of UCB. Now that he has finally arrived at the determinant terminal, what has he now discovered about UCB?  What is the current situation with UCB, and what is likely to be the future situation with UCB? 

My second supplementary question is; having sold 12 companies where we had joint ventures and realised some money and put it in the coffers of Government, when you look back, have we become wiser or have we lost out?  Have we lost out when we sold or have we gained when we sold? Let us take specific examples on taxation.  How much tax were we picking from these 12 companies when they were running as joint venture companies?  How much improved tax have we got or reduced tax have we got from the current situation so that when we tackle the next phase, we know that we are doing something which is in the end beneficial to the country? I do not know whether the Minister will be in a position to answer the question on tax, considering that the government benches are not full of URA people, but maybe he will venture and answer and circulate it later on to us.  If he can answer those two, I will be very happy.  Thank you.

DR. KINYATTA (Kinkizi East, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mine also is on UCB. The hon. Minister said that at present, 51 percent shares are held by government but we do not know who holds the 49 percent because we know it from the media that Westmont took 49 percent which was a trick.  Who really now owns 49 percent of UCB?  Let us know it.  

The second supplementary question is about the joint ventures. Mr. Speaker, we have learnt that government is disposing of joint ventures but then they were making guarantees in various companies under the joint ventures. What arrangement does the government have now to get rid of those guarantees which are such a big obligation to the nation?  

That leads me also to ask another question that, at present it seems that government is still going on with this policy of guarantees.  This is why they brought this guarantee on the AES business which the Members have refused here.  Why should the government now continue to guarantee and lock people's money for generations and generations?  

The last supplementary question, Mr. Speaker, is about Uganda Development Corporation. In 1991, the Cabinet passed a resolution that they are going to maintain UDC as one of the parastatal bodies held 100 percent.  They even went on to say that they are going to put in 15 million dollars to reactivate UDC.  Today is 1999, they have crippled UDC. All companies, of course, went; they were divested. The workers left UDC.  Some of them up to now have not been paid but UDC is on paper.  Can I get clarification from the hon. Minister, what is the fate of Uganda Development Corporation as of today? Thank you.

MR. NSUBUGA MAYANJA:   Mr. Speaker,  my question relates to what hon. Dr. Kinyatta has raised, and that is the issue of guarantees  -(Interruptions)-  Mr. Speaker, we recognise the entrance of our honourable mugole, hon. Winnie Byanyima. Now, my question is, in 1992, Uganda became a subscriber to the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency, MIGA.  I am just wondering how our belonging to MIGA has assisted us, and if it has not assisted  us, why should we continue to subscribe when our Government still has to continue guaranteeing when we are members of MIGA.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I want to thank the hon. Members for the very good questions which  will give us more work. Mr. Speaker, I have already finalised a  report to present to Parliament, but I am still negotiating with the Minister in charge of Parliament to give me a slot to present it, and she has agreed. I will probably present it next week. That means it will be more comprehensive and will give you as many answers as you would want, maybe even more answers than I asked when I was at the back.  

Let me briefly answer these questions, and as  I promised, we shall answer them in more detail when we bring  a comprehensive report on the status of the privatisation  process from inception up to 3lst March, 1999. The individual questions now are; where is the 37.28 billion, is it available for investment?  When you sell an enterprise, you receive payment, but you also disburse money to cover the costs and indeed sometimes to pay off the creditors. When I bring this report I will give you all the details but briefly, I can state in general terms that; total divestiture receipts to date are Shs.108,847,000,000 billion but total expenditure is Shs.l03,778,000,000 billion. So actually, what is available is Shs.5,069,000,000 billion but as I said, when I give you the comprehensive report, you will see how this money was spent and why it was spent.  

Now, the question is; is this money available for investment?  Once we have a surplus, then of course it is available for investment, but in two senses.  One, Privatisation Unit as per the PERD Statute is not a lending institution.  We can only put the money in the bank and increase the liquidity of banks in order for the banks to lend the money.  

Hon. Okumu was asking what method will be put in place to maximise the receipts and how we are supposed to avoid subsidies.  Of course if we sell off an enterprise, then we do not subsidise it.  That automatically removes the subsidy from Government. Effectively, all the enterprises that have been sold are no longer being subsidised.  

Can we avoid the pre-emptive clause?  I think the lawyers will help us here but I think you cannot because they were put in the contract!  And they were put in the contract by the government at the time.  So, you can only negotiate about them but you cannot say I will unilaterally cancel all the contracts because they have got pre-emptive right clauses, otherwise you will end up by paying more because you remember that each contract, not only does it have a pre-emptive clause, but also has an arbitration clause.  So, if you as the government try to do what is not acceptable to the other partner, he will take you to an arbitration court and if you lose, you will end up by paying more and in most cases, arbitration is done in London and other places outside Uganda.  So actually, the cost might be higher than accepting to negotiate on a pre-emptive clause.  

Hon. Lukyamuzi wants to know whether these sales are actually contained in the Budget. No, they are not because they should not be.  The PERD Statute clearly says that all monies from sold enterprises shall be put in the Divestiture Account, it does not say the money should go to the Consolidated Fund!  Government expenditure is only derived from the Consolidated Fund, not from the Divestiture Account.  So we cannot put this money in the Consolidated Fund. Therefore, it does not appear in the Budget as the Budget is.  Secondly, are we going to amend PERD Statute as the committee proposed -(Interruption). 

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Noting that Uganda is one of the countries suffering the burden of borrowing, do you not think, Mr. Minister, Sir, that it will be very appropriate that in order for us to reduce the international debt, it is most advisable for us to utilise part of the sales and make it a substitution for the money we borrow from the IMF, World Bank every year?

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE:  Well, that is true, and indeed in some cases the EDB funds have been used to swap certain debts with Government but surely, if the total Budget of this country this year, as you will realise if you have looked at the document, is Shs.1.8 trillion, and you are talking of Shs.5 billion, even if you spent Shs.5 billion, I do not think you would actually make a significant impact on the Budget.  

Hon. Okello-Okello wants to know who determines the value of the shares.  This was determined by qualified financial accountants, and we have used Price Waterhouse, KPMG Coopers - but now Cooper and Price Waterhouse are one company.  So, we use qualified accountants. Now, how do you get the value of the shares?  There are three methods: If you are going to sell, you can either use the market price of the company or you can use the asset value of the company, or you can use the going concern value of the company.  

Any reasonable intelligent businessman will only buy a company using the going concern value.  No businessman will use asset value in order to buy the company.  Of course when there is pre-emptive rights, then you cannot advertise; you first deal with the pre-emptive right clause, and if you fail to agree, that is when you go on the market and advertise.  That is why most of these companies have actually been handled by the core investors or joint venture partners because they invoked their pre-emptive rights and, of course, it depends on how the pre-emptive right clause was written.  If it was aggressively against government at the time of writing in the '80s and years before, then of course any good businessman will invoke what benefits him.  

Now, on the question of BAT, it is true there were some conditions. The negotiations started last year and they are likely to be concluded soon and we are still insisting that ten per cent of the shares of BAT should go to the public.  

Hon. Bakkabulindi wants to know how many Ugandans have borrowed from the Divestiture Account. As I said earlier, the Privatisation Unit does not lend to people directly;  it can only put money in a bank from where the private individuals can benefit. The only arrangements that I know of were for two companies; BMTS which produces tea in Mbarara and Sembule which produces tea in Kampala. They had a cash flow problem, they approached Government and Government agreed to deliberately increase its deposit in Bank of Baroda and Sembule Bank at the time in order for them to have access to borrowing from there, and the borrowing was done strictly between BMTS with Baroda and Sembule with Sembule Bank but not directly with the Privatisation Unit. 

Now, the question is, what bank do you use?  Well, since the beginning of the year, there has not been any sales, so we have not used any bank this year. Nevertheless, what happens is that,  when you get a sale, you offer it to the banks in the country and the bank that offers the highest rate of return on fixed deposit is the bank that accesses the deposit.  Hon. Aggrey Awori says can we have the copies of these  -(Interruption).

MR. BAKKABULINDI:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My question was; what banks do you use? And then I wanted to know how much was locked in ICB. On the issue of how many Ugandans have enjoyed this money, I remember very well when, hon. Minister, you were still a good Member of the Backbench, you read about Sam Engola's story, and if it was not for the Press to blow it out, Sam Engola was going to benefit from PU.  Now, could you tell us, when you entered in that same office, what you found out, what was the criteria used for Sam Engola to be recommended? (Laughter).

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE:  Thank you, hon. Bakkabulindi.  I want to assure you that I am still a good Member of Parliament representing Rukiga County.  Now, there was no money from the Privatisation Unit that was caught up in ICB.  ICB had already paid out all the money that had been banked there from Privatisation Unit, that one is a fact.  The only money that was caught up in ICB was money for projects which you recently helped us to pass as a supplementary, totalling Shs.4.6 billion. Secondly, the question of Engola; Engola never received any money at all, not a single shillings for, on behalf of or in relation with the Privatisation Unit.  He applied for, he was considered for but he was never paid any money!  

Hon. Aggrey Awori wants copies of my answer;  I suppose there is not problem, he can get the copies. He also wants to know whether it is true that the buyer of Hima doubted the reserves.  Yes, it is true he doubted the reserves.  There were further studies made on the reserves and there is still a dispute and I want to assure you that we are taking that dispute very seriously.  We have already asked the Attorney General to help us on that and he has already appointed a lawyer to follow up the balance of payments.  
All other issues related to Hima are still with our Select Committee and when the Select Committee brings the report here, you can be assured that they will give you a comprehensive answer. I think, it is  very wrong to believe that the Omongole report is delaying because Government is involved.  No, not at all!  This is a committee of Parliament, it is an independent committee of hon. Members of Parliament, nobody is arm-twisting them.  I think the work was much more than they had anticipated and what Parliament had anticipated.  Enquiries take much longer than what you think.  

Now, the question of clinker, hon. Awori knows that there was a problem at the time about two years ago when clinker was being defined as a raw material. He also knows that in the 1997/98 Budget, we removed clinker from being a raw material and it is now taxed as a finished product.  

Sheraton:  I am not aware of Ministers and Army Officers who were looking for two million dollars. I think hon. Awori knows them. Perhaps at an appropriate time he will give us the names.  Nevertheless, I want to correct an impression;  not everything that we read in the papers is true.  For instance, Sheraton was not bidded for 12 million dollars as hon. Awori says. The actual price was 19 million dollars and the deposit was two million dollars. There was a wrangle and that wrangle has not been resolved. Actually, I can assure the House that the Select Committee is working very hard to ensure that they disentangle whatever there is on that wrangle. So, the balance is not 9 million but it is 17 million dollars.  I think, since the Committee has not presented its report, we should leave that one at that and wait for the Committee to see what they have found.  

Hon. Ongom's question was, how many of these companies which we still have share in actually are paying taxes? The only one actually paying taxes is BAT -(Interruption).

MR. ONGOM:  Sorry, I did not say 'taxes';  I said 'dividends'.  

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Yes, I am coming to that. Let me concentrate on dividends. Only BAT is paying dividends because it is the only company that is making profit.  All the others are actually not making profits. Kasese Cobalt has not started operations very effectively; the others are making some losses and, therefore, they are not paying dividends.  Now, the question is, should we delay their privatisation because they are making profit?  I think let us look at what they are - but it is only one company, so we shall see whether it is worth privatising now or in future.  

Hon. Karuhanga: what has been discovered in UCB and what is likely to be the future of UCB?  Now, I think I will combine UCB with another question.  UCB, of course, was sold 49 per cent to Westmont Asia and Westmont Asia still has 49 per cent shares.  Hon. Karuhanga knows, as a lawyer that, that should be the case. Although Government disagrees with the way Westmont Asia is operating, the only contract we could actually terminate was the management contract.  But in terms of shares, since they paid for the shares, there is no way you can say you do not have shares for which you paid for.  If the method of payment was wrong, that is what we are challenging, and it will be up to the courts to tell us whether we are right or they are right.  

I want to say that we have appointed a lawyer, I think, a prominent lawyer in town here, well qualified in financial law, to be able to handle this case.  I am sure you have also heard that we have won the preliminary part in the High Court because they did not put in their - I do know what they call it - some defence.  Now we are going to the second clause, the arbitration clause.  The Attorney General has put in place machinery to ensure that we go for arbitration and it will be in London.  We have paid all the necessary fees for arbitration and what remains now is to sit in a place together and look at the issues related to this arbitration.  As Government, we are claiming 32 billion from them, and it is up to them to prove that we do not, actually, justify the 32 million.  

The other question from hon. Karuhanga is: have we gained from sales or have we lost? Now, which loses are we talking of;  the accountant's losses or the economist's losses? Because, really an economy is run on two grounds. Currently we are paying subsidies, that means we were making accounting loses  and economic loses in the first instance.  However, we are  getting out of the enterprises because we want to avoid financial  loses and then enjoy economic gains. Because, once you privatise an enterprise and you stop paying subsidies, that is a gain,  an immediate gain. 

Subsidies, by the way, are of two types:  There is direct subsidy which is a cash payment, and indirect subsidy which is either a loss of taxes or a loss of dividends or a loss of jobs.  Now, we have gained as a result of the sale of enterprises, therefore, because we have gained from incurring financial loses and we  have replaced financial losses with economic gains.  

MR. AWORI:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Could the hon. Minister be clear on this matter of enterprises that are losing and therefore are liable for privatisation, and enterprises that are making a profit.  Two examples; Sheraton Hotel is making a fantastic profit, you want to privatise it.  NEC - Ministry of Defence is making horrendous losses, you are still capitalising it. Can you explain? 

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE:  Mr. Speaker, I did not want to disagree but I want to actually disagree with hon. Awori on the point that Sheraton is making profits.  Profits are also of two types; there is operational profit and net profit.  Sheraton is making operational profit but is making net loss. This is because, after operational profit, you have got to subtract the operational expenses and the financial costs.  

MR. NYAI:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for being gentle with me and considerate.  I did languages.  Now, for the hon. Minister to say that Sheraton is making operational profits and then makes financial losses -(Laughter)- Mr. Speaker, I am absolutely lost because I believe profit is after you have taken away all your expenditures, and it is also financial!  What I am talking  about is, if somebody is making a profit, unless he tells me that  we tax their profit away, that is a different matter but to say that you are making operational profits and that at the end of the day you are making a loss, I think the people of Uganda deserve a better explanation than that.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am convinced and I think I know what I am talking about because when you are making books of accounts, sales minus purchases gives you  gross profit, that is the operation profit.  Once you have got gross profit, then you deduct from that all other operational expenses, what you end up with is a net profit or a net loss.  You may actually end up with some net profit but if you borrowed significantly and you have got to service the debt, then that  is a financial cost which you must also deduct from your net profit and you may end up with a net loss although you had an operational profit.  

Mr. Speaker, hon. Kinyatta wanted to know who is holding the 49 percent shares.  As I said, it is Westmont Asia that is holding the 49 percent shares in UCB.  The other question was; why should we be making further guarantees to other companies when we  are selling off joint ventures?  Of course, the guarantee we are talking about for AES is a completely different type of guarantee from the guarantees that were given to these. The hon. Minister in charge will explain all that, but it is a different guarantee.  This is a partial risk guarantee just to allow an investor  to come here and invest with a guarantee that he will be able  to sell his product and that the product will be bought, which is slightly different from the normal guarantee.  

Now, the last question from Dr. Kinyatta was that, UDC was supposed to have been capitalised and maintained 100 percent,  but it was not. I agree with him it was not. I think it is now due for liquidation because it is non performing.  

Finally, hon. Speaker, hon. Nsubuga wants to know; that in 1992, Government of Uganda subscribed to MIGA.  How come, therefore,  that we are now still guaranteeing?  Yes, of course, we have got to guarantee because MIGA which is a subsidiary of World Bank guarantees only political risks for investors. It does not guarantee financial risks and other risks.  It only helps  those countries that have got a financial risk rating which is  probably higher than 20 per cent to be able to attract investors in the country. And, of course, you know in Uganda we still have a political risk of slightly higher than 20 percent, and we  need that kind of guarantee to show the investors that we are  set.  

Mr. Speaker, I thank you very much and when I bring the fuller statement, we shall discuss this matter more exhaustively.

MR. PINTO:  I crave your indulgence, Mr. Speaker, to raise a point of procedure before the hon. Minister of Local Government presents his statement.  This is a matter of great concern and I request that the Leader of Government Business, as a matter of procedure, informs this House how Parliament is going to operate, being that it is disabled.  Now, we have Sessional Committees through which we are supposed to discuss the budget and carry on other business.  

This morning, Mr. Speaker, I came early, I found Serjeant-At-Arms trying to prepare for meetings. He had put some tables in the Main  Lobby, he had put some in the garden, he had put some in this  Plenary and sadly as I moved around, I found that he had also put some tables in the corridor leading to the toilets in the basement -(Laughter)- it is not a laughing matter. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, this morning I found the Committee on Social Services with their chairman and two Members waiting, and the Minister and his team were there very obediently trying to transact business in a very, very unbecoming, very  uncomfortable place. 

Now, being that it had been resolved that Government shall vacate Parliamentary premises to give room for the functioning of Parliament - (Applause)- could the right Rt. hon. Prime Minister please tell us how he can enable Parliament to function? Then also, following what my earlier Colleagues had questioned, if when we were divesting properties from Custodian Board, one had  been wise enough for Government to acquire some of these buildings and paid for them, or as we have heard that Government has purchased from His Majesty the Kabaka property worth 320 million, Government could go out and buy some houses build its own offices or purchase facilities or rent, but this question of disabling Parliament so that Committees cannot function is not acceptable.  I request for a precise and committal answer from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister.  The second point, Mr. Speaker, on that -(Interruption)- okay, then I have a second point, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Why do you not finish what you want to say then  -(Interruption)  

MR. PINTO:  I am very well guided.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I will give you an opportunity to make  - (Interruption)

MR. PINTO:  - a supplementary after.  The second one, Sir, as I have grown in age, I have known that once the Courts have decided on something, that is a decision we all uphold; and in our Constitution we know that the Judiciary is independent. We also know that we established another organ of Government, the IGG,  as equally independent.  I am now confused and it concerns me as I pass through Masaka all the time.  I understand that the  High Court Judge had ruled that there was a case in favour of  a certain appellant and that they had won to run the taxi park.  At the same time, we have heard that the Judge had ruled  and given a directive that his decision stands and it is a Constitutional matter.  As a lay person -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, I thought the matter for  which you stood to ask the Prime Minister was in respect of facilities here in Parliament which enable Parliament to perform its work but now you have brought in an unrelated matter. I am not saying that it is not important, but an unrelated matter which perhaps would be directed to the Minister for Constitutional Affairs or the Attorney General, instead now you are putting it in the same - can we not restrict ourselves to the very urgent matter which you asked so that we proceed  with today's business?

MR. PINTO:  I am very well guided.  Mr. Speaker, could the Rt. hon. Prime Minister answer on point number one, but also ask Ministers in this Government he leads as a Minister of autocracy and -(Laughter)- he gave an explanation when you were not  here, Mr. Speaker, that he is a very authoritative Prime Minister that can handle all issues.  Could he also address himself to the second question, Mr. Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Well, not today I suppose.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to supplement hon. Pinto's point on space by way of information.  The chairmen  of various Committees have met and approached the Speaker and requested for a meeting at 10.00 O'clock so that we can know  the fate of the Committees because it looks it will be impossible for us to conduct the Session the best way we can, and we hope that by tomorrow, since we have written to the Speaker and we asked for a meeting for tomorrow, we hope that the Leader of Government Business and the Minister in charge of Parliamentary Affairs will have cleaned room for us since we gather that there is a Presidential directive that various Ministries in this building vacate and give us room.  So, we hope that by tomorrow when we meet the Speaker, we shall have been given deadlines on the time when these people are leaving, and then we can be able to start our business. I hope that the Speaker can also guide us about the fate of our application to meet him tomorrow at 10.00.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  But since the statement was sought from the Prime Minister, why do we not get a statement from the Prime Minister  rather than the Speaker?  The Rt. hon. Prime Minister.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Nsibambi):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, only this morning, we addressed this matter which is exercising our minds at this moment, and it was agreed that hon. Rugunda should handle this matter comprehensively and he should get in touch with all the Committees and give them a comprehensive answer.  This matter must be fully coordinated because there have been a number of policies in the past, and one would like to ensure that one handles the continuities and discontinuities  of history.  I thank you (Laughter).

MR. PINTO:  Mr. Speaker, I ask my question in plain English, I request the Rt. hon. Prime Minister who is a teacher who is very knowledgeable in the English language to please try to explain to us as clearly and plainly as possible, I am confused by his answer.  

MR. CHEBET MAIKUT:  Mr. Speaker, I am certain that in this House there is this element of hide-and-seek which is always common because some time early this year, Members of this Parliament received communication from your office, Sir, to the effect that His Excellency the President had given a directive outlining a timetable in which various Ministries currently occupying the other side of Parliament will be moving out and I recall very clearly that by May this year, which is now about two months passed, one Ministry or two Ministries should have already vacated that building.  So, could we really be clarified on what is the actual position, rather than the hide-and-seek game  going on now?  Thank you.  

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I am seeking clarification from the Prime Minister.  This morning when I came in, I thought that we had a UPE lessons around the Parliament  because I found Members of Parliament under the trees.  Now -(Laughter)- ya! Committees were under the trees, so I thought this is extension of UPE (Laughter).  Mr. Speaker, should I get it from the Prime Minister that Committees should put the discussion to hold until we get space to discuss the budget?  

MS EGUNYU:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I would like a clarification from the hon. Prime Minister as to whether what we are reading in the press about Government buying properties is related to some of the Ministries which are occupying the other side of Parliament moving out. I repeat it; I have read in the press that Government is busy buying up some properties - I hope I read it correctly; is that related to having  some Ministries vacate the other side of Parliament so that the Committees can do their work?

LT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA: Mr. Speaker, I would want the Right Hon. Prime Minister to clarify to us whether it is true Government is saying that after all, the offices being claimed by Members of Parliament belong to the Executive arm of Government. This is circulating around amongst Ministers and amongst many other people.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  When Members of Parliament ask questions on the spur of the moment, it is not always possible to give what I call "researched answers". That is why there are sector Ministers to handle these matters and I did make it clear this morning when we became aware of this problem.  We do have a Minister in charge of Parliamentary Affairs and she is right here and what we agreed was that the responsible Minister who happens to be hon. Rugunda must interface with the Committees and give concrete answers and also a time frame of how he is going to go about this matter.

MR. NYAI: Mr. Speaker, I must apologise to the hon. Prime Minister. I know he is full of very high sounding words but at the moment, they are conveying almost no meaning.  Mr. Speaker, I am saying this because at the first Business Committee meeting at the beginning of this meeting which the Minister for General Duties in the office of the Prime Minister attended, a tentative schedule of when the Police Headquarters was moving out of here and when the Foreign Affairs Office was moving out was agreed on.  I think, to say that this question is on the spur of the moment is not really being very forthright with Members of Parliament. If the Right hon. Prime Minister does not want to tell us, or if he wants to tell us that the Executive arm of Government still wants to possess those rooms and that Parliament should shut up, maybe it would be more forthright, but to say that these are being sprung on them is not entirely true, Mr. Speaker.  

I think what is going around is that the Police would have moved, but now they want to regain the property they had given to UNAFRI in Naguru which is now being rented out to other agencies.  I see people importing vehicles and parking them there yet that is a Government property;  It used to be a Police College.  Now, if the consideration this Parliament gets from the Executive is that "we really do not care where you sit, we do not care about your welfare", I think it is only fair that the Right hon. Prime Minister tells us so now.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, I thought hon. Dick Nyai was seeking clarification but in the course of his seeking clarification, he has made a contribution.  I think the point has been put to the Prime Minister, of the plight in which the Committees are in the sense that they are sitting under the trees.  I think that is a very serious matter and I think he has given you an answer to the effect that this matter is being taken seriously.  Is there any clarification you want to make?

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I think the point which may not have been fully realised is that, the person in charge of accommodation is hon. Rugunda and that is why the matter was squarely given to him and in addition, he was this morning directed to get in touch with the relevant Committees and work out a way forward to this problem  and so, - (Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  But my understanding, hon. Prime Minister, is that he is working with the Committee but they have told you they are sitting under a tree; will that solve their problem?  They want accommodation.  Will that solve their problem?  They have been operating in the gardens, I saw it myself! Should they continue? I think that is the question - operating in those circumstances. 

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  Mr. Speaker, that is why this morning hon. Rugunda was directed to get in touch with the Committees and give them the details on how we shall handle this matter and I want to ask Members of Parliament to know that we have grasped the problem and that he will come and handle this matter.

MR. WACHA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I quite appreciate the problem under which the Right hon. Prime Minister is working but, could I know why he has directed hon. Rugunda to interface with the various Committees when we have; one, the Office of the Speaker here; two, the Parliamentary Commission here and even three, if necessary, the Minister in charge of Parliament here?  Why the Committee?

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Speaker, we have a Committee called the Business Committee.  The Business Committee is the one which organises the business of this House.  In that Committee, sits the Leader of Government Business who is also the Prime Minister and now the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs and the chairperson of that is the Speaker.  In total frustration, all chairmen of Committees met and asked for an emergency meeting of the Business Committee tomorrow at 10.00 a.m. where all these people will be and there was only one request for an item on the agenda; accommodation for Committees and offices for chairmen and their staff and this is the matter I had wanted the Speaker to shed light on and inform Members about so that chairmen can come to the meeting tomorrow if the Speaker has accepted this request.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:   Hon. Members, I think we are not making any progress.  What I suggest is that we should have a comprehensive report on this matter tomorrow when we resume our business at 2.00 p.m.  So, let the Prime Minister go and consult whoever he is supposed to consult and then tomorrow, we shall get a report on how this problem is going to be solved.  

               MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT  (Mr. Bidandi Ssali):  Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, there have been several reports to the effect that local governments have misused, misappropriated or mismanaged funds disbursed by UNICEF.  There have also been reports that Local Government Councils have grossly violated the provisions of the Local Governments' Act, 1997 on emoluments and allowances.  Unfortunately, critics have narrowed the issue of expenditure to mean expenditure on councillor's emoluments and allowances instead of expenditure on the administration of council affairs.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to set the record right or straight and allay the fears of hon. Members and the public at large.  Mr. Speaker, allow me to start with the Government of Uganda/UNICEF Country Programme.  

The Government of Uganda UNICEF Country Programme was designed to contribute to the implementation of the Uganda National Plan of action for children officially launched by Government in June 1993.  The aims of this Programme are being achieved through the implementation of sectoral and cross-sectoral programmes described below.

Health:
The health programme is intended to contribute to the national capacity to promote health and prevent, control and manage most health problems of women and children for the attainment of the UNPAC goals and empowerment of women in decision making.  

Water and Environmental Sanitation:
The WES programme, as it is called in short is intended to improve public health and general socio-economic development by contributing to the reduction of water and sanitation related diseases and by reducing the overall work load, especially of women, adolescents and children through improved access to safe water resources.  

Basic Education, Child Care and Adolescent development:
This programme is intended to promote full cognitive and psycho-social development of children and adolescents within a supportive family and a community environment that is conducive to education for all.  Prevention of HIV/AIDS, STDs and adequate care and protection of children and adolescents from birth to adulthood.  

Communication, Co-ordination and Advocacy:
The CCA programme is intended to facilitate and co-ordinate cross- sectoral and sectoral processes leading to rational decision making and actions in support of the achievement of the Country Programme objectives.  The Government of Uganda/UNICEF Country Programme was designed taking into account the decentralisation policy obtaining in Uganda; that is, the programme focuses on support to local governments' own programmes and priorities.  This programme is not a centrally conceived sector programme, but a programme of support to local government systems and processes.  Therefore, the responsibility for conception, planning and implementation of activities supported by this programme lie with the local governments as long as they are consistent with the programme goals and take into account national programme priority areas.  

UNICEF as a donor has been disbursing funds directly to Local Government for implementation of programme activities.  In April this year, the UNICEF Country Representative brought it to my attention that the fast growing amounts of funds released to local governments had remained unaccounted for beyond the agreed time frame of six months.   The lack of accountability was bound to affect further disbursement of funds to local governments.  My Ministry, together with UNICEF, fielded ten teams consisting of two officers each to make an on-spot inspection in all the 45 Districts and 13 Municipalities so as to retrieve outstanding accountabilities for advances of funds beyond six months.  A summary of the findings of the teams were:-
1.  The funds advanced by this programme were actually received by the Local governments and the local governments were bearing the budgets and work plans as agreed with UNICEF.
2.  A number of local governments had actually accounted for the advances but UNICEF had not liquidated their advances within the agreed accounting period.  For example, in February 1999, Gulu District accounted for shs. 32  million which was released in July 1998 on payment of that voucher as an advance to the WES Programme but it was reported in April that the district had not accounted for the said advance.
3.  Some local governments had not fully spent all advances and therefore could not provide complete accountability.  The annual refunds were on the respective districts' bank accounts.  Gulu district, for example, received shs. 87 million in December 1998 on a payment voucher as an advance for the WES Programme.  By the time of the on-spot inspection in May 1999, Gulu district had accounted for shs. 28 million and the balance of shs. 59 million was on the district account.
4.  There were serious delays between disbursement of funds from Kampala and their actual receipt and subsequent clearance in the banking process.  Our teams were able to collect accountability from a number of local governments which were delivered to UNICEF.  
At the end of the whole exercise, the whole picture of accountability for the funds advanced on this programme  was much brighter, with a majority of the local governments fully accounting for the funds.  At the same time, an accounting mechanism that would facilitate speedy accountability of funds has been put in place by UNICEF.  

The new arrangement includes the following:-
1. UNICEF has advised its bankers to expedite issuance of bank drafts at least within four working days.  
2. UNICEF will use all available means of communication to forward the bank drafts to the districts.  3. UNICEF has also designed a simple form which will be used for accountability.  Previously, the local governments had to submit all supporting documents to UNICEF right from each sub-county where the programme spread. 

In conclusion, I would like to state as follows: the funds advanced to local governments by Government of Uganda/UNICEF Country Programme were not misappropriated, misused or mismanaged as recent reports have alleged.  The majority of local governments have fully accounted for the funds, thus easing concerns that obtained at the beginning of this year.  This has been confirmed by a recent statement issued by UNICEF.  I have tried to attach a copy of that statement. An accounting mechanism to facilitate speedy accountability of funds advanced to local governments has been put in place by UNICEF.  UNICEF has never stopped funding the implementation of this programme activities in local governments.  

Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, let me now turn to the issue of local government expenditures on emoluments and allowances. I would like the House to note that the figures that were presented in the Ministry's publication - that is my Ministry - "Analysis of District and Urban Council Budgets for 1998/99 Financial Year" of March 1999 were erroneous and that the publication has since been withdrawn.  The analysis was based on estimates of Revenues and Expenditure and not actual expenditure or actual revenue.  The figures were not derived from statements of accounts certified by the Auditor General. Furthermore, the figures included the operational costs of councils, statutory committees, and boards such as employee costs, administration, property, supplies and services and domestic arrears.  

It is worth noting that when the operational costs are excluded from the figures, the expenditure on emoluments and allowances is three percent of the actual local revenue in the case of Luwero District, seven percent in the case of Nakasongola District, 16 percent in the case of Busia, 16 percent in case of Katakwi District and 18 percent in case of Mpigi District.  Mr. Speaker, I have attached to this statement a Schedule demonstrating the above.  

I would now like to take this opportunity to clarify a number of misunderstandings of the provisions of the Law on local governments expenditures on emoluments and allowances. The first misunderstanding I would like to correct is the view that 15 percent of local revenue is spent only on emoluments and allowances for the chairperson and councillors.  The expenditure on emoluments and allowances covers the Chairperson, Councillors, members of the District Service Commission, members of the Tender Board, and members of the local government Public Accounts Committee in a district.  I wish to emphasize that it is the expenditure on emoluments and allowances for Councillors, members of Commissions and Boards which is limited within the 15 percent of the local revenue collected in the previous year.  The 15 percent does not include the running costs of the Council Committees and other Statutory Bodies.  

The second misunderstanding is that other facilities such as accommodation, transport, medical treatment, water, electricity and telephone for entitled council officials including the Chairperson, Vice Chairperson, Speaker and Secretaries have been taken as part of the 15 percent spent  on emoluments and allowances. The listed facilities under the present law are charged to the council votes but not on councillors' emoluments and allowances.  This is in accordance with regulations (2) and (3) of the First Schedule of the Local Governments Act, 1997.  In the proposed amendments to the Act, this issue is being presented for clarity.  There is a big loophole in the present cast of these provisions.  

I would like to make a few more remarks about the pay received by district Chairpersons and Secretaries. The current monthly gross pay of Chairpersons and Secretaries from randomly selected districts is as follows: Mukono, the Chairperson's basic pay is 620,000 shillings, a secretary gets 385,000 shillings. Since all Members have got the Schedule,  I do not need to read the details but suffice it to say that the gross for the Chairman of Mukono is 1.9 million,  whereas for his Secretary, the gross is 895,000 shillings.  In case of Masindi, the gross for the chairman is one million, and  the gross of a secretary is 460.  The gross for the chairman in Tororo is 965,000 shillings and that of a secretary  is  400,000 shillings; in Lira the chairman gets 809,000 shillings and a secretary gets 462,000 shillings; In Kisoro, there  is 394,000 shillings for the Chairman and 149,000 shillings  for a secretary.

I wish to point out that the above figures do not represent the actual pay for the majority of districts with lower revenues however, the principles are the same and the level of pay is correspondingly lower in areas receiving lower revenue.  In this respect, I would like to draw the attention of hon. Members to the fact that district executives mobilise and supervise a constituency larger than the constituency of  a Member of Parliament. However, as indicated above, they obviously receive less than the demands of their responsibilities.  It should also be noted that many district chairpersons receive less pay compared to a Resident District Commissioner who receives 1.7 million per month as the total package.

Let me also take this opportunity to clarify that when my Ministry presented to this House a proposal that expenditures on emoluments and allowances should not exceed 15 percent of the local revenue, it was on the understanding that the sub-county councils would retain 50 percent of the locally raised revenue. So when this House adjusted the 50 percent to 65 percent to be retained at the sub-county level and therefore made the local revenue collected at the District Council to be 35 percent, we did not adjust the original proposed 15 percent limit upwards. It should therefore be noted that the retaining of the 15 percent limit of 35 percent locally raised revenue could not possibly cover all the costs of the Council, Statutory Commissions, Boards and Committees.  

I would like to end this statement by informing the House that my Ministry will shortly present a proposal to Cabinet to approve an Amendment to the First Schedule of the Local Government's Act, 1997, which deals with emoluments and allowances. My Ministry is still negotiating with the  Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development so that in the next year's budget, funds for running Statutory  bodies are provided for as part of the unconditional grants. This  is because Statutory bodies are transferred responsibilities  that should be financed by Government and yet were not  followed with funds when they were being decentralised. 

I would  also like to assure you, Mr. Speaker, hon. Members and also the public at large that, it is the view of my Ministry that there has been no deliberate attempt on the part of the majority of local government councils to flaunt the accountability requirements in this respect.  And even where this has been apparent, my Ministry, the Office of the Inspector General of Government and that of the Auditor General have spared no time and effort to advise and guide those local governments.  

Decentralised governance, Mr. Speaker, is one of the pillars of the fundamental change of the Movement System as irrevocably rooted in our country. It has been welcomed by the population as a result of its impact on service delivery and local participation. Let us give the process a chance  to evolve, while the centre, including Parliament, continues to patiently advise and guide the pioneer local political leadership entrusted with the nurturing of this tender baby.  
Lastly, Mr. Speaker, the Local Governments Associations have requested me to invite hon. Members to visit them at their respective district headquarters to discuss financing of local governments and other related issues including accountability.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you very much.  Hon. Members, I draw your attention to Rule 37 so that this statement does  not invite a debate but -

MR. KARUHANGA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the Minister for issuing this statement, and if I may just refresh your memory, Mr. Speaker, I was the one who raised this issue on the Floor of this House and it is as a result of that, that we are getting this statement. But when I raised it, I did not include a statement which I have seen  implied that I was accusing districts of misappropriating those funds. All I was saying was that there was no accountability to UNICEF, considering that UNICEF is doing a wonderful job in this country. 

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the current leadership at UNICEF and  the past one for the great work they are doing in the rural  areas, and the focus they have decided to use, especially on Primary Health Care, on Education, on Water and on children.  I have had an opportunity to travel around the country with the UNICEF Country Representative -(Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  But hon. Karuhanga, I thought you  had stood up to put a question to this detail?

MR. KARUHANGA:  Yes, and I am coming to it, Mr. Speaker - and I have noted the difficulties that some of these international organisations which come to our aid face, especially when there is no accountability coming from the people. Noting  what the Minister has said in his concluding paragraph that these are babies which we should handle with kid gloves,  I think we should not compromise accountability and transparency  because if we compromise from the beginning, it will be used as a precedent that "you see, last year we did it, they did not mind."  But what was dangerous was that, UNICEF headquarters was threatening to cut off aid because of lack  of accountability.  But I am very happy that this situation has now been corrected and addressed at senior levels like the Ministry level.  

There is a problem which, Mr. Speaker, I would like to bring to the attention of the Minister;  that is the way we did the law.  The District Councils and Local Governments, the LC  IIIs and all those have so much power that they may even defy the Minister.  I would like to know whether the Minister is proposing some amendments in the Law which is going to give the headquarters some power to be able to deal with the  Local Governments because, at the moment the chairman has so much power, he can defy because everything is in the Constitution!  We did not put a good enough string to force the  Local Governments to obey what the Central Government says and yet when these international organisations come here, they sign with the Central Government, they sign with the Ministry  of Finance. The negotiation between Government and UNICEF is done at the Central Government level yet when the monies are disbursed directly to the grassroots, the  accountability becomes a problem  - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Karuhanga, when are you going to put your question?

MR. KARUHANGA:  Let me conclude.  So I would like to know whether the Minister is putting in place in the  Amended version of the Law, a Law which is going to strengthen the Minister's hand to bring accountability forward or whether he prefers to live this just as it is.  

MISS. TIPERU:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I seek for clarification from the Minister of Local Government about the issue of creation of new districts. I am sorry it has not been in the Report but I just want to be informed  as to how far you have gone with the demands of the various  new districts from the different areas of this country? I am  very aware that the President in his statement in Kabale said that it is costly to create the new districts.  However,  rumour has it that there  are districts for which he has already given a go ahead.  Could you inform the House or keep  me informed about which districts are on the table?  Thank  you very much.

MR. RWAKOOJO:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the Minister for this statement and summaries for various districts. My request is very simple:  I am wondering if it is possible to produce similar summaries, as you did, for all the districts? Because it might be that the districts that caused the problems might not be among the good examples that we are seeing here. Would it be too much to ask to have the summaries for the rest of the districts produced?  Thank you.

MRS. BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to thank the hon. Minister for the explanation he has given.  Mr. Speaker, we are talking about money coming from the Central Government going to the local governments. Whether it be from the Government side or from a Non Governmental Organisation,  this money goes in form of conditional grants. I was in the Districts of Arua and Adjumani and we were discussing the use of the conditional grants for the benefit of people with disabilities. 

According to what they told me, a conditional grant is dictated as to whom to give; either for children, for women or for roads, you cannot change at all and they must use it in the way it is directed. What actually happens is that these conditional grants do not mention anything about people with disabilities in . As a result, people with disabilities  in the districts, whether big children or women, do not benefit from these conditional grants.  Can you clarify to me how people with disabilities can benefit from these conditional grants?  Thank you, Sir.

MR. OBIGA KANIA: I thank you, Mr. Speaker. The clarification I am seeking from the Minister is with regards to a statement on page five of his Statement.  In the fourth paragraph from below, there is a sentence which reads: "I wish to emphasize that it is the expenditure on emoluments and allowances for Councillors, Members of Commissions and Boards which is limited to 15 percent of local revenue collected in the previous year." 

Mr. Speaker, recently I attended a sensitisation seminar by a team sponsored by the Ministry of Local Government in my Constituency and one of the officials was trying to explain what collected revenue in the previous year refers to.  His argument was that the 15 percent on local revenue collected is not the total revenue collected by that particular local government, but rather the amount which is submitted upwards. For example, if you have a local government which has collected 100,000 shillings, it is supposed to submit 35 percent upwards.  That means it is left with 65 percent.  Now, the explanation by this particular official was that, the 15 per cent should be based on the 65 percent left for that particular local government. But my argument is, the law is talking about local revenue collected in the previous year,  it does not say collected for that particular local government.  
So, I would like to get clarification from the Minister as to what the 15 percent local revenue collected in the previous year refers; whether it is the revenue retained by the local government or it is actually the revenue which that particular local government collects, irrespective of what it submits to other governments?

MR. TOSKIN: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just wanted to get two clarifications from the Minister.  One is; when I look at the figures given here on the emoluments of the various chairmen, there is a lot of disparity. I do not know whether the Minister has a way in which we can help those districts with really little collections to raise them up because this is likely to cause a lot of confusion in the management of the districts.  For example, you look at Tororo; Tororo and Lira are not very different but you will find here, the chairman of Lira is getting about half a million and that of Tororo is getting 90.  This is a big disparity.

Now, the other issue is this Public Accounts Committees in the local governments which have helped us very much in monitoring the utilisation of funds at the districts. It is understood that in most districts this organ is not operating.  Now that the Minister has just had interaction with these chairmen, has he found out why these organs are failing to work? And if I can remember well, in the Act, a Member of Parliament - I think from each of the district - is supposed to be a member of this committee.  At least from the district where I come from, I am not aware that any of us is a member of the Public Accounts Committee.  Can the Minister clarify, if he has had that information with him? Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. NSUBUGA NSAMBU: I would like the hon. Minister to inform this House, if he has an idea of the remuneration of the LC I members.  At the beginning, they appeared to be part-time but these days it appears they work day and night and as a result, they tend to find some ways of getting some remuneration which is not prescribed in the statute books. And if not, what other remedies does he have so that they do not become a menace to the public?

Secondly, since the days of the CA, people in the city have been asking the Local Government Minister to restore the so-called Mengo Municipality. Has he not yet had any change of mind whether he can create one now that the work of the city has become so complicated and widened? Thank you.

MRS. KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There is something I would like to correct in this statement on page 7 which the Minister refers to as a fact. That he would like to draw our attention to the fact that the district executive mobilise and supervise a constituency larger than the constituency of a Member of Parliament.  I would like to put it to him that there is no district executive member who has a constituency bigger than mine in Masindi District. I am happy that at least he has realised that they have a big constituency but this one is for the Parliamentary Commission to note; that we women in Parliament have such big constituencies that we should also be considered as such.  So, maybe when the idea comes up, I hope the Minister of Local Government will be there to support us.  

I know he will say that their emoluments are not as much as ours but I will tell him that, at least I know in Masindi, the chairman has a vehicle which is fuelled, serviced and owned by the district but at his service. I do not know how it is considered in this arrangement. I see under fuel and transport only 359 but how do you cost a  vehicle, fuelled and serviced wholly by the district? The same with the district executives: when they go out to mobilise for development or even for their personal issues, they are given transport; vehicles and fuel to take them wherever they are going in the district. I do not know how that one is calculated! I do not want to contest the statement that they are getting less than their responsibilities but I think they should also pull up their socks.  Let them mobilise more funds, more revenue so that they can earn more as 15 per cent.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MS. BAKOKO BAKORU: Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the hon. Minister for Local Government for telling us that the funds that go to the districts, especially for the UNICEF Country Programmes have not been misappropriated but I would like to say here also, especially with the water and sanitation programme, why is it that we are having persistent out-breaks of cholera and dysentery?  I want to bring to his attention also the fact that in schools, especially in Kampala and I would like to bring to his attention Lubaga Boys Primary school -  I think the sanitation situation in Kampala is even worse than in the rural districts outside Kampala.  I also want to ask; who enforces this law? 

I am very grateful that he is saying they are now able to supervise these funds and that they will do the work that they have been sent for and that monies are going to be returned to the Treasury because I know that in my district, even this Financial Year which is ending, last week as I was in Arua, there were supervisors and people were running left and right trying to collect accountability. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I would like to draw your attention to Rule 37 that you should not be contributing but asking a few questions and clarification because we shall have opportunity to discuss some of the policies of ministries and so forth. We are going to start the President's address, it will be a general debate and we will discuss. We shall also come to the Budget and then we shall be dealing with the various ministries.  I suppose we can now stop here so that you reserve whatever you have for such debates.  I will now call upon the Minister to reply then we can start on our main debate for today.

THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr. Bidandi Ssali) Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Hon. Karuhanga made a comment and I would like to appreciate the fact that he is the one who raised the issue.  I would like to restate here  what I have just said in the Statement that the basic worry of UNICEF was not that the money had been misappropriated, but that the districts delayed.  They were supposed to give accountability within 6 months but most of them had gone beyond 6 months.  So, the UNICEF representative came up and said there was no accountability forth coming. That is why I have explained that when teamed up with them, they became happy and hence the statement from them which I have attached to my Statement. 

As to the amendments coming, giving the Minister power; there are amendments definitely which are due to be presented to cabinet and subsequently to this House.  I think we have proposals which focus on more stringent accountability, of course, taking also care that those amendments do not amount to a withdrawal of the powers that have been decentralised.

Hon. Tiperu wants to know how far I have gone with the demands of new districts.  Well, this matter is being presented to cabinet, or can I say, represented to cabinet.  I have had requests which my ministry has covered, as far as research is concerned, covering Aringa, covering North Mbale, covering Mpigi, covering Kabarole and covering Kitgum.  I am due to present it and make a case in Cabinet which will ultimately  make the necessary recommendations, either in respect of all or in respect of some. So, Members may wish to be a little bit patient on that.

Hon. Rwakoojo asked me to produce similar statistics in respect of every other districts.  I have taken note and I am sure my officer - oh, I am very glad  my Permanent Secretary is somewhere around listening, I am sure this one we shall take up and circulate accordingly.

Hon. Baba Diri, the money goes on conditional and unconditional basis.  For the conditional; there does not seem to be any mention of money covering people with disabilities.  I am afraid that conditional grants are given from either central government or from specific donors like the UNICEF and it is given on the basis of those conditions that are agreed upon by the donor or the remitter and the local governments.  So, the Ministry of Local Government has no role whatsoever in either influencing or dictating what should be the beneficiaries in these various conditionals grants.  However, now that we are presenting some amendments, if the hon. Member feels that there is an aspect that should be looked at or recast in respect of conditional grants, I will be willing to receive her proposal.  You recall, some time back I circulated a request to all Members of Parliament who had proposals for amendments of a minor nature. Some of you responded, others did not.  However, it is not too late.

Hon. Obiga Kania; yes, there is still this unclarity about what we are talking about when we talk of total revenue collected by a government.  Let me take this opportunity to explain that at the district level, the total local revenue is the some total of the 35 per cent that has been remitted from the sub-counties  plus any other income. For example, if they have property which they are renting, that is the totality of the local revenue.  At the sub-county level, after the 35 percent has been forwarded to the district, what remains becomes 100 per cent and then out of that, the 25 per cent is sent down to the LC.Is, 5 per cent to the LC.II and 5 per cent to the LC.IV, the county. What remains is now the total collected revenue of that particular local government at that sub-county level.  It is not after the 35 only but it is after the 35 minus what goes to the LC.I, LC.II and LC.IV, then the balance is the total revenue for that local government at the LC.III. 

Now, my Ministry is trying its best to move around and explain.  Some of you remember that I have been going around and so has my other minister.  Now we are making arrangements also for the Minister of State.  We are moving around to try and explain so that, maybe given another one or two years, the thing will be very clear.

Hon. Toskin talks about the difference in emoluments of chairmen and members of the executive. If you recall, the law provides that the district council or the local government council - that particular local government council - determines the levels of remuneration.  So there is no way the minister could come up and say you bring up yours or put it down or whatever the case may be as long as the budget has been approved by that particular council.  But my findings are that really, the local governments have not done as badly as they are being reflected.  That is what I have found out but, I  have also said in my Statement that we are negotiating with the Ministry of Finance to make them realise that many of the services which are subjected to the local revenues are actually transferred responsibilities. Therefore, they should re-adjust the unconditional grants accordingly.

I am also trying to make a case to them to say that the work of the Chairman, the biggest part of the Chairman's work is actually a transferred responsibility.  What the Chairmen are doing down there is what the different Ministers were doing when the services were still being provided by the centre.  Therefore, is it possible to stretch and say that, for the sake of decentralisation, for the sake of our policy, can we include the office of the Chairmen throughout the country to be funded from the centre so that now the Chairperson becomes  both the effective monitor of the revenue collection base and the controller and so on and so forth?

You recall, Mr. Speaker, that the qualification of the district chairman is the same qualification as ours, but  maybe only one or two of them out of the 45 receive a total package which is equivalent to half of what some of us are getting by virtue of the various entitlements and yet from eight to five and plus, they are supposed to be in their offices, on the move in the districts and we demand  so much of them as we sit here! But that is a debate that will follow, Mr. Chairman.

It is true that in quite a number of districts, the district Public Accounts Committees are not yet effective or are not yet on the ground, but slowly they are coming up and the Auditor General has been very very effective.  He has come up with most of the reports and my Colleague here, hon. Akech is having this big responsibility of following up the accountabilities, liaising with the Public Accounts Committees and very soon, she will be starting on a tour across the Country.

I am very happy that hon. Nsambu is putting a case in support of the LC. system, but I would -(Interjection)

MR. WAMBUZI: Thank you for conceding hon. Bidandi Ssali.  The point on which I am seeking clarification is, when you say that the councils need more money, and we are posting there doctors and agricultural officers; who in Government is supposed to ask for result oriented management in terms of generating incomes?  We are finding it very difficult at the district level or sub-county level.  The riches are not coming off the ground - the colonialists did it better! At least every DC was told, you must produce so many bales of cotton.  I would expect your Ministry to be one of the spearheads of causing riches to start coming out of the ground because they will not fall from heaven!

The Ministry of Planning surely seems to be impotent  as far as causing planning is concerned because we do not have any plans to direct or to ask for result oriented management as far as the district is concerned.  I think this should be the responsibility of your Ministry.

MR. BIDANDI SSALI: Mr. Speaker, in response to that clarification, unfortunately that responsibility is not with the Ministry of Local Government, but it is with the District Government and I would really suggest that if you have an Amendment to the laws as they stand now to enhance the monitoring, I will be ready to receive them.  But I also call upon you to really liaise with your executive where you come from where you have noticed these weaknesses and seek an interaction with them.  Your own councillors in your constituencies at the districts could be sensitized in such a way that they come up with a Motion so that the council comes up with a resolution.

At the moment I think there are two councils - Mbale and Mbarara - who have come up with by-laws governing the production of coffee and the handling of cotton, and the fact that every home must have at least a tenth of an acre of cassava. All these have been presented for onward presentation to the Attorney General's Chambers. So please, let us sensitize the councils, but at the same time, where you feel you can come in, do not hesitate.

The Local Governments Act, Mr. Speaker, provided for a share of the locally collected funds from an LC.I, hence the returning of 25 per cent to the LC.I.  This money was meant to be decided upon by that village council and if the village council was convinced by the Chairman and the Executive that part of it should be an allowance to the Chairman because of the duties he is involved in or she is involved in, so be it, that is the decision by that council.  Otherwise, it would be very very unrealistic, Mr. Speaker, to sit here and think of a budget that will cover over 50,000 LC.Is in the Country.  So, that is basically why we had to return that money down there.

Regarding Mengo Municipality, well hon. Nsambu, as you know, I also represent a constituency in Kampala, except we are on opposite sides, but I have not come across citizens of Kampala, as you are saying, demanding for restoration of Mengo Municipality.  What I have received is a request presentation from the Mengo Authorities for restoration of Mengo Municipality -(Interruptions)

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I thank hon. Bidandi Ssali, a Colleague in Kampala District, for giving way.  When I stand up to say something about Kampala, I have a stake in Kampala and I believe I am entitled to say something.  The information I want to give is in reference to Mengo Municipal Council. The people I represent in Lubaga South have written a 15 page Memo demanding for the restoration of the Municipality.

MR. BIDANDI SSALI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I definitely cannot contest that information, it only depends on to whom that Memo was addressed. Certainly not to the Ministry of Local Government.  They did not even have the courtesy of sending me a copy.  However, I was explaining that presentations have been made and about three years ago, the Kabaka of Buganda presented this case to the President and the President requested me to look into it.  I liaised with some officials in Mengo and some other quarters to find out a solution.  

Now, the position of some officials in Mengo was that Lubaga Division should be cut off Kampala and be returned to Buganda as a Municipality. I said it was not possible, of course after consultations. There was no way we could come to Cabinet, we could come to Parliament and convince Parliament that this and that, but we continued to negotiate and the floating idea was then that, yes, on the basis of Parliament having accepted to return ebyaffe and also on the basis of the Movement having accepted to restore the kingdom, a case could be made to Parliament to say, "yes! we are thankful but the headquarters of our kingdom lies here; the Lubiri, the Lake, the Masiro, everything is within Lubaga.  Can you, hon. Members, consider also redefining this area?" Then I said, perhaps if we went with a proposal that since Kampala is growing towards the East, can we consider some parts between the present boundary of Kampala and Mukono and make a case to Parliament in sort of an exchange or something like that?  

Now this is not to let the cat out of the bag but only to inform hon. Lukyamuzi that if such a step was taken, there are four governments that would be involved: One, the City Council will definitely have to accept; two,  Lubaga Council Division will have to accept; three, Mpigi Council will have to accept; four Kira Sub-county will have to accept. I ventured to present a case here for an argument like that.  Before that one was done, some of the councils I have mentioned, at that time said, "for us, no question, we will not do this"  and they came up - including one of the areas the hon. Member has mentioned.  However, the debate is still on, but if there is a change of approach, I do not see any other approach for Parliament to even consider that sort unless it is an issue of  give and take.  

Hon. Masiko, I entirely agree with you that I made a blanket statement to say that a Member of the executive has a bigger area and yet you are the whole of Masindi and the Chairman is the whole of Masindi. On that one, I stand corrected but I would  also like to say that in some districts, the package includes some fuel but this is the type of fuel which I, as a Minister, am entitled to from my home to the office or for town running. But if I go to Masindi or to Kotido, certainly the Ministry has to buy me that fuel.  I am sure it is the same basis that the government in Masindi is using.  

Now, why are we having persistent breaks of cholera if the UNCEF money is not being misused and so on?  Hon. Bakoko, this is really an unfair question to me.  I would rather save it for an occasion for the Minister of Health to answer it but I think he might also refer it to the individual local government which is responsible for this service under the Local Governments' Act.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Minister.

DEBATE IN REPLY TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT'S ADDRESS TO PARLIAMENT ON THE STATE OF THE NATION IN THE FOLLOWING TERMS:
THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT TO PARLIAMENT ON WEDNESDAY 2ND JUNE, 1999.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before the Mover comes up, I would like to inform you, hon. Members, that because of work which we have that we have to dispatch within a very short time, it has been decided that we shall spend three days debating this particular Motion.  Although most of today has been taken up by other matters, it will still be three days. Therefore, I would suggest that after the Mover and Seconder have concluded their speeches, we shall give ten minutes to whoever may want to contribute on this particular debate and then see how we utilise the three days.

MR. NSUBUGA MAYANJA (Ntenjeru North, Mukono): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that "Thanks of Parliament be recorded for the clear and precise exposition of Government policy contained in the address on the State of the Nation by His Excellency the President to Parliament on Wednesday 2nd June, 1999."  Thank you.

MS. EGUNYU: Seconded, Mr. Speaker.

MR. NSUBUGA MAYANJA: Mr. Speaker, I thank the Seconder and also thank the Members who have apparently seconded and I look forward to total support of this Motion.  

Mr. Speaker, before I continue, I just want to quote one of the hon. Members of this House, while debating a similar Motion about two years ago. He said that a state of the nation address should be such that the President addresses those matters which concern the people so much so that the people and the President himself are kept awake whole nights.  I have realised that ten out of the 19 pages of the address are on the economy and related matters.  I am sure the people are really concerned about the economy.  

The second issue which greatly concerned the President and which is, therefore, addressed in this address was the one of security. Four of the pages are concerning security. So, Mr. Speaker, I agree and I feel that in the address, this was the first requirement.  Secondly, that hon. Member said that such address must be very truthful about the matters it addresses.  Hon. Members, the President is very much concerned about the economy and I am sure the figures he quoted are very important to us, but most important to me, Mr. Speaker, it is not the figures that really excited me, but the truth in which the President gave out the figures.  

Mr. Speaker, for example, the President says that despite our good performance that the inflation dropped from 240 per cent per annum in 1987 to 5 per cent as of now, and that the economy is growing at about 6.5 per cent per annum as of now, he said that we are still very far. He further continues to say that despite the growth rates, many areas in Uganda, especially in the North, in Luwero, now Bundibugyo, Kasese and other districts around there, have not even seen the benefit of the recovery programme. They are still very far from recovery and I think that is a very honest presentation by the President and I thank him for that.

Apart from that, the third element in the State of the Nation Address in as far as that Member was concerned, was that in delivering that address, he must give guidance and vision, and I am very confident that the President tried his level best, even if you do not agree with him, to give guidance in as far as these matters were concerned. 

Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I want to deal with the issues as they appear in the address.  First the economy.  The time for the figures will definitely come when we are debating the budget  but I just want to repeat that, the President said that our economy is definitely not doing very well.  And he said one important thing that, among the other factors which are responsible for the growth the way we see it and the lack of development as we may have expected it, is the corruption in the URA and the banking sector.  He tells us that the corruption in the banking system led to very high interest rates in the economy because people were corrupt such that, some people could pay the loans and others would not pay;  and those who were paying were paying at the expense of those who were not paying and, therefore, the interest rates were high.  

Secondly, he says that there is a lot of corruption as another factor in the URA. Hon. Members, I agree with His Excellency the President about this issue because, despite the fact that recently our Minister for Finance informed us that revenue collection by the URA had improved, I was reading a very reliable magazine called The Uganda Banker of March 1998, and in that magazine, the officer responsible for public relations and tax education told us as follows on page 18: That one,  there is a lot to be desired with regard to accountability in the URA.  The tax demands are made even when tax has already been paid in certain areas.  That returns submitted and other documents sometimes get no space in URA within URA offices.  That assessments take too long before they are finalized.  That some URA staff play delaying tactics in order to make the tax payers' life very difficult.  

When the President says there is a lot of corruption in the URA, I think he is just affirming what this officer of the URA  himself said.  And what has been the result?  URA was created on 5th September, 1991 by Statute No.6 with the major role of collecting central government revenue.  Mr. Speaker, what has been happening?  The figures indicate that revenue collection has increased at a decreasing rate.  As such, in 1991/92, government collected 180 billion shillings which was 7 per cent of GDP.  In 1992/93, we collected 284 billion shillings which was 7.8 per cent of GDP.  It went on: In 1997/98  850 billion shillings were collected.  

Now what do we read from these figures, Mr. Speaker?  We are saying that, as a percentage of GDP, the revenue collection in Uganda is among the lowest in Africa.  In Kenya we are talking about between 20 and 30 per cent, in Uganda we are stagnating at about 12 per cent.  And what is the problem?  The problem is these factors which were mentioned in the article as presented by the tax man. Mr. Speaker, I want to handle another aspect of the economy which the President addressed  - (Interruption).

MR. AWORI:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, thank you hon. Member.  Since you are moving a Motion, and you are saying the President, among other things, is saying there is corruption in the URA or tax collection, I assume you are affirming his statement. If that is the case, I find it extremely hypocritical on your part and on the part of the President to say there is corruption.  What has he done?  He is the highest authority who has ever sacked, who has ever promoted but he has never sacked any minister on the account of corruption.  Even in this House, we have literally forced him. He has even tried to doge sacking ministers we have recommended for sucking!  So how can he turn round and tell us there is corruption in URA?  What has he done?  It is a crime!  Is he condoning it?  So, Mr. Speaker, I am asking my hon. Colleague, you, are you also condoning corruption like the President?

MR.NSUBUGA MAYANJA:  Mr. Speaker, if you hold this Floor and hon. Aggrey Awori does not stand up to help you in your contribution, you must be a very unlucky person.  

Now, regarding the issue, and as far as the President is concerned, he says on page 18 of his address that: "In respect of corruption, therefore, instead of mourning corruption or launching unguided missiles at each other in the form of inclusive censure motions, you should, if you are able, identify people of integrity so that we train them in investigative skills to conclusively assist us in this battle."   Mr. Speaker, I remember when the President visited Busia, hon. Aggrey Awori was able to convince him to appoint one of his kin to be appointed a minister. I therefore recommend that hon. Aggrey Awori does  the same regarding corruption - (Interruption).

MR.OTAGE:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to give information to the Member holding the Floor.  I think recently government appointed a Judicial Commission of inquiry into the Police force.  I think this is one way of tackling corruption.  I thank you.

MR.NSUBUGA MAYANJA:  Thank you, hon. Otage for assisting me again on this very serious issue.  Perhaps I should also remind hon. Awori that there are several institutions - the IGG and the rest.  Even if they are not performing 100 percent, at least there is effort to fight this evil called corruption in our society.

I will continue with the growth and development issue. Mr. Speaker, I have said that the President has carefully quite often referred to growth as opposed to development and, what does he mean?  He says that there has been a qualitative increase in the asset worth of the country.  Maybe there is no change in our quality of life, but it is important he has emphasized that issue of growth. I am sure, perhaps out of growth, we may have development and that is a political, rather than an intellectual honesty displayed on the part of the President, although we are yet to see more and better results of the growth aspect of our economy.  

Among the factors explaining our problem, apart from corruption in banks and URA, there is what we call the circular flow of causation.  Simply put, we say that if there are low incomes, there are low savings.  If there are low savings, there are low investments, and if there are low investments, lower income once again.  Mr. Speaker, the problem here is basically one of the basic savings in Uganda.  Our domestic savings ratios remain far below the worldwide average and, indeed below the African average of 20 per cent, at 9 per cent.  Mr. Speaker, in order for us to go back to the relatively comfortable per capita income of the 1960s, we need to grow at a rate of 11 per cent per annum for five years.  So, this is our dilemma.  

Now, what is the solution?  But before I go to the solution, I will tell you something about our debt burden. Because of our low earnings, because of our low saving ratios, our growth is threatened, the sustainability of our growth rate is in question and this partly explains the capital inadequacy and  Uganda's reliance on foreign capital for debt financing. The result is a daunting challenge to government to provide basic social services among other constraints. Even the 300 million debt relief under HIPC may be just cosmetic in the long run because, as I talk now, Uganda owes 300 loans to 80 countries and a debt service account for over 20 per cent of our import/ export earnings.  

A World Bank policy research report issued in November 1998 contains fundamental revelation about debt in as far as Uganda and Africa are concerned. It says that  One; aid per se has, in different places and at different times, been highly effective, totally ineffective, and everything in between.  What do we mean?  That, for example, a country like Tanzania over 20 years has received 2 billion Dollars worth of aid to improve its road network but what were the results?  

The results are that the road network in Tanzania is still very poor. Two; that because of a certain US Ambassador to the UN called A. Stevenson between 1963 and 1964, Africa received 1,500 million Dollars worth of aid and one tenth of this went to what was then called Zaire because of the Katanga problem. But as of now, Zaire is worse off than it was perhaps in 1960. Even those other countries which received the 1,500 million Dollars like Ethiopia, Somalia and Nigeria are still quite underdeveloped. 

The report continues to say that it is ironic and tragic that just as economic reform has created the best environment in decades for effective assistance, donors have cut aid back sharply. The US has been the biggest cutter such that it would take roughly a 50 per cent increase in debt from the US to flow to Africa to go back to the 1991 level.  What is the message here?  That somebody somewhere is tired of your begging.  The donors are tired of our begging and we have to do something about it.  Thirdly that effective aid complements private enterprise; that however much aid may come in here, as long as private enterprise is still at a very low level, aid will not do much to help us out of our problem.  It is for this reason that I come to the point of household income as propounded by His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda.

From my presentation, you will realize that our way out is to increase domestic savings as a way of improving our investment because the two are related - (Interruption).

MR. EKANYA:  I would like to seek clarification from the Mover of the Motion. He states that our debt burden is still a big problem because we have not developed private enterprises.  I am a member of the Committee on Commissions, State Enterprises and Statutory Authorities.  We have discovered that some of the private enterprises like METHA are highly indebted to the effect that, when the lending institutions want to auction their properties, the government has to come in and uses tax payers' money to protect them. Therefore, I would like to seek clarification from you whether private enterprises like METHA are a solution to the debt problem.  Thank you.

MR. NYANZI:  I would like to inform the hon. Member who wanted clarification from hon. Member on the Floor that, in the case of Mehta,  government came in only because we had not cleared his shares that is why government came in, in order to save Mehta.

MR. NSUBUGA MAYANJA:  Thank you, hon. Minister for assisting me on that one.  I still maintain that we need to emphasize private enterprise despite the few cases which may have gone wrong because that is the basis of development.  The people we are talking about, like Mehta he is talking about, are private investors; like Mulwana is, like Ssekalala is, like Mukwano is and definitely they are doing well.  So, we should not conclude that simply because one or two investors are having problems, so everybody else should not be encouraged to invest.

Mr. Speaker, I was talking about the issue of household incomes.  The emphasis is on household incomes because of our experiences as students of economics, of both development and under development, and as practitioners.  Mr. Speaker, the developed economies enjoy a saving ratio of between 20 to 40 percent of GDP.  Underdeveloped economies which are very badly off are suffering with a saving ratio of 10 percent and below and that is empirically proved.  Secondly, when we talk about domestic savings, we are talking about three components; the private sector, the public sector and the household.  Universally, the private sector is not the best saver and the public sector is also not the best saver. It is the household savings which have made the economies we are talking about in the East, in Europe and in America.  

The problem of saving, Mr. Speaker, is compounded by inadequacy of saving institutions and lack of product development. Whereas there were 290 relatively vibrant branches of banks in 1972, there were 237 branches in 1991 and there were 34,000 people per branch.  It fell further such that by 1996, it was 100,000 people per branch in our country and this is one of the lowest in Africa and, definitely, one of the lowest in the world.  

Another element for loss of saving ratios is the lack of public confidence. I will come to the banking crisis but even before the banking crisis, there was lack of confidence increasingly starting from 1972.  Whereas in the 1970s the average number of cheques cleared monthly at the Bank of Uganda was 135,502, it dropped to 66,472 and by December of 1973, it dropped further to 27,144.  By December, 1998, it dropped further to 12,305.  Mr. Speaker, this is a reflection of lack of confidence in our financial institutions which has been compounded by the recent spate of bank failures. 

I would now like Members to allow me to talk about the banking crisis.  The banking crisis has touched the President and all Ugandans and perhaps other investors from outside the country for one major reason.  It causes what we call physiocratic conscription in the economy.  These experiences are very evident because many of our business contracts were actually frustrated because of bank closures.  Many of us could not take our children back to school because of bank closures;  many people could not meet their hospital bills because of bank closures.  What does the President say about this?  

He argues, for example, that a major element of the high interest rates charged to customers is due to corruption in banking.  That because of corruption, some borrowers do not pay and those who pay, pay through the nose. Three, that the natural and logical way of dealing with our dead should apply to dead banks; that is, we must bury them.  Although I would add that those which are in comma should not be buried. Mr. Speaker, I want to sub-divide my contribution on the banking crisis into two; the good observations on universal -(Interruption)

MR. KYEMBA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker and I would like to thank the hon. Member who is on the Floor for giving way in connection with the question of bank closures and the management of our banking sector.  There is no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that the point referred to by the hon. Member is a very serious one and it should really be addressed with all the seriousness it deserves.  I was however, Mr. Speaker, within the last day or two, particularly disturbed by a statement made by one of the banking officials in spite of the fact that this matter is a serious one and that is why I want to give this information to the Member so that at least it can be addressed.  

The statement I am referring to was in connection with forex bureaux to the effect that the role of the Bank of Uganda is to license any forex bureau which comes up, and then he added that it is their role to close them once they do not perform properly.  I really would like to put it to the banking authority through the Minister of Finance that surely, if the Bank of Uganda has got some doubt with regard to certain applications for forex bureaux which they are now closing left, right and centre, I think it is only right and proper, Mr. Speaker, that the Bank of Uganda should use the machinery available to save the ordinary people the Member is referring to who are unable to send their children to school as a result of this fiasco, from some of the sharks that get into this business.  Otherwise, we are just going to get the Bank of Uganda to license every Tom, Dick and Harry, cheat the ordinary people and then say we close them. I do not think that is fair, Mr. Speaker.  Thank you.

MR. NSUBUGA MAYANJA: Mr. Speaker, I thank the Member for the information and I will be dealing with that very issue in due course.  

As I was saying, I am going to sub-divide my contribution on the banking crisis into two; the overview, the universal view and experience, the Uganda view.  I will sub-divide the Uganda experience into pre-independence, post independence and post reform. Mr. Speaker, I will first observe that a banking crisis is not the monopoly of the third world. Two, that it does not necessarily indicate a poorly performing economy, although we shall not hide behind such statements again to have a problem in the banking system.

The overview:  Since 1980, 67 banking systems have encountered crises of one nature or another.  52 of these have been in developing and, or transient economies as they are referred to now.  But true and ironically that some of these crises have occurred in economies which were doing extremely well like that of Japan, like the USA, like the Tiger economies, Britain and Argentina.  

In the USA, between 1980 and 1996, they had 5,207 bank failures and these banks had an asset worth of 920 billion dollars and cost the taxpayer and US about 200 billion dollars to correct the failures.  This 200 billion dollars we are talking about was about 3.5 per cent of the GDP of the United States of America in 1992 and the problem occurred despite an elaborate bank regulatory system and a buoyant economy.  

When you talk of Japan, in the 1970s it initiated financial liberalisation and until the mid-80s, it proceeded at a slow but sure and steady rate.  In 1980 when UNESCO published information about the economies of the world, Japan was the second largest economy of the world. Its GDP was greater than that of Britain and France. However, in the second half of the 1980s, Japanese growth turned into what we call a verbal economy.  By 1990, financial institutions had non-performing loan portfolios estimated at between 500 billion dollars and one trillion. Efforts by Japan did not yield much results and  the deposit insurance fund for Japan as well as the smaller agencies of the insurance fund for the smaller banks would not also sustain the problem and this presented Japan with this serious financial crisis since the early 1950s.  

In the case of America, again, in 1913 there was a President called Hoover Wilson.  This man complained of what was called unethical banking and a nation crippled by credit. He demanded of Congress to pass a law and such a law would be that it is  better a servant rather than a master and on December 23rd, 1913, they passed what they called the Federal Reserve Act which tried to solve the problem. Twenty years later, unfortunately President Hoover, and later on his heir to the Presidency, Franklin Donaldo Roosvelt, had to grapple with a similar but worse problem and all of you are aware of the crisis which we had in the 1930s in the global economy.  Donaldo asked Congress and said; "You give me powers as if I was or as if we were actually invaded by a foreign enemy", and they gave him the powers. Unfortunately for both Presidents, one led his country to the First World War and the other to the Second World War.  

In Britain, through the 1970s we heard of what they called the secondary bank scandals which culminated into the 1980s banking crises and the problem was small banks which financed a bubble although they could not overthrow the bigger banks.  And what happened? The then Chancellor of the Exchequer, Nigel Lawson directed the Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, Sir John Mc Mohon who said - and this is very important regarding our crisis - that if you find yourself forced to make the most unpleasant corrective decision, a number of wrong decisions or failure to make decision must have taken place before hand.  This is the problem.  

Very many mistakes were made and I will go through them briefly as I discuss the pre-independence Uganda problem. The economy of Uganda was managed through the import/export houses Baumann, Mackenzie and the like. These were financially serviced by banks either originating from Britain or related countries like India and these were Barclays, Standard Chartered, ANZ Grindlays and Baroda. These banks were required to deposit with their headquarters such that, for example, by 1952, their bank balances outside totalled 177.6 million shillings; that was 22 per cent of that year's export earnings.  To this you would add the services earnings like the premium for Owen Falls dams and the factories which were being built at that time. A lot of money was therefore held outside and the financial policy of the time was aimed at controlling the banking market ostensibly for development and other non-commercial objectives.  

At independence, like many other countries, those who took power were not happy with the conservative policies and regulations of the banks that were running our economy. Therefore they decided to intervene. The interest rates were controlled, public sector banks were created; that is the UCB in 1965 and Co-operative Bank in 1972. A variety of programmes were established and most important for us at that stage was that His Excellency, Dr. Milton Obote created the Bank of Uganda.  Following on that, through the power sharing Act of 1970 when President Idi Amin compulsorily purchased 49 per cent equity shares in foreign banks and because they were disappointed, many closed their branches.  Both the UCB and the Co-operative bank were expected to fulfil development objectives but both ignored the basic commercial principles and incurred heavy losses and bad debts.  
The economic policies were heavily encroached by government and some of their programmes on lending government and donor funds with medium term maturities were not suitable for a development bank and when the Asians and other businesses were nationalised, the UCB became the banker for the parastatal sector. The branch network rapidly expanded and after Amin's overthrow, foreign development assistance increased. The UCB played centre stage as a conduit for this aid. It was also used to perform a variety of functions for the government in the rural areas like accepting taxes for government as well as school fees for our children. In the late 1980s, major rural expansion programmes saw UCB opening up 130 new branches, and by the early 1990s, the UCB had around 50 percent of commercial bank deposits, had 190 out of the 237 branches in the country and the Cooperative Bank had 24.

The problems: 
We are coming to the crisis. The expansion inevitably undermined the banks' managerial efficiency and internal controls even further. The availability of automatic liquidity support from Bank of Uganda and lack of proper accounting procedures allowed the imprudent management of the UCB and Co-operative Bank to mismanage the bank. The consequent losses continued into the 1990s. Both banks have in due course become insolvent.  Uganda Commercial Bank non-performing loans accounted for 75 per cent of its total portfolio mainly due to political influence, very poor or wrong procedures and corruption. A restructuring programme was commenced for UCB in 1992. NPART was established in 1995 and Co-operative Bank was restructured. 

Before I go further into the problems, I would like to inform you that in the second half of the 1980s and early 1990s, nine banks were established by local private sector investors, mainly by people with interest in trading, manufacturing and agriculture. Some of them originated as credit financial institutions like ICB. The restrictive services offered by established public sector banks and foreign banks created an opportunity for the new banks to win customers, for example, by offering longer hours and by being very simple in giving their loans.  

However, despite this apparent opening, these banks met numerous difficulties in establishing their presence in the market.  Liquidity was tied because of the shallow depth of the financial system and because the inter-bank market was not developed.  A financially shallow economy is not conducive to banking, especially commercial banking. Secondly, there is a shortage of suitable collateral other than real estate in Kampala and disposal of collateral in case of default is very difficult because the market is already glutted by NPART.

Properties: 
Loan recovery is hard to execute because of weaknesses and delays in the courts because the market for property is depreciating, as I said.  

Finally, severe scarcity of qualified and experienced people is also another problem in our banking system.  The other one is definitely that of inside lending, which we call in our language "incestuous lending".  It is a problem and many of you have heard of it. Now, another problem was the legislative or statutory provision of the banks -(Interruption).

MISS. AKELLO:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am standing on a point of clarification.  I am not a banker, but the word that I have heard peddled around is "insider lending". Today I have heard another one called "incestuous lending".  I just want to be clarified because, as a student of English, "incestuous lending" sounds obscene!

MR. NSUBUGA MAYANJA: Hon. Members, the hon. Minister of Entandikwa is definitely correct to be disturbed by the word "incestuous" but it is a word we use in our area of operation and it is not obscene there.  What it means is basically what "insider lending" actually means.  In other words, it is related, not by blood, but by business organisations lending each other and even individuals perhaps who are operating these organisations who are related borrow from the organisation.  

Now, the Banking Act of 1969 was, for some time, the main law relating to banking. The first problem was capitalization. The minimum capital requirement under the Act was Shs.2 million, and up to 1987, this was a requirement despite the fact that price levels were changing and the purchasing power of the shilling was falling.  After the removal of two zeros in the 1987 currency reform, this became Shs.20,000 and 50 per cent of Ugandans at that time could each start a bank on his own.  This remained a problem for some time. 

Another problem was that the supervisory capacities in Bank of Uganda were too weak for it to discharge many of the functions it was assigned.  Also, the returns at Bank of Uganda were inadequate and the information was not analyzed by the Bank of Uganda.  Another problem was that of auditing;  different auditing practices were applied, and because of the shortage of experienced manpower in the country, and because of the shortage of auditors specifically experienced in banking auditing, the practices would differ from bank to bank and this caused a lot of problems.  

It complicated the task of supervision and the banks were able to ignore regulations such as liquidity ratios and Bank of Uganda's willingness to accommodate liquid banks further undermined incentives for bank management to improve performance.  The Act failed to delineate appropriate credential requirements to be followed by the banks.  It was also inflexible and made it difficult for Bank of Uganda to have recourse to courts of law.  Further more, Bank of Uganda was also not able to issue credential guidelines to the banks where appropriate.  

Now I come to the course reform period:  In l993, The Financial Institutions statute was passed, just like the Bank of Uganda Statute was.  The purpose was to rectify most of the shortcomings narrated -(Interruption).

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  With due respect to the person presenting the speech, and noting that a State of the Nation Address tackles issues other than the banking institution, would it not be proper for the speaker holding the Floor to concentrate on the stake of the speech other than making us a school ready to absorb banking issues so to speak?  Is it in order for the speaker holding the Floor to over concentrate on a single issue when the President's speech was diverse in material form?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Well, it will not be easy for me to rule on that point because the Mover is still addressing the House on the Motion, he may take the whole day.  He may have a number of points which he intends to cover.  I cannot say he is not going to cover other matters other than this one.  So, he may proceed. That is his way of presenting his Motion. 

MR. NSUBUGA MAYANJA:  Mr. Speaker, when I was starting on this issue, I said I was greatly concerned by the impact of the bank closures to the economy and most other issues are normally discussed by anybody anyhow.  So, I do not know, but on this one, let me be a bit brief because I have other issues to tackle.  

I have gone through the problems and I am now talking about the reform.  The Statute has increased the minimum capital requirement;  further more, they have made the Bank of Uganda autonomous, and although the reforms have not been a total success, there are times when disaster has been averted, like when intervention was in the case of Sembule, in the case of Transafrica, Trust Bank and Nile Bank.  I will not go into the details of what was done there, but I will just say that problems still continue. Insider or incestuous lending was compounded where poor accounting has continued.  
Government's failure to meet its domestic arrears has been a major problem affecting the banking system. Even the structures, the parastatals which are inefficient have translated their weaknesses and they are reflected in the banking sector.  

My recommendations, before I conclude on the banking crisis:  I am saying that a system of laws and laws for corporate governance, including comprehensive bankruptcy laws and laws that describe the rights of creditors in disposing of borrowers assets is urgently needed.  I am also saying a uniform set of transparent accounting standards, statements and supporting schedules and reports should be formulated.  That a set of constant structured and well refined standards of financial reporting forms part of an equitable resource allocation system.  It allows banks to compare borrowers relative merits, bank supervision and management becomes a bit easier.  

Another issue is that of consistent laws on valuation:  We have had problems when Bank of Uganda officials go to a bank and they want to approach the problem from the historical cost basis of valuation.  The other one will argue that we need an adjusted historical cost basis, yet another will say I am going to value my assets on the replacement cost basis.  Another one would say that I am going to value on the deprived value basis, yet another would say that I am valuing on the economic value basis, and this is causing a lot of problems because banks tend to disagree with Bank of Uganda simply because of an accounting concept and a clause to standardisation of reporting and financial information.  Another important issue is that of disclosure: Not only should we know that there must be disclosure, but we must also know what must be disclosed, at what intervals and how much of the disclosure should be.  

Hon. Members, as you will realise, the subject is not as simple as it appears and some Members are already getting tired of the presentation on banking, but I want to assure you that if you read The Background to the Budget as well as the Budget Speech itself, what Government is going to do appears there and I request Members to really read before we come to the Budget debate because there will be a major presentation on my part.  

I have about three issues which I want to address briefly.  Mr. Speaker, I can see the problem but I have my speech and as the rules say, I can talk, but I want to summarise.  I want to talk about UPE.  

According to Adam Smith, that economist who published a very important book for us in l776, he said that public education is the remedy for public dullness.  He argued that educated people and workers were more likely to exercise their minds both at work and away from work and he, therefore, advised that for a small expense the public can facilitate, encourage and even impose upon almost the whole body of the people, the necessity of acquiring the most essential parts of education.  
About 420 years later, in Uganda we are experiencing and actually executing the recommendation of that great scholar by the names of Adam Smith.  His Excellency definitely refers to this in his state of the nation address, and here I just want to thank the Government's commitment to UPE despite its constraints and problems. It put Shs.44 billion - (Interruption).

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, with reference to our Rules of Procedure number 17(b) and noting that this is a very important speech which is highly valued by people we represent honourably in this House, is it in order for us to continue when we badly lack quorum?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Maybe, let me ascertain the number;  let my staff assist me to find out and I make a ruling on that.  I do not intend to suspend the proceedings, I intend to adjourn the House.  The House is adjourned to tomorrow 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose and adjourned until Wednesday, l4th July, 1999 at 2.00 p.m.)
