Wednesday, 17 July 2002

Parliament met at 2.27 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as a way of nurturing democracy in this country, we are privileged today to host the children of Real Primary School in Lubaga North, who have come to witness what Parliament does in the country. They are seated in the Gallery.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2002

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Speaker, I am not ready to read the Bills now, I apologize.

MR AWORI: According to my Order Paper, I do not see what the Clerk is reading.  Do we have different Order Papers? Which is which?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have one Order Paper. After Communication from the Chair, there is Bills First Reading: The Financial Institutions Bill, 2002. Bills First Reading: The Public Finance and Accountability Bill, 2002. That is what I have.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, what I have here – Wednesday the 17th - Communication, Bills First Reading, Bills Second Reading; I do not see No.5 that the Clerk is reading.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable Member, this is the Order Paper. Item No.1 Prayers; Item No.2, Communication from the Chair; No.3 Bills First Reading: The Financial Institutions Bill, 2002; No.4 Bills First Reading: The Public Finance and Accountability Bill, 2002; No.5 is the motion. 

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, on the Order Paper which I have, item No.5 is “Questions for Oral Answers” and I was told that I was due to –(Interjection)- If you wish I can read it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Mwandha, it is okay I will answer it.

MR MWANDHA: You mean I will ask my question?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Now, honourable Members, that Order Paper was issued without concluding the consultations, so it was withdrawn and the Order Paper we are using is this one. The reason is that questions do take about one and a half hours of our debate time, and constitutionally, Members are very anxious to make presentations on the Budget.  We would like Members to take that opportunity, complete this debate and we shall have the questions.

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, I am not really persuaded by that explanation, because I am sure that by the time this Order Paper was prepared, I think, I do not want to disagree with the Speaker, but I just want to explain my very difficult position. I was made aware that I was going to put a question, and this question has been pending for a long time. And Madam Speaker, you know how much we have been complaining in this House that the questions we asked a long time ago are not being answered. Now, fortunately, the question is on the Order Paper; I am given proper notice and all of a sudden a different Order Paper is prepared. I do not know what the fate of my question is in spite of the fact that we have been waiting for a long time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mwandha, I have already told you that the fate of your question will abide by the outcome of the debate on the budget, and the Order Paper we are using is the one I have read. Let us proceed.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, with humility, I am standing on a point of procedure.  This debate – the budgetary debate – is the center of focus in every meaningful democracy, and Uganda is one of such a democracies of meaning. In view of that statement which I have made with dignity, in terms of procedure, how do we proceed when I see only one Minister of Government on the Frontbench?  Are we serious?  In the absence of all the ministers save for one, is that an acceptance that things have come to the end of their terror?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, the debate we are handling now is centered on the Ministry of Finance and I can see the Minister of Finance is here, let us proceed.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

(i) The revised revenue and expenditure estimates for the fiscal year 2001/2002.

(ii) The budgetary proposals for the fiscal year 2002/2003 estimates of revenue and expenditure.

(Debate continued)

MR LARTIF SSEBAGGALA (Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I am sure this is my first time to contribute on this debate. I wish to thank the Minister of Finance for having taken the responsibility of reading this year’s budget as it is stipulated in our Constitution. Madam Speaker, I will first of all address three issues in as far as the budget speech is concerned.

The first is about Government’s initiative to professionalise our UPDF. It is really great to note that our Government has started talking about reform of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces. So the word “reform” is of great importance. If the Government has realised that indeed we must have reforms in our defence force, then I believe reforms will even go further, reaching other ministries and policies.  

Under this reform of the UPDF, I believe our local defences, the LDUs, also fall under the reserve force. It is also my conviction that they operate under some guidance from our security organisations. However, there are no clear laws geared towards ensuring the proper functioning of LDUs. We are not so sure that they belong to the Ministry of Internal Affairs. Do they belong to the Ministry of Defence?

It is my humble appeal to the concerned ministry to ensure that LDUs are clearly defined so that we can know where they belong. When I was inspecting some of the LDUs who were being trained in my constituency, they informed me that at times civilians mistake their identity. They may get someone involving himself in acts of indiscipline, and because their uniform resembles that of the workers of national –(Interruption)

MR ERESU: Madam Speaker, the member holding the Floor has raised a very important issue about LDUs. I, however, come from a rural constituency, and I have taken the trouble to look around to see whether LDUs are there in my constituency and there are none. May I know how LDUs are recruited? 

Secondly, apart from their recruitment, are they the monopoly of urban constituencies? If so, should they be budgeted for? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you seeking clarification from the member on budgeting for LDUs?

MR ERESU: Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the ministers of Defence and Finance, and the member.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the Member will not answer that question. 

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the honourable colleague. When he says, “when I was inspecting the LDUs”, what does he mean? I know him in three different capacities. I know him as the Imam of Parliament, I know him as the Member for Kawempe, and I also know him as a distinguished multi-partyist. In what capacity was he inspecting the LDUs?

MR SSEBAGGALA: Thank you very much for your contributions.  I have informed this House that I inspected the LDUs who were being trained in my constituency. I used the word “inspecting” because I was given a title in my constituency. I am a Major. So I am entitled to use the word “inspection” because I was given that title.

My point is, the LDUs asked me to request either the Minister of Internal Affairs or the Minister of Defence, to at least have a change in their uniform. Currently they are using blue uniforms, and they told me that in most cases their identity is mistaken, because their uniform resembles that of the workers of National Water and Sewerage Corporation. So, at times they might be implicated for no good reason because of the resemblance of the uniforms It is their humble request to the concerned ministry to have a change of uniform.

When I turn to taxation, I believe that our taxation policy should be redesigned to suit our local investors. Sincerely speaking, we have really elevated the foreign investors so much by giving them all the necessary incentives to allow them operate in our country. At the same time, we have neglected our local investors to the extent that some of our colleagues who were very powerful businessmen and women have already gone to other countries. They have been complaining about high taxation and the poor taxation policy of the Uganda Revenue Authority. 

It is my humble appeal, Madam Speaker, that in as much as we try to encourage and attract foreign investment, we cannot do it at the expense of our local investors. Government and the President should really spare some time to talk to our local investors and consult them about the problems they are facing with taxation. Look at the taxes that were imposed on the used vehicles; they are really very high!

Secondly, they told me that having the vehicle inspected at the source is going to add more costs to these vehicles. When they reach here, they will not be affordable. (Please refer to addendum.) 

What I want to add is that, instead of using tariff barriers, it is best to use non-tariff barriers to make sure that these tariff barriers which have been put in still allow used goods to come here. If the Minister was really serious, and he wanted to promote the products of our industries here, he would have imposed a non-tariff barrier.  What do I mean by this? 

The tax which was put on used clothes is meant to boost the textile industry, but actually, if on the other hand the Minister informs the country that all - I will use UPE as an example - kids benefiting from UPE must go to school in a uniform that is manufactured in Uganda, of course people would come up and cry and say parents are poor, they cannot buy uniforms  Every parent who would say that would then be advised to plant cotton, and from the cotton they plant they would earn money. Some businessmen would come to buy that cotton, the ginning industry would start again, then the milling industry will also come up to produce the yarn, then the textile and the fabric would be produced.  

Today, even this textile in the former CMB, I am sure they are not getting yarn from Uganda; they are importing the yarn!  So, at the end of the day, really, it is the farmer in China who is going to benefit, not the farmer here. So, I believe the Minister should be considering that.

On the issue of used cars, in this country you can import a car manufactured in 1960, and when the Minister says he wants a certificate of competence from the country of origin, all of us know Japan is more than willing to get rid of these cars because every time they get rid of an old car, they have a chance to produce a new one. And when they produce a new one, they have given employment to their people, and all we get on our roads here are junks!  You find a car running for one year, and then it is parked in Bwaise or wherever! 

Instead, the Minister should say vehicles older than three years should not come to the country, because all of you know in this country there used to be courses like motor mechanics. Those have closed because when you are struggling to tune a carburetor, there is an old one in the shop that you can just buy. There are very few garages now that can overhaul an engine because there is a used engine, which you just buy and whenever we use those used things, we are denying Ugandans employment, and we are becoming just a dumping ground. So, the Government should be firm and say, “You can only bring vehicles which are three years old and not older.” If this can be done that way, we shall get our people some employment.  Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you, my honourable colleague. I would like to inform you that the same Ministry you are addressing recently authorized nearly a million dollars to the Ministry of Defence to buy 1960 model vehicles.

MR NDAWULA KAWEESI: Well, that information has been given to me, but I hope the Minister of Finance and Defence will be in a better position really to make use of it. 

My second remark is on the procurement system in this country. We all know that the procurement system, both in the private sector and public sector, is a very important engine for the wealth of the country, but in this country, you all know the tendering system. There seems to be no referee, no regulator.  

What has happened, because very many Ugandans are unemployed, the client or the so-called employer is given an upper hand. Even Government is so amazing; Government puts international competitive biding. I will use an example of the Hoima/Kiboga/Busunju road. They say in international competitive bidding that first you must have done a similar job for maybe ten to 20 years. 

My question is, that person who has done that work for the last 20 years had a starting point. So what is the use of having technical schools in this country? Because a road is a road! A third year engineering student can design a road; it is just a repetitive job! What you do in this square meter, you do it elsewhere and you build a road! But you see that the French people are the consultants then you get the Italians as contractors, but when you drive there, Ugandans are the guys who are doing the job! So, really why not give Ugandans a chance? Give Ugandans a chance to do this!

Secondly, there is another attribute, which has come in; a conditionality that you must escort your bid with a bid security of 5 percent, and a condition being floated by a Government department that they want serious bidders.  What happens, you go to a bank, you put in your money, they give you a bid security, they keep it for a year while they are doing evaluations, then they get back to you and say, sorry you never got a job!  

So really, my concern here, Madam Speaker, is that if the employer wants a serious bidder, even the bidder wants a serious employer, so that should I give you my bid security and I do not get the job, you must foot the commercial rate of the money you made me tie up so that there is some reciprocity.  

Finally, Madam Speaker, my issue is on the way Government is emphasizing consuming ministries. Our biggest budget is on education; it is not a production ministry, it is a consuming ministry. Health is a consuming ministry; Defence is a consuming ministry, and when you read the ministerial statement from energy, it is a non-core ministry. A ministry that actually produces is non-core to the Government of Uganda; really this is amazing! 

As economists have told us to measure the poverty levels of the country, you look at the caloric value a person takes everyday. Similarly to measure the level of modernization of the country, you look at the energy that the country consumes everyday. Uganda consumes 260 megawatts, Kenya 1200 megawatts, Tanzania 900 megawatts; South Africa is in excess of 60,000 megawatts. So really, how can we modernize the country, create wealth in the country if we cannot distribute it with energy? 

If you look at the Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Industry and Trade, they are production ministries at the lower end of the Government priority. Really, Government should start looking at  - it is good to have UPE but how do you sustain it? You must produce people to pay tax and sustain it but to expect these consuming ministries to be sustained on donor money that will not help? 

So, really, I wish to urge the Ministry of Finance, which is the custodian of the wealth of the country, to make sure that the production ministries are given a chance on all Government projects. Many of you have received those books on Government projects; foreign expatriates, the so-called consultants, take all the money.  Really, I want this Parliament, maybe at an appropriate time, to maybe move a resolution that by the time expatriates are brought here, there should be evidence that actually, that skill is not here. But to get an expatriate to teach people how to plant bananas when they originated here, that is really unacceptable.  

So, at least that could help our people, otherwise we should close the tertiary institutions. You get an engineering degree from Makerere, it is useless; someone gets it from USA, he comes here, he is an expatriate yet the textbooks are the same! Newton’s laws never change, wherever you learn about them. So, really, we have got to be serious. We are in Government, our corporate objective is to create wealth for Uganda and equitably distribute it. I thank you, Madam Speaker.  

DR STEVEN CHEBROT (Tingey County, Kapchorwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to say how grateful I was that you did grant me permission to be out of this country for about six months for medical treatment. I would like to thank the Members of Parliament for their prayers, and I wish to say that I am now fully recovered and ready to resume business in this House.

For those members from Kapchorwa who have been complaining about my absence from this House without taking the proper means to find out why I was away, and asking Government to declare the seat of Tingey vacant, I wish to inform them that there is no vacancy in Tingey, and I am back. 

I would like to tell the members of the press - thank you very much for your support. Many of you knew why I was away and many of you shielded me from unnecessary attacks. Once again, thank you very much. (Interruption)

PROF. KAGONYERA: Madam Speaker, is hon. Chebrot in order, in spite of his fairly prolonged absence from the House, to break the rules of the House and address strangers from this House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the honourable member is out of order. Can he address the matters of the Budget?

DR CHEBROT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do withdraw my remarks on the issue of the press. 

First of all, I want to say one thing about Uganda’s image abroad in respect to HIV/AIDS. Because when I was looking through the Budget, I did realize that there was no provision for drugs for patients who have Aids, so that they can be provided free drugs.  

The image of this country is that President Museveni himself has done a tremendous piece of work to educate Ugandans to change their attitudes on their sexual behaviour. I would like to appeal to Ministry of Finance to provide a special budget to buy antiretroviral drugs for people who have been affected by HIV/AIDS.  

The moment we do not do that, it means that we are doomed, because now there are drugs that are available that can treat. You do not have to die of Aids. You can be treated, and you can live as long as you may wish to live. So, Government should make sure that it provides a budget for that. 

I was also happy that this House has created a standing committee on Aids. I was extremely happy because I think this matter was overdue, and I would like to urge members to participate fully in that committee. 

I wish to find my bearing at a later stage and then I can contribute in a more meaningful way. Thank you very much for giving me the chance.

MR TWAREBIREHO TUNGWAKO (Bunyaruguru County, Bushenyi):  First of all, Madam Speaker, I thank the Minister of Finance for his Budget Speech, and I thank the chairperson of the committee for her good recommendations, observations and comments.  

Permit me to address the concerns of the people of Bunyaruguru County whom I represent. The people of Bunyaruguru are very grateful to Government for its efforts to extend medical services at the grassroots. However, they are worried as to when their health centres and theatre will be equipped.  Last year in this august House –(Interruption)

DR WABUDEYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you honourable member for giving way.  I thought it would be necessary to chip in at this time, so that this issue does not come up many more times. I am sure every member here is concerned about when his or her health centre and theatre will be equipped. 

I wish to inform the House that in this financial year, we hope to equip all the theatres, which have been completed in terms of structure. We intend to equip all of them, and I hope that all the districts have recruited the medical officers to run these health centres.  Thank you.

MR TWAREBIREHO: Madam Speaker, I thank the Minister for that comfort, but I beg to be allowed to remind the honourable Minister that last year I raised the same issue.  I remember very well the Minister was seated exactly where she is seated today. She rose and comforted me and assured me that the theatre would be equipped. To date, the same words are being used. I do not know for how long I will be assured, but I hope this time is the last time.

My main concern, Madam Speaker, is that even the theatre, which was completed a year ago, where there is even a doctor - the other day they were making repairs to it when it has never been used.  

The second point is on the people who were chased from Kyambura Game Reserve. I remember last year, again my colleague, the honourable woman representative from Kapchorwa raised the issue, the honourable Member of Manjiya County followed and raised it, and I also reiterated it. We were assured that people who were chased from game reserves were supposed to be resettled. To date, the people of my county in Katerera are not yet resettled. We are wondering whether this year’s budget is really catering for them, and we pray that the Ministry of Finance will assist the relevant ministry to cater for our people.  

Thirdly, Bunyaruguru County is so unfortunate because we do not have cows. When you hear that there are very tiny people in Bushenyi District, they come from Bunyaruguru. It is because of malnutrition. However, we are endowed with about 52 crater lakes which could be restocked, although for the last 51 years I have been around, I have never seen any restocking of our lakes. It is our prayer that Government considers, in its budgets, the restocking of our lakes.

Fourthly, Bunyaruguru County again -(Mr Byabagambi  rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know, honourable member, the more time you give away, the less time you have.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank the honourable member for giving way. I would like clarification from him. He said that his people were evicted from Kyambura Game Reserve last year. May I know where those people are living today? He wants them to be resettled, so can I know where they are living now, or where they have been living for the whole year?  Thank you very much.

MR TWAREBIREHO: Thank you, hon. Byabagambi. I am glad you have reminded me to say what I had left untouched. These are actually about 100 families, and they live with friends, they live at trading centres and others, as usual, are meandering around.  

Fourthly, I was going to the roads. Bunyaruguru County has got only one road, which goes through the county, and that is the tarmac road up to Fortportal. When you go inside Bunyaruguru County, there is no single road that we can be proud of. 

Every Budget comes and our roads are not considered.  I am glad the Minister of Works is around, and I want to urge him and everybody else concerned that the road from Kyambura to Buhindagi through Katerera sub-county, which joins Bushenyi District to Kamwenge District, should be thought about. 

I also add with concern that Bunyaruguru County has no connection to its neighbouring county, which is Buhweju County. We would also like those two counties joined by a road.

Permit me also, Madam Speaker, to talk about education. We are very grateful for the UPE programme, but of course, as everybody knows, there are lots of problems that have arisen. One of them is lack of teachers to cater for our children in primary schools. 

What is happening in the districts, and in particular in my county, is that young men and girls are being recruited to do in-service teaching work for our pupils. These young men and girls are not being paid anything for accommodation, for food or otherwise, and they are finding it very difficult to carry on with their work. It is our prayer that their plight will be looked into.  

Madam Speaker, if I do not offend the Rules of Procedure, I would like to end by making one observation. Since I was not able to contribute to the President’s address on the state of the nation, permit me to contribute now.  

On page 19 of his speech, His Excellency the President was happy that the election of our representatives to the East African Legislative Assembly went on well. He said that the method used was very transparent, and it gave credit to the Movement.  I would encourage every one of us in this august House that indeed, we should always use such a method. I thank you, Madam.

CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA (Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I will start straight away with the Budget Speech. 

On page 7, the Minister stated that His Excellency was concerned about the increase in the cost of public administration, as compared to other sectors. And in the Background to the Budget, on page 18, there is a table showing how the approved figures of the Budget have been over-passed by the real expenditure.  

Every year, consecutively from 1999 to-date, there has been an increase in public expenditure.  We are getting domestic arrears on the cost of public administration. Apart from the minister lamenting in the Background to the Budget, he does not provide any advice. Has he given any advice to His Excellency the President about the increase in the cost of administration?  

I do not know whether he has given any advice on the many presidential advisers and presidential assistants who are duplicating the work of ministers. The other day, at first I was saddened, but afterwards, I found out it was not what I thought. When I read in the newspapers that they had appointed Ngoma Ngime as the overseer of the President’s manifesto, I wondered what the Prime Minister was doing. I thought the Prime Minister had been sacked! Only to find out that he is there and Ngoma Ngime and Bakojja are also there doing the same work - (Interruption).

MR DOMBO: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. On the issue of duplication of duties, recently Mr Ngoma Ngime wrote to all Permanent Secretaries in Uganda asking them to appoint somebody to be in charge of the President’s manifesto in each ministry. That left me wondering what the ministers themselves are doing as part of the Executive. This is the information I wanted to give this House.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Thank you, hon. Dombo, for giving that information. The emphasis I am making is on the duplication of duties. We have our technocratic Rt. hon. Prime Minister who can oversee the President’s manifesto effectively in all ministries. The duplication of duties is the cause for the increase of the cost of public administration. Have you advised the President on that?  

Recently, in the President’s speech, they told us they had appointed Onegi Obel and Mrs Muhwezi whom they would report to. I remain wondering, what is the IGG doing? What is the Minister of Ethics and Integrity doing?  Have they lost hope in them? If the President has lost hope, why doesn’t he sack them and appoint Onegi Obel, because they are doing the same thing here, instead of reporting to the IGG? Why don’t you strengthen the office of the IGG instead of creating another parallel body that increases the cost of administration? Honourable Minister of Finance, I hope you give him advice.  

The other day, they appointed Fagil Monday to form co-operatives. What is the Ministry of Industry doing? Are they incompetent? Why don’t they go home instead of creating other offices? This would reduce the cost.  

On the number of RDCs, you find that one district with a small county has an RDC, Deputy RDC, Assistant RDCs - unconstitutional ones by the way, because in the Constitution we have one RDC.  What are they doing? This is an increase in the cost of administration! If we reduce those, we shall be saved.  

Why don’t we reduce Members of Parliament? Do we need over 300 members to pass POB or any other law? Why don’t we reduce the Cabinet? This one would reduce the cost of public administration! If His Excellency is concerned about the increase in public administration, advise him about those areas that would save the budget. 

In the Budget speech, they talked about the developments in the East African Community and the Common Union coming up.  But, as someone who comes from Kamwenge where a group of Ugandan citizens were chased from Tanzania, we were asking ourselves; is the East African Community for a common man or for the top leadership?  If they could narrate how those people were chased; those who had cows; who had goats; they were just chased and they left all their property and yet we have East African Community growing strong.  

How can we grow when this group was chased and put in Kikagati? The Government knew they were there; they shifted them to Kamwenge; they know they are there! What surprises, if the Minister of Finance could note, is that over 2000 people are not catered for; not even a single coin has been added on the condition or non-conditional grant of Kamwenge District!

They also talked of the income tax burden: The income tax burden on civil servants is very high. Madam Speaker, if I could remind the Minister of Finance, His Excellency the President during the campaign period met the teachers who were complaining about paying a high tax of Shs80,000 and he promised to reduce the tax.  But what surprises me is that in the next budget, they moved from Shs80,000 to Shs100,000.  What a reduction!  

The Ministry of Finance gives five percent increase on the salaries, but he puts in one pocket Pay-As-You-Earn and takes it away from another pocket.  So let us not deceive these civil servants, either you increase or you don’t, because I do not know when the living wage will come, if it comes at all!

Agriculture. Let us be serious about Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture.   In Kamwenge we produce a lot of maize now but because of drought, there is no maize.  The Plan for the Modernisation of Agriculture is a very good plan but how do we modernise on a hoe?  

Maybe, I should thank the Minister because he has seen there is a lot of unemployment, so they want people to get engaged using the hoe to increase production.  At least if you provided a tractor in each sub-county, I would say you are serious about Plans for Modernisation of Agriculture!  

I know people in Lango and in the East would produce a lot of cotton for your AGOA, but how do you do it with a hoe?  It is very difficult.  Let us review our policies and see what we can do.

Education. In Education, there is some bit of lack of planning because we continue training teachers every year from Makerere, but we have not lifted the ban on recruitment.  How do you train teachers and technocrats to go on the streets?  What planning is there to train people you cannot use, only to find them on the streets?  

During vacations, Grade III teachers have been undergoing training for Grade V, but after their course they go back to school and continue getting Grade III salary.  What planning is there?  Let us get serious on this human resource, because the moment we do not increase their emoluments, UPE will continue failing.  Lastly Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, no, hon. Sinabulya.

MS SYLVIA SINABULYA (Woman Representative, Mubende): I thank you, Madam Speaker.  I want to begin by appreciating the Minister of Finance for the Budget Speech. I would also like to appreciate the efforts of Government to reduce poverty as manifested by the increase in per capita incomes, GDP growth and the control of inflation. 

I would like to comment that much as the macro figures are very impressive, I find it very difficult to explain to my constituency that the country is developing.  When you look at the micro indicators, the level of poverty at the household level, the poverty among women, the poverty among the youth, even men, there is a very sharp contrast between the micro for the household and macro figures.  So, I would urge Government put emphasis on enabling people to access micro credit if we are to have meaningful development of the country.    

Yes, I agree Government has done a lot through the Entandikwa and the Rural Micro-Finance Support Programme, but you will find that most of the people in the rural areas are not accessing this rural micro-finance.  So, I would urge Government to put policies that directly target the people, if you are to transform these macro figures into reality.

I wanted also to talk about the PMA.  My colleague from Kamwenge-  (Ms Akello rose-)

MS AKELLO:  Madam Speaker, I thank you for recognising me, and I thank my colleague for giving way.  I would like to appreciate her concerns about poverty at the household level in the countryside, and to appeal to her and to all Members of Parliament by saying that under the new delivery mechanism for micro finance, the Government of Uganda is putting money at the district level and getting agents who are going to run micro finance agencies at the parish, but immediately at the sub-county level.  So now it is our responsibility to go and mobilise our people so that when this micro finance is put at the district level, our people are ready to access it from the sub county level upwards.  

It is also up to us to ensure that our people are educated about the new delivery mechanisms on micro credit so that we can actually enable them to fight poverty. I am looking forward to working with all the Members of Parliament.  

I know when I talk about Entandikwa, some of the Members of Parliament, especially those who were here in the 6th Parliament run away from me because they know that their constituencies are guilty of not having paid back the Entandikwa and killed off the revolving nature of that fund.  

MS SINABULYA: I want to thank the Minister for the information, but I wonder; what mechanism has her ministry put in place to ensure that the people are educated about micro finance?  So, the onus is on her ministry to ensure that the people know and are even enabled to access that micro finance.

Madam Speaker, I wanted to add my concern to that of others that much as the literature about the PMA is very impressive, there is a very sharp contrast between what is in the document and what is on the ground.  My district happens to be one of those areas benefiting from the PMA grants but if you go to the rural areas and ask people about PMA, people know nothing about it. And if you want to find how much is going to the parishes, it is as little as Shs200,000.  How much can Shs200,000 do for a parish?  It is not surprising that even the policy makers at the sub-counties do not inform the rest of the people because of the little funds which are given under PMA.

On NAADS, I am aware that NAADS is supposed to be the nerve of PMA.  We have PMA in 24 districts; we have NAADS in six districts.  Now, how can we transform agriculture using PMA without NAADS?  I am urging the Minister of Agriculture to ensure that wherever there is PMA, there is NAADS because there is no way you can transform agriculture without NAADS.

On the exports, I also want to commend the efforts of the President to find markets for our products, and his role under initiatives like AGOA.  But, I would also want to comment that much as we are eyeing markets in U.S.A. and other developed countries, we should also ensure that within our own country our people are enabled to purchase.

When I hear of milk being poured down in Ankole, and then when you go to Eastern Uganda and Northern Uganda people do not have milk, I wonder why we do not develop the potential of our people to purchase that milk.  

When you talk about eyeing the AGOA markets to sell our cotton in America, we also need cotton clothes here in Uganda.  So, we should also put emphasis on developing the capacity of our people to purchase our own products. Even if we take our products to U.S.A, there is no way you are going to compel an American housewife to buy Ugandan cotton products in the stores.  She can go for something she can understand - something American, something British.  But Uganda, a very distant country from America, it may be a problem!

Finally, I would like to talk about the roads.  I am glad the Minister of Works is around.  I want to bring to the attention of the Minister of Works the plight of the people of Mityana and Mubende Districts on the poor state of the Kampala-Mityana road.  That road is a stretch of 68 kilometers but as I talk now, it is a mixture of patches of murram amidst tarmac, and with manholes. It is no wonder -(Mr Nasasira rose_) Mr Minister, let me finish – it is no wonder that the FM Radio Stations have declared it dead and buried.

MR NASASIRA: Madam Speaker, I just want to assure the hon. Member that that road pains me as it pains her - (Laughter) - but my pain goes further because according to our plans, the tenders were supposed to have been issued in May this year.  The designs were completed but unfortunately, as you know the way our budget is funded, there was a sudden withdrawal of a development partner whom we had agreed to do that road.  But despite that, we as a sovereign State of Uganda are looking for alternative funding to do the road as soon as possible.

MS SINABULYA: I thank the Minister for that information, but that is what we have been getting for so many years. I will not be surprised next year if I get the same answer from the Minister.  

Finally, when I was reading the Budget Speech and the State of the Nation Address by His Excellency, he did mention of remittances from abroad as one way which has helped our economy to develop.  I am wondering, because when I look at these remittances from abroad, it is this kyeyo business.  I am wondering; if he can acknowledge the great contribution those people are making to our economy, why don’t we legalize the kyeyo business?  Why don’t we help these kyeyo people, because they go through a lot of huddles to get visas. Why don’t you put in place a policy to help them go, since we can even acknowledge their contribution in our books?  Thank you very much Madam Speaker.

MR WAPAKABULO: Can I, Madam Speaker, clarify a point?  I thank the honourable Member for giving way.  Kyeyo is not illegal.  It should be on record that it is legal and we thank those Ugandans who have gone abroad and are sending us in the proximity of half a billion dollars without conditions.  This is because some people give us the same amount with a lot of conditions, and that is why when I go to the Minister, I want your support. (Applause).  We must maintain embassies where our people are so that they can continue being protected and they bring the money.  Thank you very much.

MR FRED OMACH MANDIR (Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  It is good to agree to agree, and sometimes it is better to agree to disagree.  But it is never good to disagree to agree.  Positive criticism is very healthy in a dynamic society, and where credit is due, it is important to recognize it.  

Madam Speaker, some time last year in October, I was on a delegation that went to Brussels to represent this House, and in the opening remarks by the Co-President, John Carey, he was quoting from a report of the Hansard, and in that report, he singled out only two countries in Sub-Saharan Africa whose gross rates for the last 10 years was above six percent, and that was Mozambique and Uganda. Madam Speaker, you should have seen our faces and how everybody was looking at Ugandans.  As if that was not enough, there was also a case of Ugandans becoming consultants on the issue of AIDS and HIV.  So we had such a great day in the European Parliament where we were meeting as African Caribbean, Pacific and European Union.  

When we debate this very important budget, Madam Speaker, we should be very clear in our minds and say what we want to say. In the speech by John Carey, he mentioned something about- and I quote from this report of ANCTAD - “for each dollar of net capital flow to Sub-Saharan Africa from the rest of the World, a dollar and six cents is broken down as follows: 50 cents through terms of trade losses, 25 cents through debt servicing and profit remittances and 30 cents through leakages into reserves and capital outflows.”  

As we debate this budget, we should know that this country is yet going to have another growth of over five per cent. We must also bear in mind that we still have very high domestic debts, which has a negative response to this economy.  The people who have supplied the Republic of Uganda need to be paid, and where these domestic debts have been inflated, the rightful authority should look at this and ensure that corrective measures have been taken.

We have been told in previous contributions that inflation has been recorded as being negative, and I would like to quote from the Background to the Budget which says that: “maize exports quadrupled but realised unit value fall by 38.1 per cent.”  When you give this value in the calculation of the inflation, it will give an erroneous position, because if you use 60 cents to produce one kilo and you sell that one kilo at 30 shillings, Madam Speaker, we have a problem.

I would like to speak briefly on the trade deficit that is facing this country.  How do we go about ensuring that these deficits are reduced?  I would like to give the example of the department of Forestry.  In 1889 when we had the colonialists coming here, one of the first departments that they opened was the Department of Forestry, and that is because, although the saying is that agriculture is the backbone of this economy, forestry is actually the flesh.  But you will find now that Forestry is being given very little attention as far as the resources are concerned.  

In this budget, 1.4 billion is being allocated to the inauguration of the Forestry Authority. This orbit is very important – (-Mr Lukyamuzi rose_) – Madam Speaker, I am very informed. As you can see, I stay among four different professors and by association, I have become an associate professor; and therefore, I am well informed.  Madam Speaker – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, please!

MR OMACH MANDIR: Madam Speaker, the importance of Forestry in this country needs to be re-emphasised. Right now as we are talking, we are using the laws of 1964.  For instance, 90 per cent of the people use charcoal and firewood as a source of energy, and there is not a single law prohibiting them.  There are a number of forest trees that can bring in a lot of income to this country, which could go a long way in trying to reduce this deficit caused by the low prices of coffee.  One of this, Madam Speaker, is the great Gum Arabic, which can bring a lot of income to this country; there is also macedomia, we have moringa and clone eucalyptus. 

As I sit down, I would like to remind, again, the Minister responsible for Works that the road from Packwach to Nebbi, even if these Chinese are given 10 years, they will not be able to complete that road.  As I talk now, they have only completed about four kilometres, having spent one year of the three years that have been allocated to them to finish this road.  Madam Speaker, knowing that the portion from Nebbi to Arua is going on very well, the people of Arua do know the art of hop, step and jump. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: By the way, honourable Members, I am giving priority to those who did not contribute to the President’s address.  

MR PAUL LUBOWA (Budiope county, Kamuli): Thank you very much Madam Speaker.  I also wish to add my voice to those who have contributed and appreciated the presentation of the Budget Speech by the Minister of Finance.  As you did indicate the other day, you said the budget speech definitely is a step in the implementation process of the intention of His Excellency the President, as portrayed in his address.  

Madam Speaker, I have analysed the address of His Excellency, the President, particularly in the area of good governance.  I must thank Government and appreciate the trends made in that direction because it has put in place a number of institutions to ensure good governance. We have the IGG in place, the Police and other areas.  

However, I wish to say something about what he indicated on page three. He expressed the need to exercise appropriate political, administrative, and managerial authority over potential centres of disruption that are a stumbling block to the several reforms and actions that have been taken on various fronts to improve service delivery.  

I want to particularly talk about the taxation system both at national and local levels. At local levels, I am a bit disturbed by the trends taken, despite the fact that the other day, the Minister of Local Government indicated to us that an instrument is out to stipulate how the graduated tax is going to be handled. I am still afraid, because comments are coming up on radio that local leaders at the district level are not in agreement.

Others are saying that generally, it should be Shs3,000.  This one will cause a stalemate in the delivery of services at that level. In fact, it is very ridiculous for us to hear that local governments have come up with budgets. I don’t know what consideration they gave to local collection because graduated tax contributes 90 per cent of locally collected revenue. I don’t know what was put in their budgets. This definitely is going to cause a stalemate.

At national level, I am concerned about the five per cent taxation on mivumba. I don’t really understand what the intention is. I have been seeking an explanation but others say that it is a kind of deterrent to people who want to buy mivumba at the expense of buying manufactured textiles. The five per cent increase in tax is very negligible. 

The women have been buying their trousers at Shs3,000, now if you put five per cent, it will be about Shs3,150, but an opportunity has been given to the dealers to double this price. But even then, the elasticity of demand for mivumba is so low; in fact it is very inelastic. People will continue to buy mivumba but of course it will affect their domestic incomes, and what is available for other things. For that matter, you cannot tell me that we are supporting the local textile industries because people will continue to buy mivumba at any cost.

On infrastructure, Government has gone a long way in ensuring good road network in the country, but traditionally, we have too many trunks that link the southern districts to the northern districts. You either go through Karuma in the West or through Malaba in the East, but I feel we should break that tradition and have a middle trunk through Kamuli district and Lango areas such that in case we had problems along Karuma, one would get an opportunity. Let us diversify opportunities to get to the north.  

Madam Speaker, as you are very well aware, it will be another opportunity for your district, which traditionally had only 20Kms of tarmac road, to have an extension to Lake Kyoga. I think that would be good for us.  

I also want to talk about communications. We are talking about the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture. Of course, most of the agricultural products are perishable. When you talk about agriculture, we also include veterinary and fisheries, but these products are very perishable. If somebody is going to transport fish to Malaba or Busia, we need to detect what the market situation is in Malaba before we take the fish there. So, I think the minister in charge of communications should extend gadgets to ensure that people can use these mobile phones, or even Uganda Telecommunications.

About electricity, I must thank the minister in charge of energy, who has tirelessly gone out to the districts, constituencies and sub-counties, to detect the need for this important amenity. In fact, she is breaking the tradition of viability. It is very unfortunate that people keep talking about viability and saying that electricity should not go to a particular area just because there are no storied houses, there are no factories, there is no this and that. How do you expect to have a factory where there is no electricity? But such areas are potentially good. If there is a lake and you know there is fish, definitely we need to preserve that fish. So let us have electricity there.

We have sub-district health units or centres. These require electricity – (Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, honourable Member, for giving way. I want to seek clarification specifically from the sector minister in regard to what the President of Uganda has said on a number of occasions about electricity. When you look at the power purchase agreements that these private developers are signing, there is an element of power tariff. 

The President has repeated on many occasions that when the supply of power increases, the prices will automatically come down. How are we going to reconcile the cushioning of the power purchase agreement which Government commits itself to uphold, and the forces of supply and demand, which the President keeps promising about? How are we going to overcome that to ensure that the people can ably use the power we are going to produce? Otherwise, it might be a myth. I want a clarification. 

MR LUBOWA: Thank you very much. I think the Minister responsible will respond.  

Madam Speaker, yesterday, when the chairperson of the Budget Committee guided us with her presentation, I did not feel like supporting her when she talked of slashing Shs2 billion from the Ministry of Defence. But I went home and analysed the Recurrent Expenditure Estimates and realised that Defence has an expenditure of Shs232 billion, and yet the Ministry of Education has only Shs53 billion. 

The wage component consumes Shs128 billion, yet the Ministry of Education is programmed to consume only Shs7 billion. But if we talked in terms of the human resource involved in these two ministries, where do we have greater numbers? I would imagine that the Ministry of Education will have more than 150, and Defence may be about 50. 

The impression given here is that maybe the personnel in the Ministry of Defence get about Shs2 billion each. So, I am now supporting the Chairperson of the Budget Committee that we slash Shs2 billion from that side and give it to the Ministry of Education so that the Ministry of Education employs more secondary school teachers.  

We are considering UPE but then the secondary level – (Interruption)- I do not know whether I should continue. I was advising that if we slashed Shs2 billion from the Ministry of Defence and took it to the Ministry of Education, we would enroll more secondary school teachers. We have 1000 sub-counties in Uganda, and if each secondary school lacks about 10 teachers, it would mean spending about Shs15 million in every sub-county on 10 more teachers. For the 1000 sub-counties, it would mean Shs1.5 billion and so the secondary school level would be properly catered for. With that, I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR JACK SABIITI (Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will address myself to three basic areas, but first, I would like to comment on His Excellency’s statement that the cost of public administration is extremely high. I agree with him, but he should have gone further to explain why the administration cost is very high. There are three reasons.  

1. Poor policy formulation on the part of Government;

2. Poor decision making process on the part of Government;  and,  

3. Poor management of public assets, which again is on the part of Government.  

Madam Speaker, we have tended to use ad hoc institutions to manage the state. I am aware that the President is empowered under the Constitution to create units, structures and departments in order to help him to administer the country, but unfortunately, we have organs of state. 

We have the Executive, which has institutions under it; we have the public service and we have ministries. It is under these ministries that the Executive manages the affairs of this country. It is in the public service that we have highly qualified technical staff in nearly every field to help the Government. But what I find intriguing is that we have resorted to ad hoc ways of doing things; creating structure after structure, and leaving the institutions that are supposed to be rendering service. As a result, there has been an increase in the cost of administration. I will give an example. Take the Secretariat. 

When you look at the structure of the Secretariat, you get intrigued! If you look at page 14, 15 there is a Directorate of Legal Advisory Service headed by a person who is at the rank of a minister. You have a Directorate on Economic Affairs headed by a person who is at the rank of a minister. At the same time, you have the same minister in the office of the President. At the same time you will have an advisor in State House. All of these are at the rank of ministers. They are doing the same job but at different levels. This is a contradiction! 

It appears that we have taken political patronage as the basic way of appeasing everybody at the expense of the public. I, therefore, find it strange that such a thing appears in the speech of the President when actually the Executive should be looking at how they manage themselves. So it is policy formulation, decision making process and poor management.  

If you look at the number of presidential advisors, some of them at the rank of ministers, others at the rank of minister of state, it is unbelievable, yet here is a Minister for Finance telling us that actually, the cost of public administration is going up! I request the responsible minister to advise the President that unless we come out clearly to prune our structures, particularly at the advisory and ministerial level, we shall continue spending much on public administration.

Look at Police; we have the LDUs. Why should we have LDUs?  Recruit people to join the Police; they will do the work.  Then, you take LDUs to Defence; Defence has its own role!  We tend to confuse how to manage society. Therefore, poor management, poor decision-making has cost Uganda a lot. It is high time the Prime Minister came out as the advisor of Government to clearly tell Government that we must restructure this way.  

Madam Speaker, the second point I would like to touch is about roads. Local Governments run the majority of the roads in this country, and we know that scarcity of resources in these districts is too much. I will give an example of Kabale district. We have only about 50 kilometres in the entire district, which are managed by the central government. That is from Muhanga to Kabale, Kabale to Katuna and then the road leading to Kisoro, which is just a few kilometres yet there is a policy, which clearly states that all roads leading to district headquarters should be taken over by the central government. 

There is Muhanga-Rukungiri road, which I understand Rukungiri district and Kabale cannot manage. There is also Rubanda road linking to Kanungu. Unless these two roads are done by the central government, you do not expect people to transport their products to the markets. Therefore, I appeal to the Minister of Works to look into this matter and make sure that Kabale is included in the allocation of funds to manage district roads. 

Lastly, I would like to talk about graduated tax. We have a problem. The President went around the country when he was looking for votes, telling people they would pay less graduated tax. Some of us who helped him tried to implement his manifesto by explaining this. He told us that people who are poor should pay Shs 3,000. This has caused problems in nearly every district. The people have refused to pay taxes over and above Shs 3,000.

I will give an example. Rwamuchuchu sub-county has 35,000 taxpayers. Less than 10 percent have paid tax because they earn below Shs 24,000 per month. This means the local governments have no revenue to run the district. I propose, Madam Speaker, that the cost of collecting this revenue is too high. It is illogical to ask the Gombolola chief, or the officials of LC I, II or III to collect tax. At the end of it all, what will have been collected is much less than what was actually used in the collection process. So, I request that graduated tax be abolished. Let the budgeting for this country be centralized and we just send funds to the district. Let us tax all areas that we think we can get money out of. 

For example, I am told that we have beautiful farms and ranches in Ankole, in Nyabushozi and in eastern Uganda, but I am amazed to see that actually there is no ranch that is taxed. I see cows moving to Kampala on lorries everyday, they are slaughtered here but there is no single revenue collected on them! I want to be guided on this, if I am wrong. I hear there is no tax collected from ranches whatsoever! 

How do you get revenue without expanding the tax base? I request the Minister to look into this very seriously, to make sure that we get more revenue, and we relieve the poor men and women in the village who cannot pay tax. With this, Madam Speaker, I thank you very much.

MR JOHN ODIT (Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Like many other colleagues have stated, I must thank the minister for this good Budget Speech, particularly the way he mastered the macro economic policies. 

He gave us very good figures, very lovely statistics, and I learnt one thing just a few minutes ago. In the Animal Farm, when the animals overthrew man from the farm, the pigs wanted to know the statistics of the animals that had survived. They wanted figures, but the doves said, “other than giving us figures we need more grain.” They instead wanted more food for themselves. I think this is what Members of Parliament are talking about. The figures are very good, the policies are very good but there is still poverty at the household level, and that is the challenge that we have.

Ten years ago, I had an opportunity to work with a very civilized Ghanaian who has decided to retire in this country. This man is called Canon  Kodwo Ankra. In the church where we were working, there would be a time when things were very rough and we needed a lot of prayers. Sometimes even prayers did not mean a positive result. So, Canon Ankra  gave us a very important and worthwhile proverb from Ghana, from among the Akan tribe. He said, “if you want to talk to God, and because you do not see God, speak to the wind and the wind will hopefully carry the message to God.” 

The front bench is occupied by Cabinet Ministers and I am sure that they are sitting here to represent the Executive. They should be listening, for us we are speaking to the wind. If they can listen, they should. There is poverty, there are problems in the country, and there is insecurity. The Minister of Finance came to tell us that things are very good indeed and we are saying, on the contrary, there is poverty in the villages! 

Where do these figures emanate from? These are the factors that worry us. They tell us they have staticians who give them the figures and these are very good indeed, but I do not know whether the ministers also give statistics from their respective ministries to the Ministry of Finance to enable them compile a good budget. Why do I say this? 

Two weeks ago we were talking about the issue of Teso, and I asked one senior Cabinet Minister whether he knew how many policemen lost their lives in the course of operations against thugs in this country. He gave us figures about the death of the thugs and many other things, including the guns recovered but when it came to the number of policemen who died, he said he was not a statistician, and therefore, he could not tell us the figures. These are the contradictions that we have.

Here we have the Budget Speech, but the ministerial policy statements are full of contradictions. I call upon members of various sessional committees to check carefully. For us in the Sessional Committee of Agriculture, we are already noticing shortfalls even before the budget is approved. One thing is that they recommended the reallocation of some money from coffee to research on coffee related diseases. That money is lost already; Shs 3.3 billion lost! That is already a shortfall. At the end of the fiscal year, whom are we going to blame?

Secondly, we recommended Shs300 million, which was a budget allocation, for drawing of plans and construction initiation of the office for the ministry to move from Entebbe to Kampala. That money is lost too. We traced and discovered that the money has now found its way to the IGG’s office for some reason as yet unknown to us. So, if from day one we are already realizing shortfalls in billions of shillings, what kind of result are we going to expect from this ministry at the end of this fiscal year? 

Madam Speaker, if the various ministers care, they should try to listen because it is very important. Once you listen you can improve on your performance. Some of them have never even bothered to take into account the recommendations from the ssessional committees that looked at the EMTEF report. The policy statements have come in, looking the same as they did before we looked at them. So, I think we are getting into trouble. Probably some of them are already tired, but we are saying, stay with us. We urge you to try and listen. Madam Speaker, these are the problems that we have in our country.

I wind up by saying that very good economic policies were floated -(Interjection) (-Mr Lukyamuzi rose-) I have only one or two minutes to complete -(Interruption)   

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker -(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Odit, who allowed you to take information? Complete your statement.

MR ODIT: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your ruling. By way of conclusion, I must say that these good economic policies helped us achieve quick and speedy economic recovery only in the 1990s. There are a few reasons to justify my argument: 

One, there were a few government properties to sell and give more money to the coffers of Government. 

Two, the Asians came back with their money to try and repossess their properties, and they rehabilitated the industries and results were definitely remarkable.

Three, some of the people that we talk about as having given us over US $0.5 billion from kyeyo went abroad during that time. As a result, they are repatriating money, which is making us proud.  

Then lastly, I must say that the state of the country in terms of security was very sound and promising in the 1990s, but now problems are all over the country. Insecurity is in many forms including rebel activities, land wrangles, re-settlers and robbery. Government also needs to do something about incentives to investors. 

I invite honourable Members to take individual trips to Nakawa Industrial Estate. They will see that there are no giant industries established in this country, other than stores and warehouses, which can come and go any time. Madam Speaker, these are very temporary measures.

MR GODFREY KIWANDA (Mityana North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to talk about three or four points.

Many people have made contributions centred on UPE. As I calculated, we were expecting the first batch of UPE recruits to be in primary seven by the year 2003, and we shall have about one million candidates. 

The ministry has been talking about having one secondary school per sub-county. When I look around in my constituency, there are only two government-sponsored secondary schools. That means such constituencies may not be considered for getting one secondary school per sub-county. And these secondary schools cannot accommodate all the candidates we are going to have by the year 2003. The only way out we have is the private schools, and the kind of education being given to students in private schools is lacking. The Ministry of Education needs to help if we are to improve this education. 
   
Some secondary schools cannot even afford to teach 10 subjects in a particular secondary school. And this is the only secondary school in the neighbourhood. The one next to it, the only government secondary school in the sub-county, is something like 20 or 15 kilometres away. Unless we help these secondary schools, we are going to have a very bad output after senior four. They concentrate on few subjects, which may not be beneficial in as far as development of our nation is concerned.

When you look at the quality, the accessibility of UPE and its retention rate, they are all lacking. When I approached the Minister concerned, she told me, “we recruited about two million pupils and now it is only one million that are going to reach primary seven.” That means there is a problem in the retention rate in the UPE programme, which needs to be addressed.

I also thank the Government for the infrastructure. First of all, I thank the Minister for the work on the Busunju/Hoima road, via Kiboga. Work has started on that road but I would like to tell the Minister that the work is still very slow. There should be more speed if we are to have this work completed. And even compensation should be looked into because people are worried that they will not be compensated.     

Someone talked about the Kampala/Mityana road. This road is sincerely in a very bad state. At times, even Members of Parliament, when you tell them that you have a fundraising in your constituency, they do not want to come because of the bad road. We have been left out! We also travel to other constituencies, and when you compare this road with other highways from Kampala, you can see that it is in a very bad state. And when you look at the budget, it is not even mentioned at all. Even in the 10 years’ programme, it is not there. So when the minister rose and said it is going to be considered, I do not know whether it was just defensive or its real. Otherwise, we are really badly off.  

The Minister of Finance, in the Budget Speech, talked about the decentralisation strategy. According to the Local Governments Act, the local governments are supposed to use only 20 percent of the locally collected revenue of a previous year. About 80 percent of the locally collected revenue comes out of graduated tax. When you look at the districts, I do not know how they are going to carry on their duties. 

A district like mine, when I calculated, has something like Shs 50 million, which it has to use in the councils. This includes paying their secretaries, paying the chairperson, and doing everything else. I think this money is too little. And we are putting the Chief Administrative Officers and the Chairmen LCV in big trouble. They may not be able to implement the stipulated programmes. So, there should be a way in which the Ministry of Local Government can help these people. 

Also, the graduated tax was so much politicised during presidential campaigns. Some of the candidates were saying that it should be abolished, and the President came out and said it would be reduced to Shs 3,000. That caused such a mess that we still have problems in our sub-counties and districts. And you remember that most of our services are going to be monitored by lower councils, so something should be done.

Lastly, I would like to talk about PMA.  It is a very good plan because our nation depends on agriculture.  I would like to thank the Ministry for the popular version they produced when we had just come from recess, when they were informing us about everything about the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture.  But I would urge the Minister of Agriculture to disseminate this information to LC III and LC II. They have to understand this plan for modernisation of agriculture. It is about roads, it is about health, and it is about everything.  This kind of information should be disseminated to the lower local councils so that they can implement this good strategy.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Is hon. Alonga here to make his maiden speech?  Hon. Alonga, make your maiden speech followed by hon. Apuun, hon. Zziwa, hon. Latigo.

MR OTHMAN ALONGA (Aringa County, Yumbe): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for availing me this opportunity to make very brief comments on the budget. I take this opportunity to thank the Minister for the budget presented to this House.  I originally had wanted to make my comments on the President’s address to the nation and that is why I had wanted to make a contribution, more so on the security and peace in Northern Uganda but the problem is that when they closed the contributions, I was not yet ready to make my contribution.  Therefore -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable Member, you can make the contribution you intended to make that time.

MR ALONGA:  Yes, but I cannot make it now, Madam Speaker.  Let me make it next time when I am prepared.  Thank you.

MR PATRICK APUUN (Bokora County, Moroto): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  Before I make my comments on the speech of the Minister, I would like to thank all the people of Kumi, especially the Minister, Christine Aporu, and all the community in Kumi, who actually assisted the few who survived in the accident of the 13th.  I lost six people in my county, and as of now, I have three suffering and in agony in the hospital.  The LC V Chairman is in Mulago Hospital suffering from the injuries and I wish them a quick recovery.

Now, Madam Speaker, I would like to appreciate the President’s address on the nation, and also it was echoed by the speech of the Minister. I would like to address one aspect, which is the question of insecurity and disarmament in Karamoja region.  I would like to protest that all that has been said in the President’s speech and also echoed in the budget speech, to me, is nonsense. 

I am saying this because it was in this House that it was resolved that let there be disarmament in Karamoja.  The message was acceptable to all the people in Karamoja; the President himself came and stayed in my county for ten days. He called everybody, all stakeholders including women and children, that they should surrender the guns.  It was a welcome idea.  The people of my county are now suffering as a result of disarmament because all of them responded positively to the President’s call. They surrendered 1,822 guns to the Government and that was voluntarily. It was a voluntary disarmament. 

Now, Madam Speaker, what I am seeing now is that I think all the stakeholders, the ministries who have a role to play in Karamoja have left this disarmament in the hands of the President.  I think he is carrying now the real “lubengo.”  He is the only one now doing everything to ensure that the guns in Karamoja are being handed in.  What is the difference between right now and the time when the President was there?  There were 8,000 guns recovered voluntarily and now only 1700 recovered on forceful disarmament - (Ms Nankabirwa rose_).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you take information from the Minister of Defence?

MR APUUN:  Okay please.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I thank hon. Apuun Patrick for giving way. 

The disarmament programme is still going on as planned. It is His Excellency the President who set a date for voluntary disarmament. He even extended that deadline. He gave the Karimojong chance to bring the guns voluntarily.  It is the same President who said that “now that I have given you chance three times to bring the guns voluntarily, we are now going to embark on the other method as planned; forceful disarmament.”  

It is the President who directed that the Ministry of Defence recruit two companies in the sub-counties, which border the most notorious places – notorious in terms of being adamant, in terms of not handing in guns and in terms of attacking their neighbours. We are doing that. 

We have not abandoned the exercise to the President because the President is not there himself.  It is the Army that is there. The judiciary - the Ministry of Justice has come in because in our plan, we said the Army must be assisted by sending there magistrates who can help the Army in handling the cases of the people who refuse to give in the guns, expeditiously.  We do not have enough prisons to accommodate all the criminals.  That one has been done.  

Of course, I recognise the problems that exist, that some Karimojong are still continuing to attack their neighbours, but it is not true that we have abandoned the exercise.  Thank you, very much.

MR APUUN: Madam Speaker, all that she has said is that they are in Kampala here; they have a role to play in Kampala here. They do not know what is going on, on the ground. But I have to tell you that the phase of disarmament in Karamoja has changed. 

What was supposed to be voluntary, even forceful, has become a war!  What are you telling me when my people are dead?  Even right now I got a message from Moroto, people are in the hospital, some people have been killed by the raiders!  Where is the Army?  Where are the logistics?  Where is the money which is being poured into Karamoja for disarmament?  What are we saying in Kampala here?  It is only the President who actually persistently got the guns from the wanainchi – 8,000 guns.  Now, forceful disarmament is a war!

People are getting allowances, both militarily and otherwise. What is all this when my people are suffering? Now, it has changed face, it is business! Even the cows that were being recovered have been ferried to Kampala here.  Can we not make an investigation into this matter?  We have already clues on this matter; some cows are in Kiboga here! (Laughter and Ms Nankabirwa rose_).  We have the truth of the matter; it has changed; it has become a business and I will not like that business!

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, I did not say that I am the one who commands the forceful disarmament, which he is calling war. And indeed he is right because we are dealing with people who have guns, and if we are forcing them to hand in the guns, that means they are not having sticks, they have guns! The honourable Member has made a serious allegation that even the cows that we have recovered have been ferried to Kiboga. I am greatly concerned and I sat with him in the Lobby yesterday, he did not tell me that the animals have been ferried.  Is he, therefore, in order to make that allegation without clearly substantiating so that I can follow up this matter?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, I doubt whether the Minister is well informed on the basis about everything that is going on in this exercise. I would rather you undertook to investigate what he has said; I prefer it that way.

PROF KAGONYERA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  In the NRC days, hon. Apuun was in this House and he knows very well what used to happen under his nose in Karamoja – killings and killings; he knows.  There was nearly a war in this House among the Karimojong themselves.

Recently, there was a ceremony at the office of the Prime Minister. We handed over vehicles to MPs from Karamoja to enable them to go on the ground and help the Government to carry out this exercise properly, and we asked them to report back to us if anything goes wrong. This is the first time I hear the honourable Member make any complaint, and there is money allocated to them over and above their allowances as Members of Parliament to help us carry out the exercise properly. But he only waits to come and gain some cheap political mileage in this House.  Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, if it is true that the honourable Members from Karamoja undertook to assist Government and were facilitated to do so, I think they are out of order to complain here, rather than going back to the forum in which they agreed to work.

MR APUUN: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  It is true that money and even those vehicles were for facilitation. They did the facilitation and we went there and I am giving you the report on what is going on in Karamoja.  Is that wrong?  I am giving you the report! Now what is happening is that the commanders have gone - like the operation in Sudan, they are treating the wanainchi differently. And I can give you one of the torturers. 

There is a man called Achila, son of Lakwoth of Lakari Parish, he was tortured by a man who got a rope and tied up his organs against the stone and ordered him to produce the gun.  I am giving you the report, now you are telling me we are facilitated?  I am giving you the report of what is going on there and if there is a – (Interruption)

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, this House has been informed that the Executive has been working closely with the Members of Parliament from Karamoja, to the extent that they have been asked to form part and parcel of the mobilization team that will go and solve the problems in Karamoja.  All those issues were not part of the transactions on the Floor of this House. 

Madam Speaker, you have already made a ruling to the effect that if this took place, the Members are not in order to come here on the Floor of the House and put things that are not yet ready for presentation before the Floor of this House.  

Is it therefore in order for the honourable Member, before he has had opportunity to report to the authorities that gave them pick-ups, money, facilitation so that situations can be addressed in that forum  - is it in order for the honourable Member to come here, and when the meeting is actually taking place tomorrow, and give this House the impression that Government is doing nothing, and that Government, if anything, is undermining the people of Karamoja or the disarmament process in Karamoja?  Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Apuun, you want solutions to your difficulty, but the solution will not come out of this general debate.  So, I would really prefer, since you are having this meeting tomorrow, you go and sit down in that forum where you started this exercise and together address these issues. When you fail, come to this House and say, “we have been let down by the Executive, we have sat and this has failed.”

MR APUUN: Madam Speaker, in my understanding, I think there is a conspiracy of silence on the part of Government. I am saying this because my people are suffering. Why can’t they send a team now to assess the suffering of my people? The people of Bokora County are suffering! Even right now, someone is in the hospital.  Why should they deny me opportunity to air out the views of the people of Bokora?  Are we not part of the people of Uganda?  Are we not suffering now as I speak?  Are we not giving in the guns as we resolved in this House?  We handed over the guns to the Government, now we are not protected.  The cows are going and people are being killed!  Am I not supposed to say this?  Why should I receive all these orders?

Now the Minister asked why I should have to say this, but it is here on number 15. It says, “ensuring security and good governance”. So, in what manner am I out of order, or you are the one who is out of order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Apuun, when the Minister of State for Defence rose on a point of order, I told her that it is better for her to investigate these issues before she takes a position, and I was taking your side on this. So please, allow the right channels to address the matter and then you come back here. I have told the Minister of Defence to investigate these allegations, and it is already on record.

MR APUUN: Madam Speaker, if in my own understanding the Minister of Defence is going to handle this matter, then let him send a team there to rescue my people because they are suffering. It is not a lie. I am not trained to lie in this House; this is an honourable House. When a person of my nature says my people are suffering, it is true they are suffering. 

I am not against the Government, the way people understand things is different. If you do not understand that my people are suffering, what language should I use?  If I say Government is not doing this, am I not right to complain?  Why should people always turn deaf ears to what people are saying?  

Madam Speaker, if you are saying the Minister of Defence is going to go there, then let me go with him or her. I want to be there with everybody to see what I am talking about now. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Defence, you are directed to go together with hon. Apuun in person to investigate these issues.

MRS MARGARET ZZIWA (Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I did not have the opportunity to contribute to the State of the Nation Address, and I had two very pressing issues to air to this august House.  

My people of Kampala District, specifically in Lubaga division, are greatly troubled and disturbed by the influx of the Sudanese settlers. I would like to be assisted by the Minister of Internal Affairs to know as to whether there is any arrangement in place for this. 

I wish to report that these refugees, I think on a daily or weekly basis, go to the office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and they get money. When they get money, they come to these local areas and hire rooms They sleep as many as 10, 20, or 30 in these rooms, and they have become a source of insecurity in many of our areas.  

In addition, they have become a source of very bad hygiene. They do not use toilets; they go to the wells and bathe from there, which is a taboo in this land. We do not expect a big person to bathe during broad daylight –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I thank the hon. Zziwa for giving way. What she is articulating is so correct. The area I represent, which is Lubaga South, right now is in chaos because of the influx of the Sudanese refugees.  They are moving at large, some are armed and some have very luxurious cars. I do not know! So, you are on the right track and I beg you to articulate the matter further.

MS BINTU: Thank you very much, hon. Zziwa.  Actually, what you are saying is really of great, and paramount importance. I have refugees in Kiryandongo, but recently these refugees went on rampage and they were killing and robbing people. So, it is an issue that the Government has to address.  Thank you.

MS ZZIWA: Madam Speaker, the height of this problem is grave. I want to say that last week, two groups of about 10 people went to a bar and they started drinking. Eventually, I think, they disagreed over a woman and they started fighting. They caused chaos in the bar, they pulled out guns, they started firing in the air and the police had to be invited in to cool down the situation. These are people under the guise of refugees!  

I also want to say that in some of the areas where they live, in addition to going and bathing at the wells, they do not use toilets. They go to the nearby banana plantations and they ease themselves there!  

I wish to reiterate the plight of my people in Lubaga. They are saying; why are these people not put in camps? If our own people in Gulu and other areas can be put in camps, why can’t these people from Sudan be put in camps? Why should they be given so much liberty? If you are a refugee, really, how can you access all this money and you carry a gun? It is really appalling, and we want to call upon the Minister of Internal Affairs to come up and investigate this matter seriously.  

We appreciate that Lubaga Division has been one of the divisions where killings have been reported.  The previous week, one of our businessmen was killed. About two months ago, another very prominent Ugandan was killed. I think he was contesting for chairmanship in one of the districts, and many others have been killed.  We do not know whether this is isolated from the refugees we are seeing. We want to be assisted. 

We want to also air out the concern, which was raised in the President’s speech, about good governance. We appreciate the local council system that was brought, but we are questioning instances where the local council system is not operating properly. We are having problems with the local councils themselves. We have seen cases whereby in a local council, which was appointed by the LCI chairman, at times it is his own henchmen - if I can use the word, forgive me. In most cases there are no more meetings in these councils.  

I want to find out from the Minister of Local Government or the Prime Minister whether there have been some efforts to really examine the performance of these local councils. If we find that these local councils are not operating, then good governance should not be talked about.  I think the question of good governance should start from the grassroots until we reach the Parliament!  

My humble contribution on the Budget would be twofold. I applaud Government because it has consistently said that it will continue having economic growth. Of course, when I look at the Budget speech, this economic growth is mentioned in the sectors of agriculture, industry and services.  Yes, you can vividly say that there is growth, but the plight of the people, the cries of the people are the interpretation of this growth which the Minister and his team are putting in this book, which they have to put in reality. 

People are talking about five per cent growth, which has been even internationally recognised, but the grassroots people are not looking at this growth, they are not seeing it. It should be translated. And I think we have the brains! 

When I look at the Minister of Finance in charge of Planning, hon. Musumba, he is one of the brains of this country, who was educated on the coffee of the wanainchi. It is time now that they drop the theories of the Keynes and they start developing models that can assist our economy to go on the right track. I think we may not be able to benefit from the models of the western world. We should develop our own models, and this is what the people are calling for. The GDP is increasing, you can see it in figures, but the reality is not translated. 

I just want to say that when the President talks about public administration, we want more seriousness in this affair. We want this aspect to be related to the rate of growth in population. When you look at the numbers in this country, by 1991 we were estimated at about 17 million. Today, I think we may be about 23 million. The levels of governance and levels of input definitely must improve and must grow bigger.  

It would be good if we could relate all these factors horizontally and vertically. Complaining per se may not help. I want to look at viable proposals that could be related to the facts. Of course, when you also contradict yourself by having for instance the Police and then the LDUs, or by having the ministers and the presidential advisors, that also defeats the argument.  So, we want the President to be serious on this issue.

I want to conclude with the hon. Minister of Agriculture, who has ably presented the PMA programme to this House, and we commend him because I think it is an effort. But I want to bring the cries of the urban population of Kampala in agriculture.  

Kampala, if you may know, was a conglomeration of villages.  Many of the parts of Kampala, the 195 Square kilometres, were not really town. It was a village setting. When what we called the Structural Adjustment Programmes were installed, many of the civil servants who were retrenched were actually living in these peri-urban areas, and they were left unemployed. They resorted to selling off most of their chunks of land, and they are living on these very small plots of land but at the same time, they are making a living on those plots of land.  

I have called upon the Minister of Agriculture several times to plead with him to evolve an urban agricultural policy which can accommodate the urban poor, who actually still go to these swamps and dig yams, and at times they bring them to the road-side and sell them. We cannot run away from the reality. Even if this is a town, there are still the urban poor. What policy is in place to cater for their wellbeing?  

I want to stop, because I think my time is up, and I congratulate the Minister but we shall look at more details about some of these suggestions when we go to the Sessional Committees.  Thank you.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO (Agago County, Pader District): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this rare opportunity to talk. I therefore beg that you allow me to cover both what I wanted to say in regard to the President’s address and the Budget. I will try, as an academician, to marry the two to cut on time.  

I would like to start by stating that, reading the President’s address and reading the Budget Speech - they were both delivered when I was out of the country - I get a bit confused.  

Regarding the Budget Speech, my concern is that the framework within which we are operating is actually confusing us. When you look at what is covered, you begin to think that the focus is exactly what is driving us, which is the expenditure framework, and not development goals of this country. 

Having focused on the expenditure framework, it becomes extremely difficult to report on progress in development when it comes to the time to read the Budget Speech, and here lies the problem of data that has been talked about.  

I want to give one simple illustration. In the President’s speech, they gave a rousing picture of our exports growing, and they said they grew from 441 million to 456 million. This is a progress of 15 million in the year, and this is a country talking about making good progress. I get scared!  

And when you come to agriculture, it is the back-born of the country. We talk of Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture, etc. I would like to give you some statistics that tell you that what we want to portray is not what we have. It is stated, on page 10, that the Ministry last year gave out 1.1 million cocoa seedlings to 2,900 households.  If you make that approximately 3,000, it means that to each of the households you have given 400 seedlings.  

I do not come from a cocoa growing area, but I am an agriculturalist. You can ask anybody who comes from the cocoa growing areas, the average number of cocoa trees each household has, as in Bundibugyo or Mukono, the big ones will have anything up to 200. So, if you focus on this, it looks beautiful, but the reality on the ground is totally different.  

This is the same with coffee seedlings. If you look at Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA) report, every year we are giving to our country millions of coffee seedlings. Look at the production figures over the last five years, they have not changed, and we are giving millions of seedlings every year and reporting that we are doing very well! It is not the seedlings; we tend the seedlings to produce coffee for us. The production figures have not changed, and we sit here and we are very happy?  This is worrying!  

I am saying this as a professional. Unless we really wake up and examine our figures and say, where are we going, we will wake up one day to find we are in the deep.  

The last example I want to give on this is paragraph 36, where they are talking about growth in the horticultural sector.  The last example I want to give on this is paragraph 36, where they are talking about growth in the horticultural sector. 

The most interesting thing is that the best figure that was picked to show how we have progressed up to 10.9 million dollars of exports is the 2.3 million dollars, which was in 95.  We know that by 98 we had exported even beyond 10 million, and then horticulture collapsed.  Instead of saying the truth that “look, we suffered difficulties because of a,b,c,d and this is what we have done to correct them, and this is the progress we are now achieving,” they want, for those who do not know, to show real progress. This is unfortunate.  

I will not comment much on other aspects, I will only mention something on education. UPE, in principle, is good but I also know personally that Tanzania has had universal primary education; they have had universal secondary education. I know that Kenya had universal primary education.  What follows UPE is more important than UPE itself.  But the challenge is, what are we preparing to follow UPE?  One secondary school per sub-county, those things the Obotes did.  In the 80s, they gave every sub-county a secondary school- (Interjections)- well, if you want to know, my background is DP but I like to speak the truth.  

The important thing here is that, even now with secondary schools not in every sub-county, we have many people who have gone through secondary schools who are labourers.  They would work more effectively if they spent the four years of secondary school learning skills in technical institutions.  I would actually challenge Government that instead of providing each sub-county with a secondary school, give each sub-county the vocational training institution that you proposed.  The effect will be more to this country and to the economy. This will be better than giving us secondary schools, the graduates of which will have no tangible value.

Lastly, I now turn to a matter that I wanted to address when the President’s address was being debated.  This is the matter of insecurity in our region.  The day before that debate, there were contributions that I consider very unfortunate.  One contribution was from my colleague from Obongi, hon. Pataki Amasi, and I quote from the Hansard.  He says, “I should say that it is more than 17”- he was referring to the years of the Kony insurgency because from 1979, 1980, 1981 the same Kony was killing people, especially in west Nile- “anybody who is honest knows that the Kony problem came in the 80s”- you can only make a reference as to what he was referring to as ‘Kony’, and he confirms it in the second last paragraph:  “Madam Speaker, we did not want to reiterate to Kony.  In 1980 people went to exile, some died there, others have not come back just because the same Kony labeled them as Anyanyas.” This he was a making a reference to the Acholis.  In other words, he was equating what Kony was doing to Acholis.  

And then my friend hon. Opange then jumps in the phrase and tries to give us a recommendation, and they were clear insinuations because he said they had insurgency, they even fought Government and then he said, “what did we do in eastern Uganda to remove rebel activities”- and our friends in the north would possibly adopt this.  Imagine!  It means we have not done it, and what is it: having LDUs!  

The Minister for Defence has gone away, I would ask her how many of our LDUs they recruited and went to Congo, Karamoja and Sudan.  How many times did we recruit people to defend us within Acholi who were taken away, and people have the audacity to stand up here and imply that we enjoy our people being killed?  

So, I want to tell those people -but first, I want to thank all those who have all along understood the difficulties that we have been in for the last 17 years, and we encourage you to continue sensitizing others.  But to those who have all along thought that what is happening is an Acholi affair, I want to inform this House to know that in 1997, when Acholis -this Government and many of you know I was in Kenya and I supported that struggle because what we saw was an intention to subjugate us, to suppress us to carry this label of Luwero, and there was a commission of inquiry - none of the Acholi commanders; Col. Obua, Maj. Kilama et cetera, who Museveni and the people of Luwero know personally for their courage, were implicated in any atrocity but they like to say that was an Acholi affair.  

So, at that time we got up and fought and when the UPDA came out, people in my district picked arrows to fight Kony. We would have finished them then.  We asked for guns and they said, “No, you will turn these guns against us.” So that ended.  But we also know that people who talk like this are people who do not wish us well.  

There are those who think this rebellion can finish Acholis. My friends, I have news for you. Since that rebellion started, we have reached a state of equilibrium with that rebellion, and we have people who are educated. If you go to London, you will go and find people who run out of this country with O’Level certificates, lecturers. They go to the best Universities in the UK, you will find Acholis there.  Thousands of them have educated themselves from there, preparing one day to come and resettle home and the day will come.  So, my advice to Government is this, this rebellion is yours; you will be very embarrassed if somebody like Kony considered an idiot disturbs you for 16 years and we still ignore him.  

I would like to end by what a friend of mine having criticized us said, and I talked to him, and he was quoting from a Runyakole saying.  I may not state it perfectly.  I am stating but I said I may not state it perfectly but the person said, you know that a war that never ends ashames even a hero.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. (Applause).

MRS HARRIET KAGABA(Woman Representative, Kyenjojo):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.   I would like to thank the Minister of Finance and Planning for the budget presentation to this House for the financial Year 2002/2003.  I would like also to thank the Chairperson and the Budget Committee Members for the commendable work done in their report to guide us in the discussion of this budget.  

On health, I would wish to appreciate the reallocation funds recommended by the Budget Committee:;1.8 billion to rehabilitate referral hospitals and one billion for rehabilitation of district hospitals.  I would like to add that money is provided for upgrading health center IVs for the new districts that have just been created. If that is not applicable, then the one billion provided for rehabilitating existing district hospitals should be added to upgrade the health center IVs in district hospitals. 

I heard from the hon. Minister that she did not want health centers to be mentioned over and over again, but I am forced to say so because in the last financial year, I did comment on the health center IVs, more especially those that were first constructed in 1999 and not facilitated. You can imagine; since 1999 there is a health center with a medical officer but not functional, and she goes ahead to explain that this will be catered for? She explained this last financial year and she has just done this today, but I am only wondering whether what we are planning will be provided for if we do not make sure that whatever we plan must take off!  

The health center IVs upcountry, we take them to be referral hospitals because moving from a district hospital of our mother district, for example Kyenjojo district, which broke off from the mother district Kabarole, it is about 60 kilometers to the nearest health center, and really we get so much grieved when we see that even these health centers are not functioning.  

I would like to comment on the issue of the ambulances in our health center IVs, because I am taking a health center IV as the biggest hospital in my district. I would expect these health center IVs to be provided with ambulances so that our patients can be transported to the biggest hospitals, which are 60 kilometers away.  So, I would request the Ministry concerned to have these health centers facilitated so that the people enjoy services of this country.

I would like to comment on PMA, which has been a song in this country. Indeed, everyone is looking forward to having it taking grip. I would like also to inform this House that what we see here in papers is not what is at the grassroots. I would like to inform you that of recent we were in the district council and found out that there was a lot of money injected in to provide improved seeds, but to our surprise, the people who took the tenders went and bought the seeds which are not improved. Can you imagine, these people would go to nearby plantations and buy these seeds and then bring them to the people! How shall we achieve the PMA when we are not providing the improved seeds? So, I am appealing to the Ministry concerned to make sure that officers supervise and monitor these activities.  Otherwise, Madam Speaker, what we are saying here may not be a reality at the grassroots level. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to comment on works –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Try to wind up.

MRS KAGABA: I am winding up, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Chairperson of the Budget Committee for the work done on our roads but it is true that some projects are taken away before accomplishing work on the road.  I give an example of Kyenjojo-Kyegebwa-Mubende road. There is a stretch which is going to be left untouched from Kyegebwa to Kyenjojo, and putting into consideration the heavy trucks now which are carrying the machines of drilling petroleum from Bundibugyo, can you imagine how long this stretch will take before it is washed away? As I talk now, this stretch is already wearing away before it is handed over to the Government.

I would like to end with security, Madam Speaker. Security –(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kagaba, I think we agreed you are winding up on the point of roads, thank you.

MRS KAGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (Persons with Disabilities, Northern): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to comment on both the President’s State of the Nation Address, and the Budget Speech presented by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

I would like to comment on the election of councilors to local government.  The President mentioned in his speech that these elections were smoothly conducted.  I would like to inform the President, Madam Speaker, that these elections of local government were characterized by violence, irregularity, malpractice and corruption. 

I would also like to inform the President that the elections of the youth and persons with disability were conducted three months after the ordinary elections, and that was because the funds allocated for elections were embezzled by the Electoral Commission. After a very long struggle of disability fraternity and the support of the Members of Parliament here, we had to move a resolution before the elections were conducted.  And when the little money was allocated to persons with disability and the youth, the Electoral Commission went ahead to embezzle it again.  This has been clearly demonstrated by the IGG’s report, which appeared yesterday and in the papers today.  

When we were urging for our elections, we recommended that the leadership of the Electoral Commission should be reshuffled or thrown away, and God has heard our prayers at last!  Today, the IGG has exposed the rot in the Electoral Commission.  I urge Government to provide more money to the IGG, and also to ensure that the identified people are prosecuted and that they refund the funds they have embezzled.

On the budget speech, I would like to comment about section No. 15, which talks about improving budgetary efficiency and effectiveness.  After a very long period, the Minister has realised that it is important to reduce our supplementaries and domestic arrears.  We have been passing supplementary budgets which were spent without us knowing whether they were correctly used or misused; we were just rubber stamping.  I am glad that they have introduced this Finance Bill where these supplementaries will be brought to Parliament, and we shall scrutinise and approve whether to give them or not.   That is a very good development.  

Then the attempts by the Minister of Finance to reduce domestic arrears; I would like to know, within what timeframe should we eradicate these domestic arrears?  From what I have seen, every year we are accumulating more. So there is need for the Minister to put a timeframe to reduce and stop domestic arrears because this disorganises our budget.

I would like to comment about the population census, which is very close to the door, in September.  We have been following closely the population census as persons with disability.  In the last census, that was 1991, people with disability were not properly enumerated because they did not know who should be labelled disabled.  

In the past when they would see you well dressed, they would say you are not disabled because you have money.  So, they were looking for disabled people who were poorly dressed and miserable, leaving out a very large section of disabled persons.  But now that disability has become a kind of hot cake because of representation in Parliament and in local government, there will be many people claiming to be disabled.  (Laughter).  So, I would like to find out from the Minister of Finance; how much money has he allocated to sensitise the people so that they can identify the right number of those who are disabled?

I would like to comment on education. In the Presidential Manifesto, the President committed himself to provide at least four special schools for severely disabled people throughout Uganda, but up to today, I have not seen any allocation of funds. When will you start the process of establishing these schools without the funds being given now?

I am a representative from the North, if I do not comment on security I will feel indebted.  The situation in the north has gone beyond control; it is unbearable.  From the reports in Gulu, now over 27,000 people are living around Gulu town and Lacor Hospital.  This means people do not know where to sleep, where to go, where to get food.  

When the Government took the initiative of going to Sudan to get Kony, we had all the hopes that “Iron Fist” would knock out Kony.  But, unfortunately, the “Iron Fist” has become a “rubber fist” and Kony is back.  This situation is very serious. We should not be sitting here to deliberate but we should go there and find a solution.  We are fed up of being moved left and right and centre!  

For how many years shall we make our people suffer?  We would like to use all the possible ways, either negotiation or giving guns to the young men and women in northern region to fight Kony. We cannot sit here and lament when we are dying!  Madam Speaker, thank you very much.     

MS JALIA BINTU LUKUMU (Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me a chance to contribute on this important topic.  I will go directly to the budget speech, but when I look around, I cannot see the ministers but only the Prime Minister is around. 

I wanted to comment and make observations on the item of the main roads in the budget speech.  It is not all that long since we passed a resolution here authorising Government to borrow money in the aid of upgrading the Kafu-Masindi road.  We passed the resolution in the last session, we were happy and the people of Masindi were happy, but to my surprise, I have been going through the budget speech and the ministerial policy statement of the Ministry of Works, but there is nothing that has been allocated to this road.  

I wanted to know whether this road has already been worked on, or the Ministry has decided to put aside the upgrading of this road.  This is what has been happening all along since so many governments have been in power.  So, I want to know really, what is the fate of Kafu-Masindi road since it has not appeared in this financial budget?

I remember in 1994/1995 during NRC, the current Busunju-Kiboga-Hoima road used to stretch up to Butyaba and the Government had a programme of upgrading these roads using the names of Busunju-Kiboga-Hoima-Butyaba road. Of recent, the stretch of Hoima-Butyaba road changed and now the road stops in Hoima. 

I want clarification from the minister. Don’t these people of Butiaba and Bulisa belong to Uganda? In the ministerial policy statement of the Minister of Minerals, there is a plan of refining and drilling oil along Lake Albert in the western side. If this stretch is not tarmacked, how will the investors transport their oil from Butiaba up to the centre? 

Madam Speaker, I want to talk about some of the pertinent issues affecting the people of Butiaba. This is again under the Ministry of Works and Housing. Since Railways decided to desert the harbours along Lake Albert, that is Butiaba, most of the machines were left in the waters and people of Butiaba are predominantly fishmongers. These machines have become a source of insecurity to my people. 

Accidents have been occurring along the shores of Lake Albert and the Ministry has been informed on so many occasions. At one time they went there and put some temporary floaters, which were swept away by the waters. As we talk today, people are having problems with these pillars. When you move in a boat, you cannot see the pillars, you just end up hitting them and the boat cracks. Accidents have been occurring there. We have been reporting these cases, but nothing has been happening. I have been going through the ministerial statement, and there is no plan of removing the pillars; even the dilapidated ship. So, I want the minister to come and rescue the people of Masindi.

Madam Speaker, allow me to talk briefly about immigration, which my colleague talked about. I have seen in the objectives of the Immigration Department that it is supposed to ensure that there is control of movements of foreign nationals. In Masindi district, along Lake Albert, foreigners from DRC are coming into the country at Butiaba, but there is no office. Even the small office we had in Masindi district was closed and shifted to Hoima. But these people come and they are a source of insecurity in the district. We do not know where they end up. They come up to Kampala and go back. I call upon the Minister of Internal Affairs to come to our rescue. Some of these people come when they are sick. Actually, some come with diseases like cholera and they interact with our people and we are at a risk!

Madam Speaker, I want to talk about the fisheries industry, since half of my constituency is covered by water. The fishmongers are concerned about the Government policy of introducing the four-inch fishing gear. Our worry is that when the fisheries uphold the nets, they do not introduce any solution to the fishermen. Under the PMA, nothing has been talked about helping the fishmongers in elevating their fishing systems So, we suggest that Government introduces loan schemes that will assist these fishmongers in acquiring the right size of the nets in order to control the fishing on the lakes.  

Secondly, the mother ministry should try to put in place a plan of rehabilitating the natural breeding areas for fish. When we talk about agriculture and PMA, we are talking about breeding animals, but not the fisheries side. There is nothing like breeding areas for fish, and yet we have the natural breeding areas that would have been rehabilitated in order to assist in controlling over-fishing.

Lastly, I will talk about the NGOs, and I call upon the NGO Board to be strict and serious with its work. There are some NGOs, which are coming in under the guise of helping women with loan schemes, and in the end actually defraud the women groups. It happened in Masindi district, in Kigumba and Kiryandongo sub-counties. Somebody came under the UPA project, collected the deposit money, and at the end of the day disappeared with Shs60 million. I reported to the Prime Minister’s office, the case is still there, but I understand this person is still at large in Kampala. 

I therefore call upon the relevant ministries and the Government to protect the citizens and their properties. The women suffer to get the little money to deposit in the hope of getting more, but they are actually robbed of even the little they have. Then we shall still remain with poverty. 

Madam Speaker, thank you very much for giving me this chance. (Applause)

MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA (Bulamogi County, Kamuli): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for allowing me a few minutes to make a few comments on this year’s Budget. I would like to start by thanking the Parliament for the vigour they have started with over the last year. I appeal to the honourable Members not let down the steam of the 6th Parliament. They should look into the records of the achievements of the 6th Parliament so that the 7th Parliament actually surpasses the 6th Parliament.

I would like to start straight away by reminding the Rt. hon. Prime Minister that the people of Bulamogi will always wait for the district of Kaliro to be formed. Madam Speaker, you know the plight of the people of Bulamogi because you are actually the district Member of Parliament, which incorporates Bulamogi, and you know how people there are suffering. I am sure you will do the needful with the PMA.  

Today is not a day to praise the Government too much because all the people who are in Government today, whether multi-partists or whatever, they are actually Movementists. I think everybody who came to Parliament wants the Movement to succeed. It is our job to criticise the Executive and to show them where they are going wrong. It is a pity that some cabinet ministers want to throttle some people when they stand here and tell the people what the problem on the ground is. I think it is our job, both in the private corridors, in the offices of the ministers and here on the Floor, to air the views openly so that the whole world sees us as a democratic country, which allows people to speak freely.

Today, I would like to address what we call contradictions. Contradictions are generally not good for democracy, and it is the business of the government in power to address contradictions because it is contradictions, which eventually bring complications, which might even lead to wars and such things.  

The first contradiction I would like to address – I addressed it last week - the NRM Government is a successful government; it has done a good job. Why is it that today there is no clear legal framework for reporting from LC I up to LC V? 

I heard hon. Zziwa complaining that even up to now some people are not actually meeting. This is the disease, which is existing. I will not get tired of reminding the Prime Minister that this issue of a clear reporting framework at all levels must be addressed now so that we start praising the Movement beyond what it has achieved today.  

Two, there is no clear definition of the jobs of the LC I, the RDC, LC V and LC III as far as conquering poverty is concerned. Why am I saying this? We have been targeting to eliminate poverty, but on the ground the picture is not improving. Yes, we have got electricity in some areas except Bulamogi, we have got roads – thanks to God that Bulamogi got a share on that, but on poverty, how can we produce only 15,000 bales of cotton last year? In an era where we are addressing AGOA, 15,000 bales when we should be targeting at least one million bales – this is serious! Here we are targeting 15,000; this is quite serious!

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INDUSTRY (Mr Richard Nduhuura): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and thank you hon. Gagawala for giving way. I would like to correct the information given by hon. Gagawala that the actual production was 150,000 bales, and not 15,000.  Thank you.

MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: On Page 10, it is clearly 15,000 bales last season, but if it is a correction, of course, Madam Speaker, I have to accept. The question is that we are still not actually getting there. 

The contradiction I would like to point out here - the biggest grower of cotton is Busoga region. Madam Speaker, you know it – it is your constituency, Bulamogi. How can it be that everything is being taken from Bulamogi? The ginnery also is being sold today by the big Busoga Growers Union. It is being sold in pieces and behind our back. This ginnery is going to be transferred - I do not know whether to Kenya or to where - and then we say we are going to address AGOA? This is a big contradiction which I cannot just leave.  

Then we added another contradiction, the Coffee Marketing Board – the best building for processing coffee in Africa is being turned into a textile mill! This is another contradiction which I fail to understand. Madam Speaker, I thought there are enough buildings in Jinja really, anything to do with cotton. After all, Busoga region was known the world over for producing cotton by small holders. I would like this contradiction also to be addressed by the hon. Prime Minister.

Another contradiction is on roads. How can we spend US$30 million donor money to do a road from Bugiri to Malaba and then we fail to get nine to five million dollars to dress it with the last coat? You know very well that two, three years, when the US$30 million have been spent and you have not got that five to nine million dollars, you will end up with zero; you will start again may be worse than a million, looking for the money! That is the same story with Bundibugyo – it is a big contradiction to try to do a road, spend so many millions and then abandon it. The same thing is happening to Arua and Kyenjojo. 

So, this is the contradiction. I would like this type of contradiction to be addressed. It is very absurd for farmers to be paid Shs100 for maize, and yet people are taking it to Kenya to bring it back in form of corn flakes at something like Shs.2,000 per kilo. This is a big contradiction which must be addressed.

Madam Speaker, another contradiction, which I have seen is in Defence. How can it be that the winning commanders are always transferred quickly to other assignments? These of Ali Chefe, these of Katumba; why is it that in the Ministry of Defence there is a disease of removing guys who are actually succeeding? Is the Prime Minister not seeing this?  I would like this sort of contradiction also to be addressed.

Madam Speaker, I would not like to go very far, but the purchasing power of a Ugandan should be the key point to be addressed in the budget every time, not things to do with calories; no! I would like people to hear that the purchasing power of our people is coming up, because our people are becoming poorer and poorer, with weaker and weaker purchasing power. We would like the Minister of Finance, particularly the one who knows the situation in Kamuli, the Minister who comes from really a situation which is poor, to address the issue of purchasing power.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR LULE MAWIYA (Kalungu County East, Masaka): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join the rest of my colleagues who have thanked the Minister of Finance for presenting this Budget to this House.  I would like also to appreciate and applaud the friends behind the Budget Act because they have actually enabled us to debate further and further as far as this Budget is concerned.  

To differ a little from my colleague, hon. Gagawala, who has just spoken, I think we should give credit where it is due. I would like to tell him that where the Government has actually done well, we should give credit, and instead of criticising where it has failed, we should just advise and give remedial actions.  

Madam Speaker, I thank Government for its continued efforts towards improvement of the plight of our people, but I would like to bring to the attention of this House that even though we always say that there is increased economic growth, and even this year, GDP alone is expected to grow by 5.6 per cent, the rest of our people, especially, in the countryside are very, very poor.

I do not know the yardstick used to come up with these figures, because some time I made an evaluation of the Poverty Eradication Action Plan (PEAP) - how it has faired over the years. One said that the absolute poverty has dropped from 60 to 35 per cent. I do not know which yardsticks were actually used. If they were used, it was just centred around the capital, Madam Speaker.

Coming to PEAP, which is a multi-sectoral approach, there is PMA. You find that quite many seedlings like those of coffee, banana plant-lets and others have been given out. We have a lot to be desired in this kind of programme.  

When it comes to bananas, the market price of a plant-let is only Shs500. When it goes through the tendering process, it costs Shs1,500. So, if transport is also included, it is more than Shs1,500. So, there is a loss of over four times the market price. Therefore, Government is losing and even the person at the grassroots who is intended to have a say in this is also let down by four times. Therefore, this should be improved. 

When it comes to entandikwa, I am glad the hon. Minister is here. My people of Kalungu East actually prefer to term this “enyongeza”, meaning that those who have should be given more. It has failed to achieve the desired goal it was meant to. Therefore, my people say that instead of being given entandikwa, it should be injected into some other programmes, say supplementing the farm implements like pesticides. You find that some pesticides cost about Shs 16,000 per litre bottle. So, instead of giving out entandikwa, the money should go into purchasing farm implements. 

There is much to be desired about the livestock sector, especially this re-stocking business. Our people are very poor. They are confused when given breeds of high quality. Instead, they prefer to go down to Kisenyi and buy the goats for re-stocking, themselves. One has to put into consideration the cost for constructing the sheds and even goes further to look for other varieties of animals. And these animals, goats or cattle, have to be looked after properly.

The tendering process is also continuously handled very badly, right from the villages to the highest level. Therefore some measures should be taken to rectify this. 

On Government programmes, I appreciate especially the Ministry of Health’s HIV/AIDS struggle. We find that the Uganda Government is regarded with the highest esteem because we have now handled the AIDS problem well. We are proud that the message is now even going down to the grassroots where the problem is actually emanating from. However, Madam Speaker, Government, or the commissions concerned, have not gone down to follow up these programmes. 

I had an example in my constituency of a programme for the community, and we found out that instead of telling the people that this money is from Government to help them fight the scourge, they continue to say that, “it is from somebody, and somebody has sent you this money.” Actually, it has been politicised. Therefore, this should be followed up and taken care of.

On education, I want to applaud Government on UPE. Various things have been done as far as UPE is concerned, but there has been duplication of roles when it comes to classroom construction. There is that programme where classrooms were built under TDMS and others were built under SFG. We find that the SFG classrooms have been demolished with none of them completed. Other classrooms continue to be built yet these ones have just been left to rot. We should first of all tackle one programme, complete it and then move on to the next, because all this is Government money.
 
Many members have talked about Universal Secondary Education. I appeal to Government that this programme be handled expeditiously so that the one million students who are expected to sit for UPE finals in 2003 are actually accommodated in 2004.

Last year I talked about the tuition in the higher institutions of learning. You find that very many people are denied higher education. The rich can afford the higher education whereas the poor cannot afford it. Therefore the rich will become richer and the poor will become poorer. Madam Speaker, there is need to look into this.

When I attended my BBA programme in 1990, I used to pay Shs 700,000. We were very few by then; about 70 students in a lecture room, but today, there are over 400 students sitting in a lecture room. Therefore, if we go for numbers, we should be able to handle the costs that are associated with this programme. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR BADRU KATONGOLE (Kyaka County, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Finance for the elaborate Budget Speech. I also wish to thank the Chairperson of the Budget Committee for the report that was presented to the House yesterday. 

I want to express dismay at the inadequacy of the budget we are running and the previous budgets we have run. I express dismay because of lack of provisions of certain basic and essential services to the people I represent. If I may elaborate, in my constituency of Kyaka County, there are hardly any roads to be proud of. Year in year out, farmers have lost their harvest because they cannot access markets. 

What is even more unfortunate now is that the Minister of Works, Transport and Communications is unable to find any provisions for purchasing road units for the new districts. I am wondering as to how my people are going to come out of such a   plight!  

Two; we have got a high concentration of cattle in certain parts of my constituency, but the dams that were constructed in the 1960s to help the farmers with water for livestock have all got silt in them, yet I have not seen any deliberate programme by Government to assist my herdsmen with water for production. I have looked at the Budget Speech, and the areas that are being covered do not include mine. 

I do not know whether the problem is that they are looking at the areas in terms of the district. Do they look at the population of the farmers, then look at the number of animals in the district and take the average to see how many animals are in a household in the district? When you look at Kyenjojo district, you will find that the highest concentration of animals is in just one sub-county, in Kyaka County, called Impala. So, I appeal to Government that under the programme that I heard of for the construction of valley dams, my constituency should be considered. 

That aside, I think the plight of my people may not necessarily be because of the inadequate budget the Government is running. It is more of inequitable management of the budget. Let me give you an example of safe water coverage. In my district, safe water coverage is about 25 percent. It is actually now 25.7 percent, from the 25 percent of last year. Some time back, I heard the Member of Parliament for Bugabula South saying that water coverage in her constituency was below 20 percent. 

So, if Government is saying that safe water coverage in the whole nation is at 55 percent, and there are areas with safe water coverage of as low as 25 or 20 percent, it means there is no deliberate programme to help the marginalized districts, because I would imagine that since safe water coverage in my district was 25 percent last year, it should have gone up by not less than 10 percent. But it only went up by a mere 0.7 percent! I request Government to have a deliberate programme for making sure that there is equitable management of the budget, and that all areas are equitably covered. 

For the inadequacy of the budget, I request fellow parliamentarians to support the initiatives of the President on the economy like AGOA, Everything But Arms, and his efforts to try and exploit the Chinese and the Japanese markets. We may look at supporting Government in form of increasing the knowledge that is being generated by the nation so that increased services can be offered to our people. I feel that we should also optimally utilise the small resource envelope we have. For that matter, I request that we as parliamentarians, and the whole Government, go in for zero tolerance for corruption.  

On this note, I would like to thank the Speaker for having arranged for the Public Accounts Committee to sit during recess so that we could be up to date in the consideration of the Auditor General’s report. I think this is important because the culprits of mismanagement of Government can be got while still in office, or at least while still alive.    

I also want the Committee on Local Government to take up the same steps and be up to date in consideration of local government accounts. I actually request that Parliament also takes up the matter of timely consideration of the Inspector General of Governments’ reports so that we can try and rid our Public Service of corruption.

There is one more element I want to comment on, and that is the war in the North. I feel that we should try to plug all loopholes that lead to our financial haemorrhage. What I have noted is that what is not adequately covered is mobilisation against rebellion. I request and suggest that if it is practical, this Parliament should take off time and relocate to the North so that it can take part in the mobilisation exercise against rebellion. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MS LUKIA ISANGA (Woman Representative, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also add my voice to those who have contributed before me, and I will start with the Health sector.

Honourable Members, I would like to inform you that you formed districts because you wanted services to be nearer to the people, but in Mayuge district, we have a problem. We do not have a referral hospital, yet in the programme of the budget they are going to improve on referral hospitals countrywide. Mayuge still has nothing. We go to Iganga and Jinja and that is far. You can imagine someone coming from the islands in Mayuge going to Jinja or Iganga for treatment! I therefore ask the Ministry of Health to consider Mayuge, and upgrade the hospital we have, that is Mayuge Health Centre, so that it is turned into our referral centre.

On health still, I would like to inform this House that our islands were invaded by Tsetse flies. I wrote to the hon. Minister of Health in charge of General Duties, and I talked to the hon. Minister for Primary Health – unfortunately she is not here - but up to now, I have never got a response. I do not know if it is easier to treat other than prevent. 

I would like to thank the Minister of Works for the work they have done in Mayuge district on the road from Musiita to Busia. They are doing a very good job but then there is a problem. ROKO Construction, which is upgrading that road, left some stones in the road; they just buried them there. When it rains the murram will be washed away. The minister told us yesterday that there are supervisors going around. I do not know whether they did not see this.  

On education, I think Mayuge is one of the most disadvantaged districts so far. We have only two grant-aided secondary schools. This is a humble request to the Minister of Education. You should consider us when allocating grant-aided schools to the districts, because this is a district that is still in its infancy. It needs help more urgently so that it can also meet the needs of its people.  

I also want to talk about facilitation of students with loans. There is a programme, the Student Loan Scheme, which is going to take off. I also request the ministry concerned to consider Mayuge since we have a contribution of 14 community polytechnics, which are for those ones who are unable to join secondary schools. Let Mayuge also be considered as a priority.  

I would like also to talk about justice, law and order, which were also mentioned in the budget.  They talked about reduction of people who are on remand. I have also a suggestion that there are those people who contribute to the congestion in prisons for remand. These are men who defile children of two years, months and three years. I would suggest that let these men be castrated there and then instead of taking them on remand.  I think by doing so, we shall have killed two birds with one stone. We shall reduce the number of defilers and we shall reduce the number of those on remand. 

I would like also to request the honourable Minister for Entandikwa to consider Mayuge since it has been left out in most of the non-governmental organisations which are coming up; Mayuge is not considered. These are our people who are very poor, they have nothing and they need that Entandikwa.   Thank you very much.   

MS NUSURA TIPERU (Woman Representative, Yumbe):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to that of my colleagues in support of the Minister’ speech, and I also want to make a few remarks on the President’s speech.  

On the speech of the Minister for Finance, I would like to comment on the grants that have been allocated during the financial year 2002/2003 for recurrent and development expenditure. For instance, Madam Speaker, the unconditional grants sent to Yumbe District is totaling Shs571 934,000 only. The people of Yumbe believe that that is too little, considering the number of problems Yumbe District has, and knowing that it is such unconditional grants that can easily be directed towards many of the development projects. So, we are seeking Government to increase on the amount of the unconditional grants to the district.

Further still on the issue of equalization grants, I have looked at the table at the end of the Minister’s speech, and in this table, I have noted that districts like Kayunga, Kyenjojo, Kamwenge and Kaberamaido have been given equalization grants, and Yumbe district has nothing. I am seeking an explanation as to why Yumbe district has not been considered for an equalization grant.  We feel that Yumbe should be given this grant because, Madam Speaker, when you look at the poverty level in the whole country, Northern Uganda is one of the poorest regions. And if you look at the poorest of the poorest districts, it is Yumbe. So, by all standards, I feel Yumbe would qualify for this grant.  

We have so many problems; for instance, being a new district, the administration block is not yet completed yet the money allocated to it is already used up. Our officer in charge of environment sits on the verandah; there is no office space. Things like cesspool emptiers that some of the districts have for purpose of removal of waste are not there in Yumbe district. So, we believe if Yumbe could be considered as far as the equalization grant is concerned, then maybe we would be a little ahead; we would catch up with some of the districts.

Madam Speaker, the President in his address on page 5 said that he will use peaceful means for conflict resolution, and where he cannot apply such peaceful mechanisms then the military will apply. I do support him on that note. It is true that he should apply the military where peace cannot apply so as to show that Uganda is not a state full of cowards. I mean we should fight back! However, I would like to give an example of how the peaceful means have succeeded in the area of West Nile. A case in point is the West Nile Bank Front.  

Madam speaker, Yumbe District has had insecurity for the last 15 years or so, and it seemed next to impossible for us to attain peace, but Government has been taking the peaceful means seriously and this has taken over four years.  Negotiations have been held in Yumbe, in Sudan, in Nairobi and various ministers have represented Government to talk to the rebels.  I would like to report to this House that as I speak, the main rebel leader in West Nile called Chairman Babuze is now settled in Yumbe. The rebels have agreed on a ceasefire with Government; there will be no bullets in the area unless maybe Kony crosses over. But as far as West Nile Bank Front is concerned, there is total peace. 

They have also given in their conditions like - you might have read in the papers - demanding for ministerial posts, ambassadorial positions, demanding for the Karuma-Pakwach road to be extended to Yumbe. I do not know how far Government is serious with fulfilling some of the demands, particularly the extension of the road to Yumbe; I believe my people will benefit from that.  

I would like to commend them for having taken it seriously and knowing that enough is enough; it is time to settle and develop Yumbe. I would also like to thank the people of Yumbe for taking that initiative, because it is until when people felt that the rebellion was beyond control that they came out openly to report anybody who was involved in rebellion to Government. The elders wrote letters to the rebel leaders and now we are going to embark on development. 

It is on that note, Madam Speaker, knowing that Yumbe district is serious as far as peace is concerned, that the people are demanding the Ministry of Agriculture to take Yumbe as a special area for redress. Yumbe has heard about NAADS, the National Agricultural Advisory Services, but there is nothing like that on the ground. We are asking for these services to be extended there.  There is no single demonstration farm in Yumbe, there are no qualified extension service workers, there are some graduates at the district level but those at the parishes are not qualified. Hence, skilled labour is not given to the people at the rural level.  

Madam Speaker, the district authorities have also told me to inform the Minister in charge of Agriculture that since they are committed to transforming from rebellion to agriculture, and since their aim is to be the food center for West Nile, and even provide Sudan, they are willing to provide a very large piece of land as a demonstration farm. So, if the Minister can consider taking Yumbe, then they will be very happy.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MS TIPERU: Madam Speaker, I would like to comment on electrification.  Yumbe being a new district, there is no electricity in the district. I am asking the Minister in charge of Energy to at least consider a generator so that the district is not called a district when there is no single light in that particular district.

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.   I would like to thank hon. Nusura Tiperu from Yumbe for giving way. I just want to give this information. About a month ago, I received communication from the Attorney General, hon. Francis Ayume, pointing out that Yumbe was not served electricity wise.  I immediately dispatched a team to Yumbe to study the power needs of that region.   As I speak now, we have a report in our Ministry, and I would like to assure hon. Tiperu that the matter she is raising is being attended to. And with the recent launching of the Energy for Rural Transformation by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, I am sure we should soon be in position to do something about your district.  I thank you.

MS TIPERU: I appreciate the Minister for that response, and I will inform my people that we are going to receive electricity very soon. Madam Speaker, allow me to conclude by just hinting on the health sector. 

Yumbe hospital is not a referral hospital, but we have assumed it to be so because it is all we have within the district. I would also pray that it could be considered and upgraded into a status of a referral hospital.  We have a problem of poor staffing.  The entire hospital has only two doctors who also play an administrative role. So, in most cases, you find that patients have nobody to attend to them. The common drugs in the hospital are mostly Piriton and Aspirin. So, the people are wondering what is happening as far as providing drugs to the hospital is concerned. The capacity of the hospital is meant to be 100 beds but the population is increasing. The people are now coming back from exile. So, there is need to provide more drugs so that the hospital can cater for the increment of the people.

I would also like to thank the Minister for Health who visited Yumbe District and toured all health centers and Yumbe hospital.  He went from room to room and made some changes.  I thank you so much!

MR CHARLES PETER KOLUO (Serere County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker for this opportunity. I would also like to thank the Minister of Finance for the budget speech. And I would like to start by thanking the Commander–in- Chief of the UPDF for the high discipline that he has so far been able to instill in the Army. Only of late, it is becoming very apparent that the high-ranking army officers are beginning to become undisciplined. 

I have a case of a policeman that I read in the papers who was assaulted. I have a case not in the very far past when a colleague of ours here was assaulted.   Only yesterday or a few days ago, I was reading in the papers, another colleague was assaulted. Very high-ranking officers assaulted all those people. I would like to appeal to the President to discipline the soldiers because if this is not done, then the ordinary Army will even become more and more indisciplined.  And if we get back to that level of insecurity, then definitely, this development we are talking of will not be realized.  The moment people are psychologically or physically insecure, then we cannot progress in this nation. 

I would like to come to the area of water. I once worked with RUWASA; it is a project funded by DANIDA, and it was drilling and providing water in other forms other than boreholes in various districts in Eastern Uganda, with the exception of Teso, or Soroti for that matter. Now, my concern is that there are districts which got very privileged in such circumstances where projects were given. I am aware of districts which got as many as 1,000 boreholes from such projects, and then here we are with hardly anything since the colonial times.  Most boreholes we have were drilled during colonial times and maybe in the early 1980s. 

Now, my problem is, when money is being released –(Mr Baguma Isoke rose_)- let me just finish this and then I will allow you – when money is being released or when there are these conditional grants for water, there is no differentiation. They do not differentiate between such districts which are already privileged and those which are less privileged to the extent that it is not uncommon to find, say, in Serere a whole parish without a borehole. The boreholes available, you will only find them in primary schools along the feeder roads.  So, the rural areas are left –(Interruption)

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the colleague yonder for giving way. Exactly two years ago, I went to Serere County and commissioned two boreholes: one in a place called Oliyo, another one in a place called Bugondo, in addition to 100 others done by Nile Drilling Company in Soroti District. It is on record that two years ago, so many boreholes were commissioned in his constituency.  Maybe by then he was not yet there. So, it is not correct to say that Serere County in particular has had no share, and it is not also true that there is any one district that has got 1,000 boreholes - the figure he mentioned. Every district has got a rural water programme and the money is given out according to the development parameter of the district, its partial area, population and the bulk of water points already existing. 

In our programme, Serere County and Teso region are a priority because they do not have gravity flow streams and they do not also have the protected springs. So, the programme for boreholes is concentrated in the Teso area, and I call upon the member to read my policy statement for this year. There is an elaborate plan to supply water in Serere, in addition to what I commissioned two years ago in the same area.

MR KOLUO: Thank you, hon. Minister, for that information. I did not say that there are no boreholes that are being constructed there by this Government. What I am saying is that most of the boreholes that we have were constructed in the past colonial days. 

The boreholes that we are getting, we feel, are too few compared to other districts that are more privileged. For example, if you go to the hydrological map of Teso and look at Kateta sub-county, you will bear witness. Some districts have a lot more than others. When that money is being sent, why isn’t there a deliberate policy to ensure that those districts which are less privileged are also brought to the level of the others?   

If you look at the monies which are sent to other districts, you will find that Soroti district is getting as much as Kamuli, for example. I am sorry to quote Kamuli as an example. So, I appeal to the Minister concerned to take this anomaly into consideration and address the matter. My people are really suffering; they are sharing water with animals! 

Education. I thank the President for UPE, fortunately the President admits that there is an explosion in the UPE graduates, but very little again is being done in this area. I want to tell you that the only secondary school I have in my constituency, with four sub-counties, is Serere S.S. 

Recently the local government finished a secondary school in Kyere sub-county. We have lodged applications for grant-aid, but I am shocked to hear that this year there is nothing that is going to be grant-aided. 

There is a similar case in Atila sub-county, the local government has put up a secondary school, it is ready, but from what is happening, there is no grant-aid. So, I am wondering whether it is easier to build a secondary school per sub-county or to take that one which is already put up.

Then we come to the case of electrification, coffee seedlings and hybrid goats. These are all very nice things, and I really thank Government for looking at such projects, however, my problem is that whereas we are talking about several millions of seedlings having been distributed, I do not seem to see any transparency in the exercise. For example, there are countable seeds, if any, that have ever come to my constituency. I even do not know how they are got. 

The same story applies to the goats when they come. At the moment, if you want an imported breed of goats from South Africa in the private market, the costs are as high as Shs1.5 million, Shs2 million, and Shs3 million. You wonder how a goat can cost two million shillings when a hybrid cow costs less than one million Uganda shillings!  So, these are issues that should be addressed.  

Otherwise, I appreciate all those projects, but if we do not come to monitor and evaluate, then some of these things will not be of any benefit to the people. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

DR JOHN ARAPKISSA YEKKO (Kween County, Kapchorwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I also thank the Minister of Finance for his motion. I want to comment briefly on three areas; security and good governance, education, and disaster preparedness/food insecurity.  

On security and good governance, my problem is with LDUs. Towards the end of last year, and early this year, there was a lot of insecurity in Kapchorwa district, which involved gunfire and many lives and properties were lost. So, Government took an initiative to disarm all the LDUs and other armed groups in the district. And there was a very strong promise from Government that they were going to recruit, train and arm 60 LDUs per sub-county to fill the gap which had been created. Some UPDF soldiers were also deployed in various parts of the district, but in the last one to two months, the majority of those UPDF soldiers have been withdrawn.  I do not know whether they have gone to surround Kony. So, there is a problem at the moment. 

There have been more than five incidences of cattle rustling, which I believe come from Karamoja region. There have been incidences of robberies, and because of the disarmament exercise which was going on in Karamoja, many people had removed their animals from the mountainous part of the area to Tingey sub-county, which is very vast and has a lot of grass. 

As it is now, it appears the disarmament exercise in Karamoja does not have the steam it had at the beginning. So, the whole of Mt. Elgon region in Kapchorwa district and Sironko are in fear because of the increasing and impending cattle raids. Even yesterday, I was with the RDC and the chairman LC.V and they were recommending that the Minister of Defence urgently re-deploys the UPDF in that area, or carries out urgent recruitment of LDUs, trains them and arms them as they had promised.  Otherwise, if the situation continues as it is, the local population is likely to find their own way to defend themselves by acquiring guns through various means, like they have done before.

Lastly, related to that, I have been hearing members from other districts talking about LDUs being paid up to Shs. 40,000. To the best of my knowledge, those of Kapchorwa have only been earning Shs. 10,000. So, if that is true, I would ask the Ministry of Defence to rationalise that issue.

The second issue on good governance is the decentralisation policy. Well, this is good because it brought services nearer to the people, but as many of you might have been reading, there are a lot of conflicts arising between local politicians and the civil servants, which at times I relate to denying services to the people. For example, we had a case in Kapchorwa where for two to three years, Kapchorwa district was denied about 3 billion shillings every year because there was a conflict between the CAO and the district executive. 

So, while I recommend that all other services be centralised, the issue of the human resource management should actually be taken back to the centre so that civil servants have the freedom anywhere in Uganda, other than remaining in a district. The way it is now, we are tribalising the civil service even in the districts. You find that it is other members from the clans of the district executive who are getting employed. So, I really urge the central Government to centralise the human resource management.

The second issue is on education. As my colleague has just said, the issue of UPE is a very welcome programme, but the Government this year is saying that they are not financing, they are not grant-aiding any secondary school. In my county, I also have a problem because in the whole county, there is only one secondary school, and yet we have five sub-counties and about ten community schools. So, if they are not aiding any school this year, I do not know where all the other graduates of UPE will go when the time comes, if we only have one secondary school in the whole county.  

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I would like to comment on food insecurity and disaster preparedness. Kapchorwa district has actually been the main food store of Uganda, especially in terms of maize. This year, unexpectedly, from the beginning of May, sub-counties which were not experiencing drought ever since the world started have started getting drought, and the crops are already withering. So, I am just bringing the alarm or cautioning Government that we should be prepared to supply more food, maybe for the next one year or so. Sub-counties, which did not have drought before, are actually now experiencing drought. 

With those few remarks, Madam Speaker, I thank you very much for giving me this opportunity.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me thank you for your contributions and your patience. I think this is an appropriate time to adjourn. We adjourn to tomorrow at 2.00 O’clock.  Thank you.

(The House rose at 6.35 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 18 July 2002 at 2.00 p.m.)


