Thursday, 26 July 2007

Parliament met at 3.13 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s meeting. I would like to apologise for the late start. I had said that we would start at 2.00 p.m. today, however we had a very lengthy meeting of the Parliamentary Commission, which ended at 2.45 p.m. So, I really hope you will understand but we shall try to move as fast as possible. 

Secondly, I would like to adjust the Order Paper. Last week, we required the Minister of Internal Affairs to come to this House with a statement about a doctor who had been abducted and taken to Butabika. He should have given the statement yesterday but he was not ready. He is ready today so, I will substitute his statement for that of the Minister of Works, which had been scheduled for today.

In the meantime, I would like you to welcome - honourable members, today we really have a full House in the gallery. We have students from Amazing Standard Nursery and Primary School in Kabale. (Applause) We have Kabale Adventist Parents School. You are welcome! (Applause) We also have Shanamu Bombo High School. You are welcome! (Applause) We also have a delegation from the Forum for Women in Democracy (FOWODE) You are also welcome!

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE, INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable colleagues, as per the resolution of this House last week, you tasked me to go and prepare a statement on an incident that happened to one Mr Godfrey Muhumuza who was allegedly, according to the press that day, abducted and delivered to Butabika Hospital against his wish. In accordance with that decision, I would like to present a factual statement on this matter.

The background to this matter - copies are being distributed. In November 2004, Mrs Florence Muhumuza, the wife of Mr Godfrey Muhumuza, reported to Police that her husband had threatened to kill her on several occasions and that he, Mr Muhumuza, periodically threatened to commit suicide. Mr Muhumuza on the other hand made counter allegations against his wife claiming that she had also threatened violence against him. Mrs Muhumuza expressed fear for her life, their children who were in the custody of Mr Muhumuza, and for the mental health of the husband as well. She requested for Police assistance to have her husband committed for psychiatric examination.

The Police contacted Mr Muhumuza who voluntarily submitted himself for mental examination but he was found to be of sound mind at that time. Mrs Muhumuza continued to make allegations against her husband claiming that he consistently exhibited strange behaviour which she alleged had increased in frequency and that she feared he could harm himself, his family and other people. Mrs Muhumuza informed the Police that her husband constantly promised to cause bloodshed and that he intended to kill her, kill the children and then kill himself.

She further claimed that Mr Muhumuza had banished her from her matrimonial home and had warned her not to step at that home or else she would be chopped to pieces with a panga. Mrs Muhumuza stated that her husband has a history of mental distress and had been receiving treatment from a traditional doctor from an early age. She expressed concern that her husband’s erratic and alarming behaviour was the result of a mental imbalance and sought further Police assistance. 

Now, the arrest and removal of Mr Muhumuza to Butabika Hospital: On the 2 July 2007, Mrs Muhumuza obtained an urgency order issued under section 6, which was formerly section 7, of the Mental Treatment Act. An extract to that effect is attached to this statement.

Section 6 of the Mental Treatment Act Cap.279 empowers Police officers of the rank of assistant inspector of Police and above, it also empowers any medical practitioner, it also empowers any chief to make an urgency order in respect of any person suspected to be of unsound mind and have such a person removed to hospital or other suitable place of detention. The Urgency Order in this instance was by a psychiatrist from Butabika Mental Hospital named Dr J. E. Walugembe. A copy of that order is also attached to this statement.

In the Urgency Order, Dr Walugembe stated that it had come to his knowledge that Mr Godfrey Muhumuza was suspected of being of unsound mind and that it was necessary for Mr Muhumuza to be placed under care and control in accordance with the Mental Treatment Act. 

In addition, a brother to Mr Muhumuza, one Ben Mugasha, went to Police headquarters and informed the Police that Mr Godfrey Muhumuza was mentally unstable and required urgent treatment. He said that the family had secured an Urgency Order for his detention and removal to Butabika Mental Hospital, and he requested the Police to execute that order. 

On the 10 July 2007, the Police proceeded to arrest Mr Muhumuza and immediately took him to Butabika Mental Hospital where they handed him over to the hospital authorities. Mr Muhumuza later lodged a complaint with the Inspector General of Police against his removal to Butabika Mental Hospital. The Inspector General of Police promptly instituted an inquiry into the circumstances under which Mr Muhumuza had been removed to Butabika Mental Hospital. 

In particular, the Inspector General of Police instructed the CID to establish: One, the basis on which the Urgency Order was issued. Two, whether any person had deliberately misled the authorities by uttering false and malicious reasons. The investigations in this matter of how the order was issued and whether there was false information given to the authority that issued the Urgency Order are still going on. Dear colleagues and Madam Speaker, the law will take its course if anybody is found wanting in this regard. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. This matter is supposed to be handled in only 30 minutes. So, we now have 15 minutes. Yes, hon. Wadri.

3.23
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank hon. Matia for always being assigned to undertake the most difficult schedules. I am happy you have been able to report within the stipulated time. However, when I look and follow the trend of your statement, it suggests that there is a lot yet to be uncovered under the carpet. 

The first authority to which the complaint was lodged was the institution of the Police, and under normal circumstances, when a complainant registers a complaint or a case, as soon as it is entered into the station diary, one will expect the Police officers to institute investigations. Instituting investigations among other things will not only be limited to taking statements from the complainant but also bringing on board the suspect and also carrying out inquiries in the neighbourhood since this was a case in a married family, which I think in this case Police failed. Police did not carry out any investigations and, therefore, left a lot of latitude for other authorities to act. 

It is rightly indicated in the Lunacy Act, which Act has been quoted, that any authority can only be allowed in the Police force to – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Wadri, I do not think the Parliament made a Lunacy Act. They made the Mental Treatment Act.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I said that in as far as the Lunacy Act is concerned, it rightly states –(Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Mental Treatment Act.

MR WADRI: Sorry, the Mental Treatment Act –(Laughter)

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, nowhere in my statement have I referred to the Lunatic Act. (Laughter) I have said and it is documented, the Act is called “Mental Treatment Act”. Is the honourable member in order to put wrong words in my mouth and to mislead this honourable House that there is a Lunatic Act. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the Opposition Whip was excited by the environment of lunacy, which this Act governs –(Laughter)- but it is called the Mental Treatment Act. 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for that wise ruling. It was just a slip of the tongue. Having said that, the Police, as I indicated earlier on, are actually failing in their cardinal duties because when you look at the Act under, which the Police are to commit a person for medical treatment, the reason why they insist that the person must not be below the rank of assistant inspector of Police is to guarantee that by the time a person is judged to be in need of mental treatment, that authority should have certified itself beyond reasonable doubt that yes, this person is a danger to himself or herself and to the society. But in this case nothing was done. 

As if that was not enough, even the medical personnel a one Dr Walugembe, with due respect, acted on hearsay. He did not use his scouts to ascertain the facts on the ground about the mental state of this person.

Thirdly, when you look at the statement that has been submitted, the lady who complained said Mr Muhumuza has been having mental sickness ever since he was born, and that he was receiving medical treatment from a traditional source. When you look at the Marriage Act, it therefore means that that marriage was invalid. How could a lady subject herself into marriage with a man who has already been judged to be mentally sick? These are realities. So, in all these I deduce that there was foul play, and I am very happy the minister ably said that investigations are still continuing. 

It will be to our interest, first as legislators and as members of the Ugandan community, to see that justice is done because if such a thing has happened to a legal advisor to the university of Makerere and a senior lecturer, how about the ordinary Ugandan out there. If we do not touch our noses, it will give a lot of room for every complainant, whether in a marriage set up or because of having failed to agree with a partner, to lodge a complaint. I will not be surprised if Butabika, as an institution will not be enough.

Why was Butabika authority overwhelmed and acted very fast when we know for a fact that there are many lunatics moving in the streets of Ugandan towns and villages? These overzealous medical staff have never taken trouble to save the society and lunatics of their lives. Why were they so overzealous in the case of Mr Muhumuza and not the many lunatics that we know of who are actually a menace even here in the streets of Kampala. If one is overzealous, you do not need to walk for 10 or 20 meters to come across a lunatic. 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague for giving way. I would like to inform my brother that Mrs Muhumuza, including a brother to Mr Muhumuza, did register a complaint that one of them was threatening his life, their lives and the lives of others. These other lunatics that we are talking about, if somebody has not come and complained, and they are not dangerous to society – you can be a lunatic but not necessarily dangerous to society. Until Butabika has confirmed that actually you are dangerous to society –(Laughter)- the Police have no obligation to remove you from society. I thought I should pass that information.

MS ANYWAR:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  The minister is saying that unless there is a complaint to a case and maybe a registered disturbance by the said lunatics, it is difficult to arrest such a situation. I wanted to have this clarification from the minister that since we have been operating in this country, especially in this city, is he trying to say that these lunatics we see on the streets of Kampala and other streets of the country have not caused any disturbance or even beaten passers-by and disturbed the public to a point that could warrant the intervention of your ministry? Thank you.

MR KASAIJA: I have said that Police will move to arrest a lunatic if they are convinced that that lunatic will either cause damage or harm himself/herself or the general public. Mental illnesses are of different degrees; I am not a doctor but doctors can clarify on this. So, not until an individual has proved to himself or to herself or to the society that he or she is dangerous, would the Police be able to move in.  

If you moved in earlier than that, then you would be trampling on the human rights of that individual. Until medical experts have put a case and in this case we had to wait for the medical – I want also to inform this House that if you refer to my paragraphs Nos.1, 2, 3, 4 and 5, this matter was reported to the Police and the Police did act by taking Mr Muhumuza, who voluntarily surrendered himself to Butabika Hospital for check up and the guy was found to be of sound mind. The complaint continued coming not only to Police but they also went to Butabika themselves and therefore secured that order.

MR WADRI: I think the minister has considered that lunacy or to have mental sickness is an erratic stage hence the more reason why Muhumuza was summoned. When they carried out an examination on him, he was found to be of sound mental state the first time and even the second time when he was bundled by Police and taken there, he was still found to be with a stable mind. The point I am trying to raise here is the negligence on part of Police. 

Many people have suffered in this country under inefficient investigative machinery. We have a case in point; a gentleman was brought to the courts of law in 1979 ostensibly for having killed a person in Masaka. He was convicted and he stayed in Luzira Prison up to 2005. But at the end of the day, there were no investigations; the person who was alleged to have been killed was alive and kicking and moving around. So, the appeal that I am trying to make to Police is that, let them be thorough in their investigations before they swing into action.

MS KAMYA: Thank you my, honourable colleague, for giving way. I wish to give information on the over zealousness of Police that right now in a bid to clean up for CHOGM they are on a rampage in Lubaga North and are arresting every youth whom they find walking. As I talk now, there are almost 200 youths in Lubaga North who have been arrested even when they show their identity cards they tear them. 

I was going to raise it as a matter of national importance but now that we are discussing the over zealousness of Police, I wish to give this information to the minister that the Police are on rampage in Kampala District arresting youths, tearing up their identity cards all in the name of CHOGM. Thank you.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, we as a Committee on Social Services yesterday when we were looking through the policy statements, we found it necessary that as we call the Minister of Health, we would want to have a real thorough report from the experts of Butabika Hospital because it is not only Muhumuza. I am told there are several frame-ups that are always done maybe simply because of disagreement on property. So, I hope when this committee reports here we are likely to have some kind of well-researched information from the medical experts. That is the information I would like to give hon. Wadri. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it coming through your sessional committee in general or is it a specific item you are bringing?

MR KUBEKETERYA: It is within our sessional committee. So, when we call the Minister of Health that is going to be one of the items we shall handle and then report to the House, Madam Speaker.

MR WADRI: As I wind up, Madam Speaker, Ugandans are very patient. They still hold respect for the institution of Police and this Parliament every financial year has a very sympathetic cause in as far as allocating resources to the Ministry of Internal Affairs is concerned. It is my humble appeal that let the Police not allow the Ugandan public to lose faith in them because we do appreciate the noble role they play. And when executing their duties, please have a human face and carry out thorough investigations before you swing into action. Thank you.

3.40
MR BEN WACHA (Independent, Oyam County North, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. After I raised this matter last week, I had the occasion to have a discussion with Mr Muhumuza in my office on Tuesday. We met for about two hours, and he informed me of the following: One, that he is a lecturer in law at the Christian University, Mukono.  Two, he is an advocate of the High Court of Uganda. Three, he was formerly lecturing at the LDC and Makerere. Four, that currently he is the legal advisor to Makerere University. And five, he is a secretary to the committee in Makerere which is sourcing out persons to the position of Vice- Chancellor.  

Madam Speaker, I was very keen in observing him and according to my non-medical observation, this is a very sane person. He also informed me that he separated with his wife in 2004 and the lady is now living in the UK. I am, therefore, surprised that the minister alleges here that on 2 July 2007 this same lady is the one who sourced the Urgency Order.  I have seen the Urgency Order but unfortunately it does not indicate who seeks for it. But I have noticed one thing in this statement that Mr Muhumuza also told me -(Interruption) 

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, hon. Ben Wacha, for giving way. There is something that I have failed to comprehend on this Urgency Order that you have referred to. Whereas the Urgency Order is dated 2nd July, when you look at the bottom right corner, there is another date there of - I do not know whether 13th July when the document was authenticated and it was authenticated by another Dr Walwa. So, I do not really know whether the arrest was made before the Urgency Order was authenticated and therefore what was the basis of the arrest? (Laughter) Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we proceed, I just want to ask you to join me in welcoming teachers and pupils of Rock View Primary School from Tororo Municipality represented by hon. Sanjay Tanna and hon. Grace Oburu. You are welcome! (Applause)  

MR WACHA: Thank you, Dr Epetait, for that information. I was saying that there is one issue which Muhumuza told me, which seems to make sense in this statement. That is the involvement of his elder brother, one Ben Mugasha. When we talked at length and I asked him specifically, “What is causing all this?” He told me that they have a serious family problem arising from his refusal of his brothers from taking over the land of his father. 

Madam Speaker, we are now getting Police involved in doing outrageous matters while the issue is actually a family dispute. You put a person in Butabika under an Urgency Order! Even if he comes out, he is already labelled a mad person. Wherever he goes, that is a mad person. That is a very serious state of affairs. I am even surprised that the minister can come here – there is a word in law which we say, “alleged.” This statement does not contain that; it is as if this gentleman is already mad, why? 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and hon. Ben Wacha, for giving way. As you all may be aware, I am a student of law at Mukono University and the Muhumuza in question now happens to be my lecturer. (Laughter) Not only I but we are 115 in our law class, and you can see the kind of law I am displaying these days -(Laughter)- courtesy of Mr Muhumuza. 

But I just feel hurt if a man I hold in high esteem has today been successfully labelled mad. As I go back to class next month, I will have second thoughts and start questioning what he is lecturing to me. Something I used to religiously believe in during the last four years. So, the information I wanted to give is, if you are not careful, next on the list after university lecturers will be MPs.   You disagree with your party; you end up in Butabika. (Laughter) And you will never recover because the moment you go there, we shall never believe you even if you talk here like what. Thank you very much. (Laughter)

MR WACHA:  Honourable Speaker, I could not have put it any better than what hon. Otto has said. Once you are labelled mad, it sticks on you. That is why - I told you last week - in the Communist Soviet Union this was the biggest stake they used to have against their opponents. They put you in a mental asylum, full stop. I do not want that situation to come here, in Uganda.  

Madam Speaker, through you, I want to tell this minister: check your house; you are in too much of a rush. You bring a statement and say, “Investigations are still continuing,” and yet you make it sound as if you have already completed investigations. That is not how you do public work. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, you know this matter is still on going. We should not really say so much about it. Let us hear from the minister and close.

3.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE, INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There are two parts to this statement: Part one is giving the history of what has taken place up to the time when Muhumuza was arrested and taken to Butabika Hospital. The other part of the statement – because Muhumuza expressed and came, he reported and complained to the Police that he is of a sound mind, the Police are yet to go and investigate that one and find out what exactly took place and how did it happen. That is information, which I felt I should give to hon. Wacha.

Two, I would also like to give information. In Police we have the word “suspect.” When you are suspected to have committed a crime either of robbery or murder and we arrest you, does that prove that you are a robber? Does it prove that you are a murderer? This person was suspected to have a mental problem, does that mean that actually he is condemned or ready to say, he is mad? I thought the proof was for the doctor to say this or that. I thought I should give that information. Nobody has condemned Mr Muhumuza that actually he is mad. The relatives only lodged a complaint and the authorities in the medical field in Butabika wanted to confirm that actually he was either mad or not. So, nobody should say that actually Mr Muhumuza has been condemned to be a mad person. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I hope you will be able to update us eventually when these matters are concluded. 

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS DELIVERED TO PARLIAMENT ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY HIS EXCELLENCY, THE PRESIDENT ON 7 JUNE 2007

3.50
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion and to thank His Excellency, the President for the State of the Nation Address. The state of the nation is very important since it usually gives us an opportunity to compare notes because our constituencies and the districts or the regions are part of the nation. So, we always try to compare notes on many of the items stated by His Excellency, the President.

Like, with regards to insecurity, Madam Speaker, let me take this opportunity to clarify on The Daily Monitor newspaper article of the 24 July 2007 on page 3, which is entitled “Bomb kills four in Lira”. That one is in Ayami IDP Camp, which is in my constituency on Lira-Kitgum road. The total number of the dead is now five. We lost Ogwal in Lira Hospital on Monday. Now the other five who are still in Lira Hospital are trying to recover. This was as a result of what we would call “Get rich quick” through the scraps. But now it has turned out to be “Get death quick”.  

Madam Speaker, what has been involved in this unfortunate incident is that, I am told the national mine action team, which is heavily sponsored and paid by the United Nations Development Programme was supposed to clear mines in Northern Uganda. But I am wondering why this bomb was still hiding in Pader where it was collected and these scraps were being offloaded in one of the stores in one of my IDP camps and has caused this unfortunate incident. I wonder who is going to be held responsible because Government has already ordered for clearance of these landmines and so on and so forth.

Madam Speaker, another thing connected to this incident is that the Police took some time to arrive at the scene. We must thank the DPC Lira, Raymond Otim, for doing everything possible.  Otherwise, because of the logistics in terms of transport and then with money to buy fuel, they were unable to arrive earlier and they arrived after almost four hours at the scene, which was about 30 kilometres away.

Also, I would like to thank the community of Ayam IDP Camp because initially they had wanted to beat up this scrap dealer, Mr Geofrey Masaba, to death and then burn down his vehicle but after intervention, they co-operated and spared his life and the vehicle. I think, Madam Speaker, with these kinds of accidents, we are not yet sure whether people can go back to their homes safely.  

Following the State of the Nation Address by His Excellency, the President on security, I am worried. On page 13, there is a middle part which reads: “What I want to assure Ugandans about is that, Uganda will have peace talks in Juba. Peace talks or no peace talks, our armed forces have said that they can guarantee peace and constitutionalism in the country.”  Madam Speaker, I am worried. We have been assured of the efforts of the UPDF every year in and out.  

You will recall that I am one of the few who initiated going to meet Kony in Garamba in the Republic of Congo. When we met Kony and his team, these people looked very ready to fight and when you hear this kind of statement and what is happening down in my constituency, where we still have eight IDP camps - I think my people are saying that they will not go back until these peace talks are conclusively reached. So, before this, whether we are going to have the peace talks or not and then we have defence as promised by His Excellency the President, we are not sure that the peace talks are going to succeed. That is my biggest worry.

Madam Speaker, this statement also helps us to compare other developments under different ministries. We have various ministries performing and we have been told how Works especially has been performing. I think we have a right to criticise the work under Works, because if you view carefully the corruption level in this country, it is much in the Ministry of Works than else where where we have tenders and then contract businesses.  

We have been told of the shoddy works in the Works Ministry as a result of kickbacks and so on and so forth, which is very common up to LC 1 level. How are we going to handle this kind of kickbacks? Because now you cannot travel from here to Lira or Gulu between Kampala and River Kafu. Last time, I stated that I almost counted this unsuccessful but I realised there were almost over one million potholes. My two vehicles are now down as a result of this incident.  

Madam Speaker, you cannot travel from Lira to Soroti. If you are risking then you are going to take five hours on what used to be two hours. How are we going to manage this situation with this kind of corruption, with this kind of shoddy work?

Debate of the State of the Nation Address helps us to compare. It enables us to see whether the NRM party is doing very well, and then whether after five years His Excellency, the President can still beg the party and the country to allow him to continue. When you follow the situation in which the country is being run, you find that poverty which makes people in the North and then other places in this country to think twice will not enable the party to take over power again. That is why the opposition, especially myself who is Independent - I am doing everything possible to ensure that in the long run, the Independent can take over this Government so that this problem of corruption can be eliminated. 

We have discussed this problem; it seems we have no solution at all.  But, we in the Independent have the solution. The challenge is only that some of our colleagues have decided to go on the other side through the Memorandum of Understanding. I think they have made a very serious mistake. In their case, in 2011 is already a no return. They did not consult their constituencies; they just came here and decided on their own -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not think you should threaten colleagues in this House.  Please, leave it for 2011; do not threaten colleagues in the House.

MR ANGIRO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. However, Madam Speaker, I am an Independent Member of Parliament and on many occasions, you will realise you are the only our chief whip and that is why we have to report this one sometimes to you in the House or outside this House because otherwise we are being mistreated. Sometimes outside, we are told we are not allowed to speak even in this House. This is the truth outside there.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Angiro, which Independents have been denied the chance to speak in this House?  The Independents wherever they are have been given an opportunity to speak. That is what I think. You are accusing the Speaker of not allowing you to speak?

MR ANGIRO: Madam Speaker, I said outside this House. In some constituencies, they are discussing that you do not allow us to speak here. That is what I am trying to stress.

MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable member holding the Floor has alleged of shoddy works in the Ministry of Works and the honourable member has mentioned a few roads where shoddy work is being done: Lira–Soroti road, Kampala-Kafu road. On Kampala-Kafu Road, we have just tendered out the works; no meaningful work so far is going on. It has just started. Lira to Soroti road is going to be upgraded to tarmac road and we have just awarded tenders and so far no work is going on. Is the honourable member in order to insinuate that there are shoddy works being done on these roads where there is no meaningful work going on? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, if the work has not begun, then there is no one who is being corrupt on those two roads. You are out of order.

MRS AOL: Madam Speaker, I am very sure that the honourable member who was holding the Floor actually cited few examples but we have very many roads, which even got allocation of funds in the last financial year, for example, Gulu-Moroto road. My friend, hon. Simon Toolit right now is not in Parliament because of that bad road that caused him an accident. I am sure we are not here to mince words; we are here to tell the truth and actually deliver services to our people and good services. I would like to inform the House that the roads are really bad and it is the tendering process. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, concerning the roads, the Minister of Works will make a statement on the roads together with his response on Tuesday. So, maybe we can hold a bit on the roads until we have a debate next week.

MR ANGIRO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable minister does not travel by road; I understand he flies in order to reach these villages. If he can try to go to the North by the roads as you did, he would come back to accept and make an apology to this House. He is lucky that he has not witnessed that because on these roads we are talking about, there is always periodic maintenance work going on. In after only one month, you find a road in a very bad shape. I do not know whether that is a lie. Anyway, he will have to prove this in his statement to the House next time. 

Madam Speaker, the part of the State of the Nation Address which actually has hurt me is about the “Bonna bagaggawale”. I do not know how long it will take this country to make every household earn Shs 20 million per year. I am aware in this address, even that one of 2005, we are told of one man in Soroti who has managed to get Shs 50 million per year and another one in Masaka and another in Mityana. I do not know when we will realise one in Karamoja or in Arua or in Acholi. This worries me because professionally, this will become a terrible lie that will earn His Excellency, the President no vote in this country and then eventually the next power to be taken by the lucky party to take over comfortably.

4.03
PROF. WASHINGTON ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me start by thanking the mover and the seconder of the motion and let me thank the President for his address. A lengthy history of the political situation in Uganda was given yesterday. Today, I am going to restrict myself to the State of the Nation Address, which was presented by the President.

The President mentioned that multi-party politics came because the country has healed. I did not understand this because there are two types of healing: physical healing and psychological healing. The latter is not a one-day process; it will take years. Sometimes it takes a lifetime. So, I did not understand what the President meant. The country has not healed but the political change had to come. I am sure the President is a shrewd politician and he saw that the wind is changing and the NRM Government had to opt for a multi-party dispensation. 

I would like to submit on the statement of the President and I quote, “I would like to reaffirm the National Resistance Movement Government’s determination to continue to adhere to constitutionalism and the rule of law in the management of all public affairs.” He went on to say, “Adherence to constitutionalism and the rule of law is the cornerstone for a democratic society which Uganda is nursing today.” I agree entirely with the President but my worry is that, if the President does not withhold these very important statements, then I am sure we are in for a mess. 

I would like to comment on peace. In my opinion, lasting peace is never brought by armed forces. Lasting peace is only facilitated maybe by the gun to create environment for dialogue to establish lasting peace. So, I would like to say that the only way Uganda can enjoy lasting peace we all yearn for will be to create conditions of love and mutual trust among Ugandans. Without that, lasting peace will never be brought in any part of the world by armed forces. Some people may shake their heads but that is a fact.

I note with happiness that the Police and the intelligence services are being strengthened to contribute to the fight against lawlessness. I salute this statement from the President and I would like also to hope that other institutions which have been put in place to fight against corruption will also be strengthened. 

Madam Speaker, I was very happy when the President declared, in this book, that he would tolerate no corruption. The President emphasized that ‘zero tolerance to corruption’ is the policy he has spelt out to this nation. This policy has worn the President a place in my heart, maybe for the first time. (Applause) Therefore, I would like, through you, Madam Speaker, to request the Leader of Government Business in this House to inform the President that the people of Kwania Constituency who I represent in this Parliament will be 100 per cent behind him on his declared war against corruption. 

Madam Speaker, time is going but allow me to add that corruption is like cancer; it is a national cancer, which must be fought to its last cell. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to also comment on Prosperity for All. The President, in his address said that Prosperity for All would target about 30 households in each sub-county. However, I would like to say that this model will not bring prosperity for all because I think that via this, it will be misconstrued and it may be another manifestation of corruption. 

I also would like to submit that Prosperity for All would do well through creating mass movements like the co-operative movements of the 1980s. Some of you remember about the Bugisu, Kweterana, Bukedi, Lango and Teso co-operative unions? These were mass movements, which actually touched the hearts of the grass root people. I think those people who are advising the President on Prosperity for All should study the concept of 30 households at the level of sub-county before they move on with that programme.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member- (Interruption)

MR ANOKBONGGO: Madam Speaker, can you give me one minute so that I can say something on primary health –(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have added you several minutes.

MR ANOKBONGGO: Just give me one minute. I want to briefly comment on primary health care. Primary health care, Madam Speaker, has not imparted on the people of Uganda. The grass root people are still not getting adequate primary health care. 

In the same vein, let me also comment on indoor spraying. Madam Speaker, I think that this is a sure way of preventing Malaria. My question however is, why the Ministry of Health has delayed this process?  Apac, the district I come from, has the highest density of mosquito bites and people are dying daily. I would like, through you, to urge the Ministry of Health to move fast to save lives. Remember prevention delayed is prevention denied yet people are dying. Thank you very much.

4.13
MRS MARY KAROORO OKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Bushenyi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand up to support the motion and to thank the President for this erudite State of the Nation Address. I had prepared to comment on most of these issues but because of time constraint, I will only talk about the press and HIV/AIDS.  

Madam Speaker, the President did talk about the role of the press and he said it can be of dire consequences like it happened in Rwanda in 1994. I am aware that the press or the media hold a mirror to society. Therefore, what we say is what the press brings out. So, when the President talks about social responsibility of the media, it has got to start with us. In his address, the President said and I quote: “The press, by reporting that a decision had already been taken to give away part of Mabira forest was a major contributor to the incitement.” This was very irresponsible of our press because up to now no decision has been taken on that matter.

Madam Speaker, I want to applaud NRM and the President for allowing Uganda to have the most free press in Africa. To date we have got 104 licensed radio stations of which 78 are operational. We also have got 13 operational television stations. The major question however is, how are we using them? 

Madam Speaker, I want to appeal to Members of this august House and other leaders, and the press that since we have got this opportunity, let us use it responsibly. The other day the NRM Parliamentary Caucus –(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way.  Madam Speaker, the issue the honourable colleague is referring to which the President was castigating the media on, is Mabira. However, it is not the media alone that got concerned about the Mabira issue. When the President clearly stated that he was involved in a long meeting discussing the Mabira issue, which he chaired, he should have realised that the country would patiently wait for a conclusion on this matter. 

I want to say that the media was only doing its right job of informing the public and probably connecting this anxiety so that the authority would quickly conclude this matter to put the people of Uganda at rest. I believe that the media did not do that in bad faith. It should be realised that Ugandans and the world at large are waiting for the final say on Mabira, a decision that is expected to put things to rest. This is a very controversial issue and we expect Government to act very fast as it always does on other matters like those concerning security and so on. I thank you.

MRS OKURUT: Thank you, honourable. I do not know whether the information was actually on the media or Mabira. But whatever it was, thank you honourable member.  

Madam Speaker, I would like to appeal to the Members and to the media to handle information responsibly. For instance, when we, NRM Members of Parliament went to Kyankwanzi for a retreat, the press reported that we had gone for military training. Our explanation that the military drills talked about in the press constituted only 5 per cent, has not yielded anything. I think our people should learn to give out correct information. How can we go for a retreat then they say we have now become soldiers? That is misinforming by the media.

Madam Speaker, I just want to appeal to Members that with these so many radio stations, let us peak on issues that will build this country. When the Super Eagles of Nigeria came here, which eventually did not look so super, I stood with colleagues, hon. Odonga Otto and hon. Elijah Okupa at Namboole Stadium. The three of us kept blowing a yellow trumpet together. I would pass it on to hon. Otto; he would then pass it on to hon. Okupa; they would then bring it back to me. So I said, for once we, Ugandans, are here as a nation; we are transcending party lines! 

Madam Speaker, I want to say that we should be using the media to focus on issues like the curriculum when we talk about national service. We should evolve a curriculum that transcends party lines. So, when the President talks about the press and the media, he is saying that they should focus on those relevant issues: on issues that bind us together as a nation and on issues that form a national identity. 

I know I have only one more minute. I will go to the issue of HIV/AIDS. Madam Speaker, I want to thank the President for halting the genocide of AIDS. He came out with a straight talk; he used proverbs and was able to rally this population. However, it is sad that in his address on page 42, the President says that there is relaxation in the campaign to check the HIV infection rate. I think that as leaders, we should be helping the President in this very important campaign especially given the fact that studies now show that high infection rate is among married people and the youths. 

So, we as Members of Parliament, as leaders, what are we going to do about this? How do we help the young girls who are at risk because we are told that between 15 and 19 years, 8 out of 1 boys are now getting HIV/ AIDS? Are they getting infected because their body parts have not yet developed? What do we do? 

Therefore, I am urging the Ministry of Health to develop the chemical that will help women, sooner than later; that we need to take up this fight and not just leave it to the President alone. He has done his bit and has passed on the role to us. 

Madam Speaker, I conclude by re-echoing his words: “Uganda is difficult to rule; it is like tying the intestines of a sheep because they are slippery.” So, let us help him to tie them. (Laughter) Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, too. Okay, honourable members, before we proceed, I have some announcements to make: One is from the Catholic Champlaincy saying that there is a farewell Mass for Father Robert Binta today at 5.00 p.m. and that there will be a dinner at 7.00 p.m. in the Members’ Lounge. 

The other one is that, the Parliamentary Savings and Co-operative Society will hold its annual general meeting tomorrow at 3.00 p.m. at the Parliamentary Conference Hall and thereafter, there will also be a dinner and a dance. So, today and tomorrow I think there is quite a lot of kyamukation here. So, Members are invited to attend both these meetings. 

I also would like to ask you to join me in welcoming three other schools: First, the great Kamuli Boys Boarding Primary School -(Applause) They are behind there. They have been presented by the Deputy Speaker and hon. Menhya.

We also have St Jude Junior School from Pallisa District though I do not know their actual constituency. St Jude, you are welcome! 

And lastly, we have New Hope Parents’ Primary School from Kibale District. So, I want to thank all the Members because today we really have a full gallery and we welcome our children.   

4.23
MR MEDDIE MULUMBA (NRM, Luuka County, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Like other Members of Parliament, I wish to support the motion as presented by hon. Ssekikubo. I commend Government and the President for the elaborate State of the Nation Address, which he gave.

There are a number of issues that I would like to talk about. Let me start with health. I commend Government in its efforts to fight Malaria and the other diseases. Madam Speaker, I want to report to this House that the people of Luuka support the spray of DDT; they think that Government should start the process immediately and there should be no delay. I think they are right because as much as I know, at one time DDT was going to be sprayed immediately but now every other time things keep dilly- dallying. Therefore, I wish to call upon Government to speed up the spray of DDT because Malaria is killing a lot of people.

On the issue of education, I want to commend the government for the effort it has done in implementing UPE. Because of UPE, the number of pupils in schools has increased. However, something has to be done to improve on its implementation. 

Madam Speaker, Government scrapped schools SFG yet this fund was helping a lot. So, I am calling upon Government to give us the alternative to SFG.
 
To talk more about education, I want to say that it has come to my notice that the department of inspectorate of schools is not functional, yet Government is pumping a lot of money in schools. Because of this, teachers in some places go to schools at 3.00 p.m. as if they are going to Parliament. So, I wish to call upon the Ministry of Education to strengthen the department of inspectorate such that our children can get better education.

On the issue of power, I would like to commend the boldness of the President in building Bujagali power station. However, I want to take this opportunity to inform Government that in some of the constituencies like Luuka, we have electric poles that were erected four years ago but no power has been connected and nothing is said about it. 

I wish to call upon Government to, besides talking about power, come up with a clear policy on rural electrification. We want to know when we shall get electricity. This is very important because I know of some former Members of Parliament who lost their seats because of that electricity thing. So, I call upon Government to expeditiously handle this issue.

I want to also commend Government for fighting corruption. I only call upon Government to make good sense of the policy of zero tolerance. I know that what they are doing is good, but they should speed it up because we need to see results.

Madam Speaker, let me also talk about Bonna bagaggawale. I commend Government for initiating this programme. The problem is that Bonna bagaggawale has delayed. So, I wish to call upon Government to have the Bonna bagaggawale programme move faster than it is doing. 

However, I want to say that people cannot kugaggawala (get rich) when some of our roads are in very bad shape. The roads are very important because they facilitate transport in rural areas and the country at large. Therefore, I want to call upon the relevant ministry to do something about our roads. Local governments are being given very little money; they cannot construct roads. We wish Government could at least do something about the roads because without good roads, we are not going to market our commodities. 

So, Madam Speaker, whereas I commend Government for “Bonna Bagagawale,” I think the element of road networking should be put into consideration. I also think the President forgot – I wish to request the Leader of Government Business to remind the President that he promised us a district but unfortunately, he did not talk about it. We thought that he was going to tell us in the State of the Nation Address when that will come. The people are waiting for that district, and I wish the Leader of Government Business could do something about it and at least inform the President.

Finally, I commend Government for its efforts on CHOGM. But at times, I do not understand, when you are driving around Kampala you see people advertising themselves that so and so is ready for CHOGM. I think that is wrong. It is as if people of CHOGM are going to be staying in their houses. We would rather say that Hotel Serena or whatever is ready for CHOGM instead of referring to individuals, because the visitors are not going to go into peoples homes; the visitors are coming to Uganda, they are going to go to other facilities. Thank you, very much, Madam Speaker.

4.29
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The President reassured the nation on the issue of constitutionalism and the rule of law, especially where he said that each of us has a contribution to make. 

As I listened to the mover and the seconder of the motion, and the response by the Leader of the Opposition, I felt encouraged to live in a country where people come together in freedom to debate and discuss how to move forward as a country, and contribute to the development of our country.

Madam Speaker, for the State of the Nation Address to be strong, we need to invest in Ugandans. That means that we need to invest in education, healthy, economy, job creation, have a minimum health package and above all, be at peace with our neighbours and ourselves. 

In his previous State of the Nation Address, the President pledged and promised Ugandans to introduce Universal Secondary Education. I was very encouraged and happy that the President pronounced himself on the success so far made with Universal Secondary Education. But what made me even happier was not just the fact that over 150 students can now access education, but the fact that we have managed to banish the demons of school fees, and that in the near future our teachers will access jobs. This speaks volumes in terms of integrity on the part of the President; it is a sign of integrity in leadership for a party to promise and fulfil its promise.

Madam Speaker, the President spoke eloquently about the economy and no one can deny the successes and progresses we have made so far in keeping our economy strong. There is no doubt that we have maintained inflation and the economic growth rate of our country. But if we have a few things to learn from the reforms that we have carried out in the last twenty years, two of them come to my mind; first, that controlling inflation is good for macro-economic stability, and secondly, that having macro-economic stability alone is not enough to deliver the 68 percent of our population to their land of canaan. 

Therefore, amidst these challenges, I would like to suggest that we refocus our economic agenda. We need to redefine the role of the state in management of the economy. Above all, let us come together as a nation and do something about the over 2 million young people who are ready to work but cannot find jobs.

Madam Speaker, the President has provided leadership in the fight against Malaria. I come from a district, which is heavily affected by Malaria. I want to thank the President and the Ministry of Health for spraying ICON. Over 70 percent of our households in Kabale have already been sprayed. And like many of our Members have said, I want to support the use of DDT, and also request that spraying starts as soon as possible. Madam Speaker, I will stand shoulder to shoulder with the President when it comes to peace and reconstruction, and development programmes of Northern Uganda. 

The Leader of the Opposition raised important issues, which I would like to comment on before I sit down. He laboured a lot on the fact that he needs to be respected, and I think he is right. The Opposition needs to be respected because it is in the Constitution. But I just have one advice, which was given to me by my grandmother. She said that respect earned is sweeter than respect given. And according to the Bible, the book of all ages, blessed are the humble for they will be exalted. (Laughter)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much hon. Bahati, my colleague in the prayer breakfast for giving way. I want to inform you that it took the Seventh Parliament a lot of time to battle out the issue of protocol. It took us a long battle to ensure that MPs would stand at No.7 in the protocol list of the VIPs in Uganda, and the RDCs and LCVs are battling with No.33, 34 and 35. So, when the Leader of the Opposition comes here to demand that respect be accorded to his position, it is about enforcement of our rights. He is not begging for respect. I think those are some of the reasons why we members of Parliament carry official passports; not that we want to feel proud when we arrive at Heathrow Airport, but we want some minimum respect accorded to us because the title, “honourable” is not for nothing. 

So, I just want to inform hon. Bahati that Prof. Latigo has presented his case so well. He needs to be accorded the respect that his position deserves because this is just the first year of multi-party politics. Tomorrow, it may be NRM on the opposition side –(Interjections)- yes, tomorrow it is NRM on the Opposition side. And I do not think you would be happy if your Leader of the Opposition, I do not know who it will be, is being tossed around left, right and centre like a tennis ball. So, let us set the culture for the office by giving it the respect it deserves. Thank you so much. 

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much Madam Speaker and thank you hon. Otto for that information –(Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, I seek clarification from hon. Otto and the Leader of the Opposition. When they talk about respect and protocol, it is as if it is the President who marginalises the Leader of the Opposition. Whenever we have had the State of the Nation Address, it has been in the precincts of Parliament. And when seats are organised for the guests, I do not think it is the President who organises them. So, who is to blame in as far as sitting arrangement is concerned? Is it the institution of Parliament or the NRM Party? Because when he was articulating here, he was saying that sometime he is put on the side like he is an observer. So, who bears the blame? 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you for seeking that clarification. I may not be the best to apportion blame, but you may ask yourself, why should a mistake be such that Prof. Latigo is not accorded his right position and the First Lady gets her right position. Why is the mistake only on one side? If it is a mistake, then it must affect every one. 

So, whoever is concerned for making sitting arrangements should ensure that if the honourable Member of Parliament is accorded the respect she deserves by virtue of being the First Lady of Uganda, in the same way he should ensure that the Leader of the Opposition is also give that kind of respect.

MS KABAKUMBA: Madam Speaker, mine is more of a clarification. Since we turned multi-party, there are two sides: the Government Side and the Opposition Side. I have been watching; even in the conference hall, hon. Latigo’s seat is normally reserved. It is the first on the Opposition Side. Is it that you want the Leader of the Opposition to sit next to the President like the First Lady? (Laughter) And that issue has been raised –(Interruption) 

MR KIBANZANGA: Madam Speaker, we are struggling to build a country, and there is an order of precedence in this country. But since we started the multi-party system, we have never reviewed it. The Chief whip of the Government Side, who is now responsible for championing national building – I expected her to simply say that we are going to review the order of precedence.

Is it is order for her, holding that respectable office, and right now standing in for the Leader of Government Business, to meander around the order of sitting, which we all know, that the order of precedence in this country has not been reviewed in respect of the multi-party dispensation. Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not know whether you were here when the Leader of the Opposition was speaking. He complained about his treatment in the Parliamentary Gardens. He was wondering where he is supposed to sit at the official reception of Parliament. So, she is asking, “Do you want to sit next to the President?”

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much for your wise ruling, but I would like to confirm that the honourable MP for Ruhama happens to be the First Lady of Uganda, and you cannot run away from that protocol, much as she is an MP.

And the issue of the level of the Leader of the Opposition has been taken - he is supposed to be at the level of a cabinet minister in the law. And for the other state functions, he is placed immediately after the First Deputy Prime Minister. Even in Kololo, though at times he does not attend, he is always clearly recognised on the programme of arrival.

So, the point is noted and I believe this Parliament is taking that issue seriously. If there is need to amend the law or to include that position in the protocol that may be done. But there should be no contention about the position of the First Lady vis-à-vis the position of the Leader of the Opposition.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we should not belabour any further on this point. Let me undertake that on behalf of Parliament of Uganda, we shall ensure that the Leader of the Opposition is accorded his due respect.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, again on the issues raised by the Leader of the Opposition, I agree with him on a number of issues, which he raised, except where he confused facts with the truth, and where he confused big plans with reckless promises.

Madam Speaker, this party has big plans for his country. Universal Secondary Education is a big plan, but not a reckless promise. “Bonna Bagagawale” is a big plan, not a reckless promise as he stated it. Investing in research and later on discovering oil is a big promise for this country rather than a reckless one.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much hon. Bahati. The point I would like to inform you on is on the recklessness of plans. If you have a copy of the statement in reply, delivered by the Leader of the Opposition, there is an example cited, which can convince you. 

When Universal Primary Education started in 1997, it enrolled about two million children. And as we talk now, the number has increased to about seven million. But when you look at the graduates of UPE, the number falls far too low; it does not march. That is what we are talking about; we are not saying that all plans of Government are lumpsomely reckless. We gave very clear examples on where Government was not clear, but we are not rubbishing all the plans of Government.

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much hon. Wadri. But that is what I meant when I talked about confusing facts with the truth. It is a fact that Universal Secondary Education can be complex to implement. But the truth of the matter is that it is a big promise and it is good for this country.

Madam Speaker, the people of Ndorwa West expected a strong statement from the President, especially when it comes to education. There is need for us to balance between urban and rural schools. When you look at the environment of our children in rural areas, you agree with me that the rural schools need affirmative action. Thank you very much.

4.45
MRS JANET MUSEVENI (NRM, Ruhama County, Ntungamo): Madam Speaker, I rise up to support the motion on the President’s State of the Nation Address. I want to begin by congratulating all Ugandans, through you, Members of Parliament, because this State of the Nation Address comes one year after a multi-party dispensation. 

And as hon. Latigo said, many of us in this Eighth Parliament had no knowledge of the multi-party culture. I am happy to say that the Movement Government has been able to shepard us and that it has worked hard to ensure the freedom, the liberty and security of the people and their property. That has given this country a new hope and confidence to rebuild their homeland, beginning with big homes, modern offices, even the House of Uganda’s Parliament is waiting for a new face since the 1960s. When Uganda last had its multi party parliament, I was not in Uganda. But I know that there were challenges that forced many people to leave the country and those who stayed would certainly never say anything wrong about the government – (Interruption)

MS AOL: Madam Speaker one time in this very Parliament I was made to know that we are not supposed to read prepared texts. We can only glance or refer to them. Is it therefore in order for hon. Museveni to read other than just referring to the text? Is she really in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members I think she is referring to her notes. I urge her to look at you occasionally.

MRS MUSEVENI: I am referring to my notes, Madam Speaker. But I had just said that when Uganda last had its multi party Parliament I was not in Uganda but I know that there were so many challenges that forced many people to leave this country and those who stayed could never have the opportunity to say anything wrong about the government; they could never say anything about the Army that had become the god unto itself; they could never say anything about the economy that was completely bankrupt; nothing could be said about anything.

Indeed as the President said in this address, that building a democracy is not a one time event or an assignment to which one would assign a couple of years, on the contrary it is a dynamic process. This is a quotation and I have to read it, “On the contrary it is a dynamic process to which every generation has to contribute for the good and survival of the people with the present generation laying a firm foundation for the future generations to build on.” Hopefully, that is what we are all doing here in the Eighth Parliament. And we cannot afford to forget that.

This is why we cannot have the luxury of even using jokes that in any way divide our people. That is why I could not understand our elder brother, hon. Okello-Okello, when he said yesterday that Uganda is in two; that there is a Uganda in the North and a Uganda in the South. I think that was not only wrong but also outrageous.

Let me single out education from the many topics this address brought out. The first paragraph on education, Madam Speaker, the President was talking about USE and he said, “I appeal to all the leaders at various levels to support this effort instead of criticising it as a non-starter.” He emphasised the fact that UPE has worked and USE will work. He said as the saying goes that all glory comes from daring to begin. Why did he say all that? Because he knew precisely that the beginning is not easy and not perfect. But he was talking to all of us knowing that we are all Ugandans, before we become NRM, FDC, DP, or even UPC. Therefore, we are Uganda’s blood. We are Uganda’s blood that run in its veins. If we choose to cut ourselves Uganda will bleed to death.

When I listened to hon. Latigo, the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament, I was really surprised to hear him comparing Uganda with Kenya and Rwanda, because all of us remember that in those dark years of Uganda, Kenya was building, expanding and perfecting many sectors of the economy. Even Rwanda, which did have a terrible time and trauma, nonetheless it was for a short time and they have a very small population compared to Uganda’s population. Therefore, it is not fair to begin to compare Uganda’s pace of rebuilding to any of our neighbours.

Additionally, hon. Latigo said that UPE in 1997 the teacher to pupil ratio was 1:85. In 2006 when the population of pupils was 7.2 million, he asked how can the teacher ratio be 1:48 pupils which would have meant that there was a teacher increment and yet according to him there was none. But, madam speaker, the increment took place, from 84,000 teachers in 1997 to 129,000 teacher presently. This means, and according to the Minister of Education, the target is 132,000 teachers; this means 45,000 teachers increment. So, what he was saying was really not true.

Now, I just need to say something about what he also said about Kyankwanzi. I must say that I was really amazed at the choice of words hon. Latigo chose to use on this extract, “The folly of dressing up decent honourable members of Parliament in military uniforms and making them fumble with AK 47s”, the word “folly” also means absurdity, foolishness, daftness, imbecility or even lunacy as we were saying. So, does this mean that hon. Latigo is really saying that the Members of Parliament are too honourable to wear our army uniform, or too highly respected to stoop so low to defend our country? 

More importantly, however, is the fact that what the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament chose to call the expired communist military mindset is actually a constitutional requirement in Uganda and it is also a normal practice for many developed nations of the world, giving all citizens an opportunity for a simple military training so that they can no longer be intimidated by the Army uniform and also, if for any reason they should be needed they can be called upon to give that service for their nation. That is what was in Kyankwanzi and so I was just amazed at what hon. Latigo had to say.

Let me remind all of us that in lifting up our nation we need to do all that we can do, and we must look to each other, whether we belong to the NRM, FDC, DP, or UPC; Uganda looks to all of us to lift it up. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.56
COL (RTD) TOM BUTIME (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for this opportunity. If I repeat what the honourable members said in the last two days you will have to excuse me because I had some national matters to attend to. The President on Somalia said, “The military situation in Somalia is not all that challenging or complicated. A disciplined force like ours used to fighting wars should not find the situation challenging provided the commanders involved are serious and adhere to a well-tested battle procedures. When the four soldiers were killed, for instance, in a road side road bomb ambush, it was because the soldiers were driving in vehicles in an area that had never been under the control of friendly forces.” Madam Speaker, I agree with the statement of the President. My concern is the phrase that friendly forces not having been present, may be to man that particular area where our soldiers were killed. 

The question is where were these friendly forces? Why haven’t they arrived in Somalia? When will they come at all? I am talking of the forces like those, which had been promised by African Union from Ghana, Burundi, Algeria and other countries. All I am saying is that, has these friendly forces been deployed as Uganda did deploy UPDF maybe our soldiers lives would not have been lost.

When we were debating the resolution to send our troops to Somalia I did not want to make a comment on certain sensitive issues because I had the confidence and trust in the leadership in defence and the Army. But at that time I wanted to warn that if other troops, which had been promised by the countries did not arrive in Mogadishu on time our own troops would be thin on the ground. Our own troops would be overstretched and vulnerable because in the military if you cannot dominate an area, and the enemy knows that your troops cannot dominate that area, your troops become vulnerable. And that is the problem today.

I would have loved to hear from the President in the statement when the troops promised to go to Somalia so that our troops do not become over stretched, do not continue being thin on the ground and this kind of unfortunate developments do not happen again.

When the President was talking about DDT, he said, “Having gone through a rigorous systematic approach on the use of DDT for indoor residual spraying as elaborated above, it is not only disturbing but quite insulting to hear some individuals and at times groups claiming to be the champions of environmental protection going around misleading the public that no scientific studies and preparations have been made about the use of DDT. Since they ridicule WHO which is the international standard setter in health matters, one wonders where they derive their authority.” And I agree with him entirely. 

But my problem is on Page 8 of the President’s address. He said, “Mr Speaker, while the debate on Mabira was healthy, the misreporting and distortions especially by the press was a major contributor to the incitement of the people which culminated into the nasty incidents where lives were lost. The press’ false insistence that a decision had already been taken to give away part of Mabira forest was a major contributor to the incitement; yet up to now, no decision has been taken on the matter.”

 I only have the following questions, mark the words “scientific studies”, mark the words, “international standard setter”, mark the words “rigorous approach”. The international standard setter for health is WHO, but the international standard setter for environment is UNEP, which is against the degazetting of Mabira forest; the national standard setter for forests is National Forest Authority, which is also against the degazetting of Mabira. The other national standard setter of environment is National Environment Management Authority. It is also against Mabira forest degazetting. Now I also ask, which authority will they use to decide on Mabira since the scientific authorities, the international and national standard setters have already given the verdict? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.03
GEN. ELLY TUMWINE (UPDF Representative): I also add my voice to thanking H. E the President for a focussed State of the Nation Address. Before I proceed, I would like to state that what a human being wants in life is happiness, good health and wealth. I tried to look at where the President focussed on a number of issues and I will only want to pick on only one and concentrate on it. This is on the issue of Malaria. In the section of health, 90 per cent is focussed on Malaria and on the use of DDT. 

I have spent three years researching on Malaria and I have written a paper. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the President for laying emphasis on eradication of Malaria rather than the expatriate song of endless control, where we have been using all control methods that have never worked. Malaria has continued to destroy our people. 

Now, what I want to lay emphasis on is the quote on his appeal on our role as leaders and I quote, “May I therefore, appeal to all leaders at the various levels and the public in general, to join the fight against malaria and be counted”.  Even if I stopped there, I am glad many members have really been counted on this.  But let me give you some statistics just to deepen your understanding and for you to be able to defend and explain to anybody in the world on the use of DDT.  

The world over has eradicated Malaria without using any other method except DDT.  I repeat, no country in the world ever eradicated Malaria from its soil without using DDT.  As we speak today all the continents of the world have eradicated Malaria using DDT except Sub-Saharan Africa.  90 percent of the 2.5 million people who die every year are from Sub-Saharan Africa. Uganda loses 320 people to Malaria every day.  We have a Malaria burden of $ 690 million every year and for Africa, it is $ 12 billion every year.  No war, disease, or catastrophe has ever decimated as many consistently as Malaria.  The dangers of control are that all the drugs have become resistant over the years, and all the drugs that are being taken over a period are more dangerous to our bodies than DDT.  

The American Health Council and Scientific Council opposed the ban of DDT up to now because DDT was declared the magic drug that saved more than 500 million people that would have died. It was even passed through a Judicial Commission of Inquiry, headed by Edmond Swin who chaired it for eight months and at the end made a conclusion that DDT was the cheapest, the most effective and the most useful responsible drug in the world against Malaria.  DDT was banned politically rather than scientifically.  I could give you more details if there was time.

Secondly, I would like to call this letting Malaria kill our people continuously, romancing with death. We are romancing with death.  At one time I wanted to accuse all the African leaders of a very serious case in the International Criminal Court, a case of criminal negligence resulting in massive death.  That appeal is to all of us.  I stopped because I found I was one of the leaders and it therefore applied to me.  So, I decided that before we accuse anybody, we should first educate our people so that they are aware.

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, hon. Elly Tumwine raised a very serious concern by saying that he almost contemplated taking African leaders to the International Criminal Court.  African Leaders in this sense are the African Presidents, not just all of us; it is the African Presidents.  Is it, therefore, in order for Gen. Elly Tumwine, who is an Army Representative in this House to have contemplated taking his Commander-in-Chief to the International Criminal Court?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think as a junior officer, he was over stretching himself.

GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your ruling.  Contemplating is not a crime; committing or omitting to commit, that is omission or commission is a crime.  I stopped at contemplating because I myself regarded myself as an African leader; however, it is a very serious matter.  

Each of us has a responsibility to go down to our community, starting from our own children and our own homes, where people are failing to get education because of Malaria. The biggest absenteeism in schools is due to Malaria.  The biggest absenteeism from production in our fields is due to Malaria.  In the most crucial time of the production period during the rain season that is when malaria strikes.

The biggest threat is to pregnant mothers and children below five years. The biggest threat is that it consistently reduces our brain by causing cerebral Malaria, which affects our brains and our thinking.  So, I just wanted to re-emphasise that point.

The other point, which I think is also related to our health and our wealth is the issue of Mabira.  We need to have a more serious approach to the issue of the environment.  Mabira is such a small acreage compared to how much forest we need to put in place in our country as opposed to how many trees we are cutting daily. I have done another study on that. 

One of the most strategic advantages that Uganda has over the rest of the world is that it has the fastest growth of plants and seeds.  A pine tree in Uganda takes 13 years to mature.  In the United States, it takes 30 years while in Sweden it takes 130 years.  The strategic advantage we therefore have is that if every citizen of Uganda planted 12 trees a year that would guarantee sustainability and that would mean that in each year we can plant 360 million trees. 

From our study it was proven that every citizen consumes at least one tree a month. If we replaced these trees in that way, even if a home has one acre, for you plant trees around that one acre around your home, if one acre is about 100 by 100, is 400 ft, the perimeter if you are alone will take you 33 years to plant 12 trees per year.  If you have a family of 10 people, it will take you three years plus.  So, I think that instead of looking at small things there are bigger threats, which can be rectified in a short while and in a very cheap way.   

My estimate is that if the government was to provide seedlings to every citizen, it would cost about Shs18 billion for every citizen to get a seedling to plant.  I think it is affordable and it should be covered under our budget.  I thank you.

5.13
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, and Rakai): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to also join my colleagues who have commended the State of the Nation Address, which was presented by H.E. the President.  I also want to appreciate the elaborateness and the degree of laxity in the mood in which the President presented the State of the Nation Address.

One year down the road, having gone through the Movement System to join the Multi-party political system, we would like to question ourselves how far we have transited.  

When crossing from the Movement to the multi-party system, we said there was a transition period and I think as a nation, we need to reflect on how far we have transited. All these questions which are being asked by the Leader of the Opposition on when the Opposition will be recognised and the hype of individualism which is being carried over from the Movement system to rather playing as a team, we need to reflect and we need to seriously consider how far we have transited from the Movement System to the multi-party system. 

Sometime back in the last two weeks, we had a retreat as NRM and this was very healthy for us to crosscheck how far we have traversed the one-year. I think as Parliament, we also need to organise an inter-party retreat to examine the transition from the Movement system to the multi-party system and also set parameters on how we can move. I think it will help us a lot to ensure that we have a more coordinated and a more cross-fertilised multi-party system as we proceed in the second year. 

On the issue of security, H.E the President elaborated how Government has ensured that security is more or less reaching all the regions of this country. We appreciate the effort of the UPDF, as well as that of all the officers and men, the Amuka Boys and the Arrow Boys, who have given their lives to ensure that peace prevails in the Northern part of this country. We appreciate also the peace process, which has taken off in Juba and we hope that it will continue to create more hope for our brothers and sisters in northern Uganda. 

However, I have a serious concern on resettlement programme. Having been one of the champions who advocated for peace and stability for our brothers in Northern Uganda, I think as Parliament, we need to come in very critically and review the resettlement programme which is being embarked on by Government. I have listened to brothers and sisters from Northern Uganda and they are saying that people are not going back to the land. You can imagine people who have been in the IDP camps for 20 years and who you are now telling to go back to the land. Where are they going? That is a question we need to address jointly without bringing in politics, the land conflict, or land grabbing. 

We need to soberly talk about organised resettlement. It is not merely telling people to go back to where they came from. Most of the children have been born in the camps and 20 years down the road all the land that people are going back to is a bush. So, we need to seriously rethink- (Interruption)-hold on your fire, I will give you information. 

We need to hold a real retreat to ensure that the question of the Northern Uganda resettlement is well articulated and well planned to ensure that we do not merely tell our brothers and sisters to go back to where they came from. In this 21st Century, we need to think of organised, well-planned settlements without necessarily bringing in the politics of the North. We need to consider that issue as a very critical one, and I appeal to our brothers in the North to come up and champion it because there is a sentiment that Government has intentions to grab their land and has no intention for the people to go back to their land. This is the time to see the states men and the states women from Northern Uganda championing organised settlement let alone telling them to go back to where Government cannot deliver services adequately. So, with Northern Uganda, we need to consider that issue very critically. 

On the issue of the economy, we appreciate that we have continuously had a moderate growth rate despite the few hurdles of power shortages and others. However, on the issue of bonna bagagawale, which was a major winning factor in our election manifesto as NRM, we need to critically sit down and review how we are going to make Ugandans prosper. It is not a question of talking about numbers and that we intend to send in so much in as far as mobilising, educating and capacity building are concerned. We need to refocus on the sub-county model and have real household approaches, which look at transforming households from point X to point Z. This is a very major programme which will show that we either promise or fulfil or that we shall go back to the people, find them where we left them and face a lot of questions -(Interruption)- I take the clarification.

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much hon. Kasamba for giving me an opportunity to be clarified. In 1996 we moved on the popular slogan of kulembeka. After kulembeka, in 2001 the Plan for the Modernisation of Agriculture was introduced. In 2006 we were given bonna bagagawale.  The clarification I am seeking is that apart from these being political slogans what has happened to the earlier programmes? When you are giving the state of the nation you should tell us the state of those programmes. This is the clarification I am seeking. You are my friend.

MR KASAMBA: Thank you very much and I thank the honourable member for having sought a clarification. I think all those programmes are well intentioned and are well entrenched in our MTEF programmes. We hope that it is a question of harmonising them and ensuring that we get to the higher spectrum of ensuring that our people are galvanised and mobilised to ensure that everybody realises the “prosperity for all” because “prosperity for all” ensures that all the efforts under PMA and under NAADS are put together so that we can see that the major efforts we have put in all the various programmes realise the real incomes within the transformation of the people we are representing.

And lastly, Madam Speaker, I appreciate Government and H.E the President for having recognised the “private not-for profit-providers” in this country. I think that as Parliament we should also recognise the great importance of the “private not-for-profit institutions,” both in education and health. They are doing a commendable job. 

In fact I would like to lay on Table a document, “Facts and figures for private not-for-profit: knowing and understanding the facility based private not-for-profit health sub-sector in Uganda”. This is a document which brings out how much the private not-for-profit interventions, which Government agreed to work with under the public-private partnership, to ensure that there is increased efficiency in service delivery as well as increased out reach to the un-reached areas. 

As we consider our budgetary considerations we should note that these facilities train so many nurses most of whom are taken up by Government. The amount of budget support, which is provided, considering the efficiency and productivity within these facilities, calls for our attention as Parliament to ensure that we increase on the budgetary allocation. As I wind up, allow me to lay it on the Table for consideration by the relevant committee. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we proceed, this is an important announcement. It concerns accreditation of members to attend the CHOGM meetings and CHOGM Heads of State activities. The forms have been put in your pigeonholes. Please sign and return them by the close of business on Monday, 30 July 2007. Please, get this out of the way quickly so that you do not miss your identification cards. It is going to be very, very, crowded during the CHOGM.

MR KASAMBA: Madam Speaker, I lay on Table, “Facts and figures for the private not for profit service providers knowing and understanding the facility based private not for profit health sub-sector in Uganda”. This document is dated 6 July 2007. It is a document from the Uganda Catholic Medical Bureau, Uganda Moslem Medical Bureau and the Uganda Protestant Medical Bureau. I lay it on Table.  I thank you. 

5.25
MR SANTOS PIRO (Independent, East Moyo County, Adjumani): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to add my voice to the honourable colleagues by thanking the mover of the motion and I would like to thank H.E. the President for the State of Nation Address.  

I would like to talk on two points. On page 13, H.E. the President talked about the security in this country. I come from Northern Uganda and I appreciate Government’s efforts for peace in Northern Uganda. It is true that there is peace in Northern Uganda, children are going to school, economic activities are taking place, and health services are being provided. But, Madam Speaker, there are other forms of insecurity taking place in Northern Uganda, insecurity is emanating from land grabbing. We are very much threatened by the movement of the Balalo from Western Uganda towards the North. That is the other source of insecurity. As I talk now, in Adjumani district, there are some UPDF soldiers who have grabbed land belonging to people in IDP camps. (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, my brother, hon. Piro Santos. The issue of land in this country is very touchy and you have just mentioned that soldiers of the UPDF have grabbed part of Adjumani District. Is it UPDF as an institution or individual officers from UPDF? We really get concerned if UPDF as an institution has started grabbing land. We are afraid they may grab the whole country. Can we hear from you whether it is the institution or individual officers?  Thank you.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: I also want some clarification from my honourable colleague. I remember, I think it was two months ago, when a Minister of State for Lands made a statement concerning land grabbing particularly in the North that was being alluded to by hon. Okello-Okello and some other persons across. He made a statement, and there was nowhere in his statement that he said that investigations had been done. He said the areas or cases, which were referred to as land grabbing, had been individuals who had purchased land from the natives. There was nowhere UPDF had been quoted. The honourable member was in this House and he did not raise such a matter. It is almost two months ago. I am wondering where he is getting that information. I want clarification.

DR CRISPUS KIYONGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank the honourable colleague for giving way. I just have two or three points. One, UPDF as an institution is certainly not involved in any land grabbing. Two, the honourable member holding the Floor did bring the specific case of Moyo to my attention, and he did request me to take interest in this matter. I want to assure him that we are investigating that particular situation and when we come to the conclusion, we will let him know. I thank you. 

MR PIRO: Thank you very much. On the issue raised by hon. Kassiano Wadri, I meant individuals in the UPDF institution and in this particular case he managed to place in the land he grabbed, UPDF soldiers to guard it.  

I would like to also answer my brother Tinkasiimire that it is true that when the minister raised the land issue on the Floor of the House I did not raise this matter because this matter came to my attention after that matter was resolved by the honourable minister. But to the effect of land grabbing, I have some documentation petitioned to H.E. the President sent to me and copies to be distributed to the relevant institutions including the Minister of Defence. 

It is true that I also briefed the honourable Minister of Defence on this issue. Madam Speaker, allow me to continue with my points. I am raising this point because the desperate people who were forced into IDP camps 20 years ago are willing, at the request of the government, to come and occupy their land and get involved in economic activities. If they are to come and find their land taken, what do you think will happen? Definitely there will be a fight; there will be insecurity; there will be killings as is the case with the invading pastoralists from Tanzania, Rwanda and Bunyoro –(Interruption)

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Thank you, hon. Piro for giving way. Hon. Piro, we have been working together in the Committee on Agriculture and if you look at the land use system in this country- and I want to seek clarification from him- you will find land for trees; you will find land for fish - the lakes; you will find land for animals, they call them game parks; you will find land for farmers, they call them gardens. 

I am just seeking clarification as a member of the committee who is interested in issues of pastoralists. He made a comment on the issue of the herdsmen. I do not want to use the word he used. Has he taken an interest as a nationalist to kind of seek and understand the problem those herdsmen are facing? Are they grabbing land or are they looking for grass? (Laughter) Are they actually carrying away the land with them? I want to seek clarification. Thank you.

MR PIRO: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, the issue of the pastoralists, in the case of the Balaalo in Hoima, they even got involved in buying away the communal land from individuals. So, their interest is not only in searching for pasture for their animals but also to acquire the communal land for their own benefit, and that is very dangerous because it can degenerate into serious insecurity. 

The honourable member is aware of how the press reported this issue – people started cutting themselves with pangas; cattle were killed, among other acts. This is not a very small issue. While I am aware about the pastoralists in Karamoja, definitely they normally look around for pasture and water for their animals, and there have been some few complaints from the neighbouring districts of Teso that they have been moving to occupy some land in Teso. This matter has been on the Floor of this House before. 

On the economy, page 17 to 30. The President talked very well about the economic development in this country. I would like to appreciate the government of Uganda for having brought Northwest Smallholders Agricultural programme in West Nile. In that programme a lot of things have been done for the people of West Nile. The DFIs have been rehabilitated, people have been trained, markets have been constructed, and infrastructure put in place. We are very grateful to the NRM Government for that achievement. Another issue I want to raise –(Interjection)

MR REAGAN OKUMU: I did not want to interrupt my good friend, hon.Santos, from Adjumani but he is raising confusing statements. He is saying that Government has done a lot in West Nile and that he and his people are very grateful. In as far as I am concerned, the honourable member does not come from West Nile. The honourable member actually comes from East Nile, which is in Adjumani. Is it, therefore, in order for him to continue to allude that that is part of West Nile when his constituency is actually on the East of the Nile? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know, the people of Uganda have relatives all over the place. I am sure he has got relatives in West Nile. Proceed.

MR PIRO: Thank you very much. I would like to inform the honourable member, Okumu Reagan, that West Nile region includes Adjumani District, and I am the Secretary of West Nile Parliamentary Group. (Applause)

I would like to continue to encourage the government to encourage investors to come and put in place industries in Uganda. However, I have noticed that some of the so-called investors who come in here are not true investors because these investors come and get investment licenses, which come with incentives that are heavy. In the end, you find that after acquiring this industrial land, they go ahead to put warehouses, which they use for storing imported goods and they start hawking them around like ordinary businessmen. 

So, Government should follow up these investors very seriously and make sure that they stick to their investment licence programmes. This is very important for the economic development of this country.  Otherwise, I commend the government for the economic development because all the economic indicators are in place to show that Uganda is growing economically, and it is in the books of even IMF, World Bank and so forth. That is why the inflation rate has come down.

To finish my appreciation of the State of the Nation Address, I would like to commend the government for the agricultural programmes it has put in place especially as regards “Prosperity-for-All”, which is in the manifesto of the NRM party, and also oil exploration. But,Madam Speaker –(Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Honourable member, please wind up.

MR PIRO: I would like to urge the government to extend the oil exploration to other areas where oil reserves have been detected, like in West Nile because the people of West Nile would like to also benefit from the economic benefits that come with oil exploration. I thank you so much for the opportunity, and I commend my honourable colleague.

5.39
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I salute the President for the State of the Nation Address. I will begin by commenting on a few points. One, on Bonna Bagaggawale, I should thank the President for interesting himself on improving the lifestyle of the Wanainchi who are surviving entirely on subsistence agriculture, and he quoted 68 percent of rural farmers. 

However, most of the government interventions are addressing the rural setting. Government has not addressed issues of urban people. We have so many youth, juveniles, who are in town but no Government programme is there to address their needs. As we plan for Bonna Bagaggawale, we should take into consideration the interests of the people in town as well. That is when we will minimise resentment on the government.  

The other issue pertains to health. I should still salute Government for the continued fight against Malaria. The people of Kigulu South in particular did ask me to convey their sincere appreciation to Government for the supply of mosquito nets that were recently given. Kigulu South at least got some reasonable numbers, they have Coartem too and the people say that we should seriously push and expedite the process of indoor DDT spraying. This will work to eliminate Malaria in the country. 

However, during last year’s State of the Nation Address, I did comment about the missing x-ray machine in Iganga Hospital, and they are still asking me to thank Government wholeheartedly because last week the machine was delivered to Iganga Hospital. They are really happy and proud of that. 

On USE, Bonna Basome, still Kigulu South has benefited. The four sub-counties that I represent have benefited but we still have a challenge as regards the pupils or students who scored between 28 and 32 points because they have remained in a junction. The year is coming to an end but their fate is not yet decided. As the year comes to an end, Government should come up to decide or determine the fate of these pupils so that they are either allowed to rebound or go to senior one next year. 

Lastly, on security, Security continues to be a challenge in one way or another. Whereas we have scored on national security – I was a month ago in Northern Uganda, the people there have began to have a smile on their faces and they are urging Government to be committed to the peace negotiations in Juba. I was in Karamoja, and the Karimojong too are happy because we have deployed heavily to safeguard them against the warriors who have been disturbing them. But they are saying though the disarmament programme is on, there is a programme called Karamoja Integrated Development Programme that they are agitating for. They say that in order to feel comfortable as part of Uganda, this programme should be taken on board.

Madam Speaker, allow me sneak in something small pertaining Kigulu South. On the 26th of March this year, one of my voters was abducted. I reported this case and it was registered at Katwe Police Post because he was a teacher in Lweza Secondary school along Entebbe road. All security organs have been informed about it. We had a suspect that we managed to hand over to the CID, but it is like Government has not come out openly to address this. It is at this material time that I should ask the concerned -(Interjection)- we wrote to him and we have contacted him several times, but the people of Kigulu South are really on my neck to put the Minister to task to account for their missing son. 

Madam Speaker, allow me as I wind up to lay on Table the photograph of the missing handsome gentleman from Kigulu South and the reports that we have made to the concerned security agencies, including the Minister for Internal Affairs. Thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Member, in laying it please tell us his name; inform us of the CRB number of the case so that the government can follow it up.

MR MUWUMA: Madam Speaker, the gentleman is called Sempa Samuel; he disappeared on 26th March this year; the case No.  CRB 2044/7 reported at Katwe Police Station in Kampala. He was a teacher at Lweza Secondary School along Entebbe Road. Madam Speaker, allow me lay on Table the photograph of the missing voter.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Guidance, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Those who are not able to speak today will speak tomorrow. We are sitting tomorrow at 10.00 a.m.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Guidance, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, honourable member.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Speaker, I want some guidance particularly on –(Interruption)

MR MUWUMA: Madam Speaker, allow me lay on Table the statement, the case number and the details of the suspected abductor and the abductee and the photograph of the missing gentleman.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, the Clerk to Parliament will extract the necessary information and pass it on to the Ministry of Internal Affairs with a copy to the Chief Whip.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The guidance I want is: I am seeing the attendance of the frontbench - I was calculating and the attendance percentage is at 4 percent. I am wondering whether it is right for us to proceed, and if it is right for us to proceed, why all the 69 people are not here at this particular time. Who is going to implement what we are discussing? I want guidance, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, for now I do not know whether we should not balance between giving Members opportunity to speak and then the Chief Whip and a few others to take on. If you want us to adjourn, I will adjourn but that means the five people I wanted to speak before we close will speak tomorrow and then there are others who are still waiting. 

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Kabakumba Masiko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. At this level, Government is noting the concerns raised by members and we did request that on Tuesday after they have all been given opportunity, Government should be given sometime to respond to Members issues and –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think their concern is that many of the sector people are not here.

MRS KABAKUMBA: That is what I am explaining, Madam Speaker. I am noting all the concerns for the various sectors and I will forward - as I always do- the concerns to the relevant ministers for response on Tuesday.

6.00
MR TOMSON KYAHURWENDA (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima):  Thank you, Madam Speaker for the opportunity to talk. I want to start by making one clarification for the benefit of hon. Santos Piro. Madam Speaker, Bunyoro, Hoima District, has never complained about any land grabbing. I think he was quoting Buliisa but I did not want to interrupt him. The cases are in Buliisa for Balaalo, but not in Hoima. (Interjection) He talked about Hoima, Madam Speaker, at least I was attentive.

I want to add my voice to thank His Excellency the President for the State of the Nation Address he made. I have two points to comment about: One is obviously on oil, which happens to be in Hoima District and currently in Buhaguzi Constituency. Madam Speaker, the people of Hoima in general asked me to thank the President and Government for having made a decision that the first refinery ever should be in Hoima and in Buhaguzi in Kabuya sub-county.

Madam Speaker, I have one particular point to appreciate on the President’s words. On page 22, he made a very good selection of the words he used. he said he wants to talk about our petroleum in quotes “our petroleum,” which means he is accepting that this petroleum is everybody’s concern and for everybody’s benefit. That is nationalism. 

But, Madam Speaker, I want to observe that in this country although it is our oil, the knowledge we have about oil is not equitably distributed. I had an opportunity to go to Norway in January this year, courtesy of the Speaker. While there, I observed that where the oil is located is not an issue; where the oil is situated is not an issue; where refineries are based is not an issue, but everybody in Norway knows that oil as his or her oil. I hope this should be the issue we should be addressing in Uganda today. When the President says our oil, to me that is the best word he should really have used as a nationalist. But then this depends on the good personality of the President we have today.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you taking the information.

MR KYAHURWENDA: Well, I may.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He will take it, hon. Otto.

MR OTTO: Thank you so much my friend from there for giving way. And since the government Chief Whip has stated that they will respond on Tuesday, I wanted to seek a clarification and give information as well that could it be possible for a special tour for members of Parliament to be taken to the oil rich Bunyoro and be educated on how things are, the status of issues? 

Why I am seeking that information, we may be here in Parliament while some people are already exporting the oil the way it happened to the gold of Karamoja. In Karamoja they just see planes going, it is now 15 years that you await the plane will come back. So, through the Chief Whip, could it be possible to make a firm commitment if we can be carried in a bus as members of Parliament and lectured on how the oil will be processed, where it will be transported so that it is our oil and our knowledge. That is the little clarification I want to seek.

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Madam Speaker, that one does not have to wait. Parliament has been there already several times through the Committee on Natural Resources. And they do not need to go to Buliisa or to Hoima to exactly know how oil will be processed. But I can assure you Parliament has visited the oil rich region.

MR WADRI: We should not take this issue of oil lightly. In 1996, the Ogoni people of Nigeria more especially Ken Saro-Wiwa was killed because of oil. And right now as we talk, the people of the Ogoni tribe in Nigeria are not even reaping from the oil wells in their area. When, therefore, we are saying these words, “our oil” and at the same time we would wish to caution the locals of that area so that they are first and foremost respected and taken on board as the “oil people” so that they can be able to share the wealth with other Ugandans. What assurance does Government have, let alone the praises that hon. Tom Kyahurwenda is heaping on Government, that what happened in Nigeria will not happen here, now that we are all satisfied that there is oil in Uganda?

MR KYAHURWENDA: Madam Speaker, I want to make one clarification.  We have so far seven wells completed but all of them are sealed so there is no production of oil yet. At least from that perspective, I have full confidence that oil is not being removed yet. In any case, the little knowledge I have is that oil in its original state is supposed to be waxy and it goes through a process to become liquid. All the seven wells which have been dug, one by Heritage and six by Tullow, are still under very tight lock. 

Madam Speaker, my concern was that today the President calls it “our oil” because he is a good President; what happens tomorrow, maybe 30 years from now, when FDC comes to power? That is my wish. Thirty years from now, I will not even be buried -(Laughter)- I want to call on the Parliament to assert itself. (Interruption) 

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am forced to raise a point of order against the honourable member. We are members of FDC and we are seeking to lead this country, to establish the next Government for Uganda. Is it in order for the member to insinuate that when the next Government, FDC, is in power - although this Government has not even put in place the oil policy – it will disrupt people who are around the oil wells? Is he in order to insinuate that what is happening in Bunyoro is a favour to an individual and from some Government? Is he in order? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think he was hoping that FDC would not take power. I think that is what he is really saying. (Laughter)

MR KYAHURWENDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Sincerely speaking, if I am alive in 30 years time, that is when I will give them my vote but not before that. However, what I was saying is that when I went to Norway in January this year, I realised that their Parliament - they call it Stortinget - is the one which controls oil proceedings. It is the Committee on Natural Resources and the Committee on the Economy, which is combined with Finance, and this talked about by everybody, even an old woman and a small child. They know Parliament is controlling their oil and the outcome is for everybody to enjoy. Can the same apply to Uganda, other than giving the information to only an individual whom I was saying today is good but tomorrow may not be the same. 

Given the text we also read - there is a paper which I have forgotten at home where they talked about one of the companies that are removing the oil now and it was not very favourable. Those who read that paper in the Monitor must have seen that the paper does not give you a good picture. Also remember the party we had to celebrate the oil discovery in Serena, I think it is not far from what they have written. 

What do we do as Parliament to ensure that we take over the management and control of resources like oil other than leaving it to the Office of the President? –(Mr Kibanzanga rose_)- Why don’t you allow me to continue? I want to appeal now; if Parliament is not given the authority or does not assert itself, how do we ensure that everybody responsible handles oil transparently for the benefit of us all and the future generation? 

On the ground, there is a problem. Oil is situated in the Rift Valley. That place is more or less a desert although there are human beings there. Accessibility is very difficult, the place is very dry and the soils are bare. In Norway, although the soils are almost the same, when they discovered oil they intensified the planting of trees so that the gases that are removed from the oils are absorbed. 

Much as we are rushing to accelerate the early production programme, there is no preparation. This is my constituency and it is even my sub-county. I go there almost every weekend but I see no arrangement on the ground to maybe make the place green. We are rushing for the oil, not caring about spillages and not preparing for any hazard that we are likely to face. 

Lastly, you know that place was a bit abandoned. It is a very remote place, but with the discovery of oil there is an influx of Bazungu and Chinese and the population is now too high. People are just taking to drinking and luxury. Can the Ministry of Health at least start up a programme for health education so that people are taught how to prevent, control and mitigate the effects of HIV? Otherwise, people are just getting money all of a sudden and they have started enjoying. There is no banking facility in that area, which is almost 60 kilometres from the town. I want to call on Government to put up a fast programme on health, developing infrastructure and making the place green. 

6.00
MS VICCY KYOKUHAIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the mover of the motion and the member who seconded. I also want to thank the President for his State of the Nation Address. 

On the issue of power shortage, the President in his speech mentioned some measures on how to reduce the problem. Kikagate, which is in my constituency, is one of the sites for hydro-electricity generation. A contract has already been signed between the government of Uganda and a Chinese company called Shang Chen. It was therefore a surprise to hear that the Uganda Electricity Distribution Company came in later asking for big sums of money for ground rent. This has delayed the construction work. I want to know from the government why it has not come in to solve the problem so that the company starts on its work. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Chief Whip, have you noted that UMEME is asking for ground rent before they start?

6.01
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Nakapiripirit District is largely rural; we do have iron sheets and we stay in a most acceptable environment. 

I am going to speak on one point where the President mentioned Karamoja. On page 14, the President says, “Karamoja is now getting peaceful. The impunity and lawlessness in Karamoja is ending.” This is true, and I want to congratulate the government of Uganda, His Excellency the President and this Parliament for taking an initiative to understand some of the challenges that Karamoja faces. 

One of the challenges is a historical fact concerning the presence of guns in Karamoja. Honourable members, most of us know that guns are in Karamoja and this is not the first time they have been there. Most people think that they came in 1979. The first time the Karimojong got many guns was as far back as 1910. Most of you must have heard about the Lamogi Rebellion in Acholi; guns were got from the Karimojong in exchange for metal. 

There has been disarmament and we are in the 23rd disarmament process of arrows, spears and many things. We are in the disarmament process of AK47s now. It is very important that we understand the socio-political situation of Karamoja in order to be able to help that part of Uganda. It is not just enough to remove guns. We are moving in the right direction as a country to disarm the Karimojong and reduce this impunity because the new technology has enhanced the number of people killed, the thefts and the rapes. However, this is not the only solution. I want us as Members of Parliament to understand this issue. 

In trying to help change and transform Karamoja, there must be other programmes that must be carried out. In my constituency, I have done studies; right now after almost 10 to 15 years of primary education and secondary education - and this is a small constituency of three sub-counties - there are over 478 school dropouts from senior one to senior six. Most of these people are neither in the village nor in the towns. They are in the middle there. We have generated a critical mass of people that could potentially transform Karamoja, and this is common in many other sub-counties. 

My argument is that if there was a chance - and this is an opportunity which has been created by the NRM Government – we can be able to push people through primary education and win them over from this lawlessness, and I think we have an opportunity for Karamoja to be given affirmative action. It was my first time to hear the affirmative action that hon. Bitamazire was talking about yesterday for Northern Uganda. This is a programme by the government of Uganda to pay boarding fees for students in secondary school and take them to school. This has been the problem Karamoja has been facing. When it comes to programmes like that, we are not in the North. When it comes to this country, we want to be defined also in terms of affirmative action. (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that programme was specific for children of some of the IDPs who are not earning any income.

MR REAGAN OKUMU: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform my honourable colleague that actually apart from what Government centrally does through the respective ministries, there have been a number of affirmative action programmes especially in Karamoja. 

In the education sector, there has been affirmative action called ABEKA, which you know very well. This has been in addition to what the Ministry of Education has been doing. I can also tell you that right before 1995, there was Karamoja Development Agency (KDA) which was also specific for Karamoja. At the moment, we have what you call NUSAF. It is also affirmative action which is meant for the affected North and parts of eastern Uganda, which Karamoja is also enjoying.

On top of that, recently, there was a programme that was launched, I think last week, in Kitgum District by the European Commission. It is again affirmative action towards Northern Uganda including Karamoja. It was launched in Kitgum and these people moved - they spent nights in Tororo again to launch the Karamoja sector. 

I can assure you that you can rest assured these programmes are there. The best you can do is to get in touch with the Prime Minister’s Office because most of these programmes have their bases there. What is taking place centrally is for the whole country.

MR ACHIA: I thank you very much for the information. Probably the example I gave was not good, but what I was trying to underscore is that there is an opportunity to change that part of Uganda, not only through removing these mobile phones - like the rest of Uganda, when you lose a mobile phone you get another one - but now we want to have an opportunity to permanently change that area. We want to transform that area, and all of us know that education is the best tool for social change and transformation. I am here because of education, and we can break the cycle of violence in Karamoja if 80 young men recruited into this kind of theft and so on are taken to school. 

Now we have an opportunity with this group in senior one to senior six. If there was affirmative action to sponsor through school, university and everywhere, those will be the seeds of change, the growth poles for social transformation in Karamoja. Within a period of even six years, I can assure you if we get them from senior one to senior six, you will see Karamoja a different place. It will be peaceful permanently and sustainably. People will have the skills to have alternative livelihoods and not to think that it is only the gun or anything else. They will even open up and relate with the rest of Ugandans. 

I can tell you it is about the perception of people because of limited knowledge and lack of exposure. When I go to my constituency, they ask me, “how is Uganda?” They do not feel that they are in Uganda. We have to educate them. They are Ugandans, they are part of this country and they must contribute to the wellbeing of this country. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

6.10
MR SIMON EUKU (UPC, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to make my observations relating to the State of the Nation Address.  

My first observation is based on the security in this country. The President was very elaborate, and I would like to quote some statement that the President made on page 13: “Since the Congo Government did not allow us to operate against Kony in Congo, I accepted Gen. Salva Kiir’s proposal to initiate peace talks in Juba.”  

Madam Speaker, the statement was very provocative and it lacked goodwill. I am aware for 20 years the NRM Government has been fighting against the LRA and the solution was not reached. However, if a head of state can make such a statement at the time when we are almost reaching a conclusive understandable agreement, it is very unfortunate. I would rather, if possible, that such statements during this time should not be issued by any of the government officials. 

That statement gives me a conviction that there are some few members within our nation who feel that security belongs to them and they belong to security. I am aware that the security in this country belongs to everybody, and everybody within this country knows why and how you want security. All of us need security and we are all responsible. I do not see a reason why a statement of that nature is issued by the head of state during a time when all Ugandans expect him to issue a statement that heals the wounds that could have been damaged sometime back. 

I would like also, as I talk about security, to quote Article 218 and 219 of the Constitution of Uganda relating to the formation of the National Intelligence Service and the National Security Council. When the President was making his statement, he was silent on the issue of the National Security Council. Article 219 reads: “There shall be a National Security Council which shall consist of the President as Chairperson and such other members as Parliament may determine.” 

As I said, security is not a one man’s show. The Constitution has given us a way forward on how security can be handled in this country. Unfortunately, some sectors or some persons within the government want to believe that they are the masters of security in this country. That is why I think the security in this country is at stake.

Article 218 reads: 
“(1) Parliament may by law establish intelligence services and may prescribe their composition, functions and procedures. 

(2) No intelligence service shall be established by the government except by or under an Act of Parliament.” It is now one year since I came to this Parliament and the Executive is silent on the issue and the President was very silent in his address. This makes me very sceptical about the pertinent issues of security in this country.

My second point is on prosperity for all. The President talked about it when he was talking about the economy. On page 27, the President says: “On ‘bonna bagagawale’, the Cabinet and the Movement caucus have agreed on how we are going to change the lifestyles of 68 percent of the households that were identified as still being in the subsistence agricultural sector…” 

This reminds me of how this House is so polarised; instead of the President talking of the Cabinet and the Parliament of Uganda, he said the Parliament of Uganda belongs to the Movement caucus. It is a very unfortunate statement that a head of state can issue in his address. The statement undermines the credibility of the author – (Interruption) – I am not taking information. The statement does not define the role of Parliament instead it defines the role of the Movement caucus. If this country is to move forward, then we have to change the attitude under which issues are handled. 

I would like also to say something more on bonna bagagawale. I am aware that some money has already been disbursed but it is very unfortunate that no policy has been put in place to guide the Minister or the stakeholders on how that money is supposed to be used. How safe do you think this Parliament, which acts in the oversight function, can really be in ensuring the safety of the resources being given to the people of this country? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up.

MR EUKU: I have several things to handle; probably let me talk about the national service. Madam Speaker, I appreciate the effort of the government and I appreciate the way members of the Movement Caucus went to Kyankwanzi and they did whatever they could. However, I would like to suggest that the Cabinet and the government put up a policy under which the national service should be conducted. I am aware that the issue of national service is within the Constitution. If it is within the Constitution, why do we do it stealthily? It is as if the government wants some section of people to be trained and get some military skills while other sections remain dormant. 

I would like to say something about human rights. The President talked about human rights – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please conclude. Colleagues want to speak.
   
MR EUKU: Madam Speaker, I do not think now I will continue. I had wanted to say something about human rights but since I have limited time, I will take my seat. I thank you.

6.17
MR ALBERT ODUMAN (FDC, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will just summarise my points on about three areas. A lot has been said about Government programmes and the haste in which they are being implemented. One is the education programme. In the statement by the President, there is an attempt to celebrate the success of some of those programmes like UPE. He said that people thought UPE would not work but now it has worked. 

In implementing change initiatives, one of the risks that can damn the whole programme is attempting to celebrate early. I would like to give an example of what is happening in Bukedea. In 2001, there were 7,452 pupils enrolled in primary one. In 2007, the number waiting to sit Primary Leaving Examinations (PLE) is 2,184 pupils. The children who have dropped off from school are 5,268 over a period of seven years; of these, 71 percent were boys and 72 percent were girls. Before USE, the transition rate from P.7 to S.1 was only five percent. Now, out of about 29 percent who completed P.7, only five percent are going to S.1. What is the problem? This is what we need to analyse. If the drivers of these programmes are willing, I think the direction to go is to see what to do to salvage these programmes, because we have spent money already. 

To me, the problems with these programmes are two; one of them is costs in primary education. There are direct costs and there are indirect costs. The direct ones are exercise books, uniforms and money for lunch. Last week I was in the village and I found a child with a torn uniform, but he told me that the main reason he had not been to school for over one week was because he did not have Shs 2,000 to contribute to the fund to grind maize at school in order to have a meal for those who are in P.7. This is a real problem. 

If a child has no exercise books, no money for food or no uniform, what do we do? There is already a public statement saying that whoever turns away children from school should be arrested. I think we need to make this more explicit. We should not just apply a lecture method for whoever comes in. It should not be that we teach whoever does not have uniform. What is the position of Government on this? It is important for Government to come out on this because all those are direct costs.  

Is the cost of Primary Leaving Examination (PLE) an indirect cost? I think that education is still a choice; it is not yet compulsory. You can do other things other than sitting PLE. You can go and do casual labour or you can get married. It is somebody’s choice. The causes of these dropout rates are the better alternatives that are more relevant to the pressing needs of the people in the communities as compared to the need to study in primary school. The challenge for Government now is to make primary education more relevant to the needs of the people.  

At the conception of the UPE programme, the idea was that at the complete cycle of primary education, somebody would be able to acquire some skills to make him or her move on. However, that is not the way it has gone. What is left is to have the number of dropouts reduced.  

The other issue is: what then do we do as Government? It is true that 72 percent of the pupils have dropped out of schools. Are we just saying sorry to them? Should we try to improve the dropout rate or should we come up with another programme like a go-back-to-school programme? Do we forget about those? That is a challenge for us because when we go to the villages, those are the people we meet and many of them ask for ideas on how to cope with life. Madam Speaker, that was on education.  

The other issue I would like to comment about is on bona bagaggawale or prosperity for all. I will just concentrate on recommendations. A lot has been said about bonna bagaggawale but there are three things I recommend, which I think will help salvage this programme:

One is the policy, and that has already been talked about. We need to bring a policy here for discussion. Once you bring a policy, you will have brought all the recommendations of the people of this country, irrespective of their political party affiliations, and I think those recommendations will enrich that policy.

The second is to stop politicising this programme. Let us remove the yellow tag from it. Already, some of us are participating in educating the communities about how the rural finance strategy is going to work, but it is on the understanding that this programme is a Government programme and not an NRM party programme. So, remove the yellow tag from this programme.

Lastly, you need to make sure that the position of women is prioritised. I want us to borrow the model of the Grameen Bank. There are more poor women in Uganda than men. I think that the only way to root poverty out of Uganda is through the financial empowerment of a woman. I have already agreed with the men in Bukedea that when this money goes there, they should put women at the front row. I think that women can do better in such programmes. If you have something small in the community, say chicken rearing business, and both the men and women are asked to keep the money, you will realise that the way women spend it is not the same way the men do. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to only comment on the President’s reference to corruption by citing a case in Bugisu and Kamuli where some ladies asked the President for kamapesa. In Kamuli some women said “give us some money”. I thought these were not very good cases for seriously discussing corruption in this country.  

Madam Speaker, we are well aware that during election time, the President remains the President of Uganda; he does not step down. History over the past 20 years shows that people have learnt to approach the President for assistance, whether during elections or not. In many cases, people have asked for districts and the President has always promised to give them the districts. So, these particular cases where people asked for kamapesa because of their particular need do not relate very well to corruption during election time. I think people usually do such things because they know that at that time the President is still the President of Uganda and he has a vote for donations.  

There is no doubt that the history of envelopes in this country has taught people that when you have access to the President and you ask, he is an understanding person and he can act. So, to cite these particular cases was not a fair thing on the part of the President. It was a bit too much on these ladies. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.27
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity to respond to the State of the Nation Address by the President, which is his constitutional duty. I must say that unlike hon. Okello-Okello, I was present and I benefited from the comments, the text and body language. That aside, I want to say that I will not respond to everything. I just want to comment on a few things.  

One is the question of going to Kyankwanzi. I think we have to understand this very well. I have been to Kyankwanzi and I spent three months there. I know that averagely, military training takes six months. There is already a contradiction here because whereas the spokesperson for the NRM Party, hon. Mary Okurut, stated that going there was a party retreat, some members insist that that was military training. If that is correct, then this is endangering our country. 

They were even saying that it is a constitutional duty. I found this strange. How could we deceive our people, take them to Kyankwanzi for a few days and bring them back convinced that they are now militarily prepared to defend the country? My appeal is that if there is such an arrangement, please prepare to go for training for some good months so that you can undergo well organised military training and not political education.

Secondly, I want to comment on the issue of constitutionalism and the rule of law in this country. I have been a victim of the lack of respect of constitutionalism and the rule of law many times, but I do not want to comment on that. During my period of incarceration in Luzira Prison, I talked to so many Ugandans and I can tell you that there are many Ugandans who are suffering in prisons. Many are on remand and others have stayed for years beyond the mandatory period of remand. I find this extremely very unfair. Something must be done.  

I stayed in Luzira Upper Prison and I want to tell you that it is a bad place to live in. The environment under which our people who are suspects live in is bad. From that experience, I would like to call upon our Government to focus more on the reform and rehabilitation programmes for prisons. I also appeal to Government to adhere to constitutionalism and the rule of law by ensuring that people do not over stay in prison simply because the courts are not functional or somebody who put them there is simply not available, or investigations are not complete.

Madam Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to also say that while in Luzira I came to know a number of people. In May I was not in the country most of the time. When I came back, I heard that one of the PRA suspects or some of them had died at Makindye military cells. I met with a strong defence from the army spokesman who said that there was nothing and that that was a total lie. I believed the army spokesman. However, when I went to my constituency, I was approached by people who gave me a death certificate. When I read it, I discovered that this was the gentleman that I knew. He was in Luzira, where I met him and we talked, and he had been transferred to Makindye Prison afterwards. 

When we talk about constitutionalism and the rule of law, this is not what we mean. The death certificate was from the General Military Hospital, dated 11 May 2007. The post-mortem request form was for Oboma David; age: 32; Tribe: Acholi; Rank: civilian; Army number: civilian; unit: care of military Police. A brief report about the illness says that he died of high fever, and the date of his death was 10 May at 1.00 a.m. at the General Military Hospital. The suspected cause of death was unknown. It was requested by the C.O., General Military Hospital.

There was also a medical certificate of death from Mulago Hospital, dated 12th, the following day. It is recorded here that he was last seen dead on the 12th. The family narrated to me a lot of things. They said that even retrieving the body was extremely difficult, that the ICRC had to help them. If this is the rule of law and constitutionalism you are talking about, I find it strange and unacceptable. Beyond this statement, we are going to take additional action because this is not how we are going to treat our citizens who are suspects; just letting them die like that! I take this opportunity to lay the copies of this death certificate on the Table.

Madam Speaker, the other thing that I want to comment on is security. The President talked about security. I have been in this Parliament since the Sixth Parliament and I want to tell you that we are very happy with the Members of Parliament in this session. You visited the North without us, you have been concern about the North, you have raised issues on this Floor about our people in the North and really helped us a great deal. This is a departure from 1996. I used to sit in that corner and we were a lone voice. We were looked at as enemies, as rebel collaborators. Even people who are our allies today were not then, but because we were speaking the truth we stood by it. I am happy that today there is negotiation and high hope that the North will stabilise. (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Okumu, just for the record of this House; I am aware that during the Sixth Parliament the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, chaired by Col. Mudoola, was assigned to look unto the issues of the North and they spent a lot of time on this. So, when you say that people were not sensitive, you are not exactly right.

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was in the Sixth Parliament and I used to sit there. With due respect to our colleagues who were from Northern Uganda then, whenever you stood up to present a case on Northern Uganda they would say, “You do not know what is happening there; you need to go there”, even when you have just been there. Hon. Mao used to sit right behind me. 

It is only recently that they changed. I think they realised that the burden was too much and they opted to make this a national issue and bring it to the national agenda. However, in the Sixth Parliament we were almost prohibited from talking about the Northern question and the suffering of the people there by our own colleagues in this House. I was here and I used to support them, but I would be disregarded as someone who did not know what was happening in Northern Uganda. 

MR RUHINDI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was a backbencher in the Seventh Parliament and I used to sit in the “legal corner”. In the Seventh Parliament, there was a popular and very controversial motion that was moved in this House to declare the North a disaster area. It was so controversial that some of us who negotiated it also had problems with it. The motion was moved by hon. Dora Byamukama and I seconded it. We were certainly for the people of the North.

I represent Nakawa Constituency in this Parliament. This constituency is a small Uganda. What happens in the North affects both my people of Nakawa Constituency and me directly. I have always felt the breeze from the North. You know that very well, hon. Reagan Okumu. We normally met in Biina Church and we associate in many places. You know how ready some of us are to advocate for the peace in this country.

That aside, I want you to flashback to the documents you have laid on the Table. I would want to know when that information first came to your knowledge. I would have expected that in the spirit with which you were talking, you would have accessed the relevant officials on this side, particularly the relevant ministers, with that information to do research on it and come here with a statement or otherwise on that very important issue you have raised. You see, sometimes when you bring it at such a stage, there is a tendency to think that there is lack of coordination, interface and cooperation. That is not the spirit in which you were talking. So, I would like to urge that in future, let us be seen to work together rather than being adversaries working in a confrontational manner.

MR OKUMU: I totally agree with what hon. Ruhindi is talking about. Madam Speaker, you were also in the Sixth Parliament when we came here, you remember very well the tone at the first stage when it was moved that a select committee be established. The Hansard is there. Actually, I always read the Hansard of the beginning of the Sixth Parliament about the war in the North. When I read the Hansard of the later sittings of Parliament, there is a difference. It is clear that people eventually came to embrace this issue of Northern Uganda. 

You remember that even when the motion was moved after the report of that committee was brought here, the most critical issue was the question of dialogue, which was extremely touching. So I was simply saying that talking about the North in 1996 was not easy because it would cause hostility and tension. Later on, we have even seen Members of Parliament who are not from the North initiating their own trips to the North. 

The reason we moved the motion to have a Parliament committee to investigate the war in the North was precisely for the Members of Parliament to see for themselves, investigate and come up with a report that they would own and which would reveal lot of things. In fact, that committee helped the Sixth Parliament to highlight a number of issues and to understand the whole situation.  

On security, we are very grateful for this stage, and we are very confident that the process in Juba will deliver peace. However, I am also disturbed. If I go back to what hon. Ruhindi was saying, that we should get in touch with the relevant ministers, in this case I do not know how many times I have approached hon. Crispus Kiyonga on a number of peace related issues. We have met quite a number of times, including on this very matter. 

I want to bring to your attention another issue related to security. The President clearly stated that the North was stabilising. However, I can assure you that in May another old woman was killed in a protected camp in my constituency. This was on the eve of the burial of one of the soldiers who died in Somalia - you know one of the soldiers we lost was from my constituency. Unfortunately, this elderly woman who was shot was also related to the soldier. 

What shocked me - and I have drawn this to the attention of the Minister of Defence – was that the army spokesman in Northern Uganda said that the burial of Private Kilama coincided with the killing of an elderly woman, Regina Angi, 65 years old. She was killed by two UPDF sentries in a mango forest 200 metres from the IDP camp, at 3.00 a.m. Angi had earlier in the day been attending a funeral in the camp but allegedly drunk a lot of waragi in the process. She lost her way and ended up in the bushes. In the fire exchange of the sentries, she was shot dead. 

If this report is true, and indeed no one has disputed it, one is left to wonder what else these soldiers could have done given the circumstances and the LRA threat. Honourable members, this was in May and you know very well that the situation in the North has now really stabilized. Now, if our army can shoot a 65-year-old woman and the army spokesman comes out to defend it, then it is extremely unfortunate and discouraging. 

Soldiers are trained first and foremost to disarm people who are armed. When they fail, then you shoot to disable that person in order to arrest. Killing is the last resort. To shoot a person who is not armed and elderly, I find it extremely strange. I have drawn this to the attention of the Minister of Defence and I ask him to take some action. So, I want to take this opportunity to lay a copy of this on the Table.

Lastly, let me talk about corruption. First of all, I want to welcome the President’s comments on corruption. I have worked in the Office of the IGG before. My second job after leaving university was in the Office of the IGG. After that, I came to Parliament. At that time we used to report to the President’s Office and I know a lot –(Interruption)

MR ACHIA: Thank you very much, hon. Reagan, for giving way. Listening to hon. Reagan Okumu, it seems that he has been given room to express some of these issues and to meet with the relevant people. However, on the other scale, one of the problems we have in this country is localising or framing issues. When we frame issues, like those in the North, the perception and spirit with which you explain them should be widened to suit the general context of the country and our history right from the 60s, and 70s where people were called names; I do not want to mention the names. 

We have now finished the bigger things and have come to the issue of what we are talking about today, like the issue of the Balaalo. I think we are on the right track because we can now talk about people and issues, and you know that some institutions would not authorise it. So, sometimes the problem is with the individuals. We have faced this before in Karamoja. We were able to talk with the leadership of the UPDF, the President and Dr Crispus Kiyonga. I am happy you referred to Dr Kiyonga because he has spent nights in my constituency. Together with him, we have found that individuals who are poorly brought up cause some of these problems. 

We always recruit people who are recommended by the LC I to join the UPDF. They always recommend the worst men in the village, like those who steal chicken, and sometimes that spirit does not leave them. So I would like you to discuss it from that perspective instead of associating it with the whole institution. Some of the things that happen can be traced back in the history of the individuals. You may find that the individual is born with them and the institution has nothing to do with it. We are still struggling with modernizing our institutions – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But that is a lot of information. Please, wind up honourable Okumu. 

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, I did not like to go into that. I was talking about corruption. I said that I worked in the Office of the IGG and when I came to Parliament, I belonged to the Public Accounts Committee. Corruption is getting more complex and we should focus more on the complexity of its forms because it changes form. If yesterday he was stealing actual cash, today it may be a different thing. I welcome what the President said and I hope he is going to stand by it. As far as fighting corruption is concerned, at least I have known him right from the time we used to report to him in the institution of the IGG and I hope that he will now take note.  

I think that we should take stringent measures. If I, a Member of Parliament, think I have my role and responsibility properly prescribed, it would be wrong for me to go and infringe on the budget of the Ministry of Health and say, “give me this money so that I can go and carry out these activities” yet Ministry of Health can do that. 

I have a document here where such practices have been done. Money was given to a politician yet our financial regulations are very clear; it is the accounting officers who are supposed to handle Government funds. It is not we, the politicians, not even the ministers or whoever. However, here there is a voucher of over Shs 200 million written in the name of a minister, claiming that this money is going to be taken to some individual somewhere to carry out the activities of this ministry. I find it strange. 

This particular case was for the Ministry of Health. Some office requested for funds and the funds were given in the name of the minister, and the minister carried the cash to deliver it somewhere. When you go through the details –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: When you say that this money was requisitioned by another office, in my mind you mean an office outside the Ministry of Health. These are matters of national importance. We know the purpose for which the money you are talking about was given was not fulfilled and Ugandans are still bleeding for it. Ugandans are mourning; especially when they look back at the people they have lost who would probably be saved if this money was properly utilized. So, could you please have our minds focused by telling us which office released that voucher which you have shown us in the names of a minister, and which minister you have not disclosed? You are saying the money was taken to another office; can you be open so that we all get to know? Thank you.

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, we have come across a number of things including one which became public. The Committee on Public Accounts asked one of the ministers to refund the money because he was not the rightful accounting officer. In this case, it is the Office of the First Lady requesting for money from the Minister of Health for health advocacy conferences and requesting the Minister of State for Health, General Duties. Following discussions and as a result of that, the ministry was left with no option but to give this money to the Minister. They wrote the voucher in the name of the Minister and eventually this money was collected in cash by the Minister. I find this really part and parcel of corruption. That is why I say corruption is changing form. What is meant for Ministry of Health should be for Ministry of Health. If we infringe on the budgets of Ministry of Health, then we have no right tomorrow to blame Ministry of Health for not delivering. This is because the funds get diverted.

I want to also lay this document on Table. It is about health advocacy conferences by the First Lady. It contains all the details from State House, for the consumption of members. I think this is an element of corruption that should not be entertained.

Finally, I want to reassure people who come from Bundibugyo, Hoima, Nebbi, Amuru, Adjumani, Moyo and Arua where prospects of oil are, to be comfortable because when FDC takes over, you will definitely have a share of this. (Laughter) So, do not be alarmed; the resources are ours. There will be social responsibilities by whoever will be minding this, which will be part and parcel of what will be left for the people. My brother from Bunyoro, be assured that after third term we have to enter a new chapter. Resources for this country belong to everybody. Governments come and go but the resources of this country remain. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had indicated that hon. Obua would speak last but I think we have done enough. Will you start in the morning? We can give you opportunity to start in the morning.

MR OBUA-OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I will be very brief. I have a burial to attend tomorrow. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please be brief.

6.54
MR BENSON OBUA-OGWAL (UPC, Moroto County, Lira): I would like to thank you very much for allowing me to say a few words on the State of the Nation Address of the President. I thank the President for gradually getting away from blaming past leaders. During these two years, I have observed that he has steered clear from blaming past leaders. We hope this will continue. You know in Africa we like passing the buck for everything; we have to blame people who have come before us, even up to pre-colonial times. I want us to start looking at things more positively and delve into the future.

Having said that, I would like to thank the President and the entire Government for accepting to talk peace with the LRA. We are now very optimistic in Northern Uganda that peace will finally come. We are hoping for that day when the signatures will be appended to the impending agreement.

I, however, would like to note that my people will be very concerned when I travel to Moroto County tomorrow and tell them about the President’s speech. Much as they are now going back voluntarily - in my constituency over 97 percent of the IDPs are already in their homes - they will ask me what the President said in his State of the Nation Address about resettling them. Nothing was said about resettlement. 

Last year, however, the President was very elaborate on resettling the IDPs. I have with me here the Hansard of 8 June 2006 where the President said: “Nevertheless the government will not be discouraged but will ensure that the return of the people to their villages is carried out as smoothly as possible with the necessary security provisions in the villages they are returning to. Honourable members should give us all the support. I would like to warn those handling the exercise not to misappropriate the items which are supposed to be for the people as they return to their villages. Anybody caught doing so will be dealt with sternly.”

Madam Speaker, a lot has been going on in the resettlement front. People have been deprived of what is meant for them. They cannot resettle and dig with their hands. They need hoes. They need seeds. Actually, I foresee famine in most parts of Lango because people cannot dig yet the rains are there. The items which have been procured, including tool kits, are either of low quality or they stop somewhere. So, I was a little disappointed that the President did not touch on resettlement. I do hope this will be handled as we go along.

I would like to thank the President very much for talking about HIV/AIDS and calling for the people of Uganda not to relax and become complacent. He talked about how useful ARVs are, much as they are not vaccines or a cure. I want to thank him and I totally agree with him on the issue of HIV/AIDS. The gain that we have made as a country is enormous. If we are not careful, we will reverse these gains and yet Uganda has gained a respectable place in the international community because of its very positive achievements in the field of fighting AIDS.

Another issue of great concern is the fact that there seems to be uncoordinated movement of troops in the treatment of people living with HIV. There are organisations which seem to be fighting for funds for treating people living with HIV/AIDS. In the New Vision of 29 June 2007, there are reports about two organisations that seem to be struggling over people living with HIV. In my understanding, there are so many people in this country who have HIV/AIDS and for them to be seen to be fighting over people living with HIV defeats my understanding. I think there is something unethical about this advertisement. I would like to ask that something be done about this situation. 

There are two organisations, a new one and an older one. The newer organisation is calling for patients who are already having treatment while the older organisation had already secured funding from donors and built confidence in their method of work. The new organisation is calling those clients to cross over to them and yet they are very new and may not be able to handle the situation. This to me will make us lose the fight. This fight is for all of us and it is for the generation to come. We need to join hands to ensure that we do it in an orderly way. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, tomorrow we will start with hon. Masiko, followed by hon. Tinka, hon. Anne Auru, hon. Grace Oburu, hon. Sabano, hon. Elioda, hon. Wasike, hon. Gyabi, the worker and hon. Gudoi. We shall then get a few members from this side.

Thank you very much. The House convenes at 10 o’clock tomorrow morning. The House is adjourned.    

(The House rose at 7.03 p.m. and adjourned to Friday, 27 July 2007 at 10.00 a.m.)

