Tuesday, 27th July, 1993

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice- Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair).

The Council was called to order.

MOTION

That the National Resistance Council do resolve itself into a Committee of Supply for the consideration and approval of:

(i) The Revised Revenue and Expenditure Estimates for the Fiscal Year 
    1992/93.

(ii) The Budgetary Proposals for the Fiscal Year 1993/94 Estimates of Revenue 
      and Expenditure.

(Debate continues from 22nd July 1993).

MR. RWAKAKOOKO (Ruhama County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for allowing me on the third consecutive day by default to finalise my contribution. When we broke off last time, I had reached to the point of the need for the Ministry of Finance to establish the taxable capacity of the nation.  What I had also mentioned was that currently the Minister for Finance is collecting revenue from only 14 sources and I had suggested that 14 sources are very few and inadequate, and therefore, this is the reason why in the desire to collect more money, the Ministry of Finance levies very, very high tax rates, one the few items.  

Since we broke off, we have had few interactions with the people who pay substantial taxes to our exchequer, and there is a lot of grumbling out there. Statistics which have been produced to us show that the centres from where substantial funds are collected are going to be in a fix because first of all, their sales are going to go down, then their production is going to decline and therefore, finally the Ministry of Finance will not manage to collect the tax they have anticipated to collect.  

In view of this, I would like to appeal to the Minister for Finance to study carefully the likely impact of very, very high taxes so that we can obtain the quantum that is desirable for financing the Budget.  It is not sufficient just to levy a rate that you cannot collect.  I would also like to suggest, that the Ministry of Finance deliberately injects funds into the sectors of the economy, target those areas from which more money in tax will be levied.  If you go out on the streets there you will find that agriculture has been replaced by consumption purchases.  I am particularly, concerned about the rate at which we are purchasing very, very expensive Recurrent Expenditure consuming items like Pajero vehicles among others. I think we should set our expenditure patterns very clearly and correctly and avoid purchasing those items that are going to over burden our recurrent expenditure.  If they were purchased by individuals, I would not mind; all I would do is to fix an import tax rate that is fitting; but this Pajeros are purchase on public expenditure, and therefore, they add on the extra burden in the form of cost of fuel and maintenance costs.

I now want to turn to the financial management of the economy.  I had mentioned earlier on, that the Committee on the Economy finds some difficulties in getting information about how the Budgets are being implemented. This position is still true, and I would like to appeal to the Minister to come out when he is winding up to explain why he is not prepared to avail information to the Sectoral Committee.  

I would also like to suggest that when the Sectoral Committees are hopefully made permanent, they critically examine the implementation of these Budgets, because we pass these budgets here and when they go out for implementation it appears as if we have done nothing in this House.  I would like a situation when this august House is kept informed this august House very effectively contributes so that finally the budget belongs to the whole nation.  

This also now takes me to the recommendations of Sectoral Committees.  These too have been ignored, one of which was that this august House through its committees should deliberate ahead of the budget day all items of expenditure. The first problem we had here was that even Expenditure Estimates were brought, when we were already debating this Budget.  I think we must avoid this kind of lax methods of work, we must plan properly because it is not a very good show to the nation for the national Managers of Finance to keep having excesses, bringing information late, not consulting, varying approvals of this House, because I had heard that the Ministry of Finance in fact now is in the habit of transferring between Development and Recurrent Votes, this is not permissible.  

So, I would like to suggest, therefore, that when the committees, the Sectoral Committees, are deliberating individual items, they critically look at what happened.  I am saying so because we have just approved a supplementary expenditure of Shs.20.6 million, but we have not seen, and yet we know that during the year, there were items that were suspended.  So that means, therefore, that in fact Shs. 20.6 billion was not the only extra expenditure incurred as we also know that there are some Bills which are not yet settled.  I think, there is a need for salary examination of the management of these votes.  	

I now want to move to just two final points, so that I can leave my Colleagues to also have an opportunity to contribute. The first of those two is that for a long, time now, the Ministry of Finance has been enjoying the subsidy of the Central Bank and yet it cannot extend the subsidy to others.  I would suggest, therefore, that the subsidy of Central Bank to the Ministry of Finance comes to a stop immediately.  What do I mean?  What I mean is that Letters of Credit for the Ministry and for the Government are opened free of charge, all financial transactions of Government are handled free of charge, now, you cannot have a comprehensive picture of the economy once some of its subsidized and others are not subsidized.  

So, I would like to suggest that the Ministry of Finance begins to pay the full cost of Services by the Bank of Uganda so that we do not have a problem tomorrow when we come here to discuss the loss incurred by the Central Bank.  You see, the true situation would be, if the commercial institutions improve in their liquidity position and they no longer have to pay penalties for their overdrawn accounts, you are likely to have the Bank of Uganda running at a loss.  We must protect the Bank of Uganda by making sure that its services are paid for.  

Another aspect, is the Ministry of Finance holding many dormant accounts at the Central Bank. Recently, I have, only on one account, drawn the attention of the Minister for Finance, that there is Shs.4.5 billion lying out there doing nothing; and I have suggested to him that instead of the money laying there, if he knew as I am sure he should, that money, should go to fixed deposit account to earn the Treasury some money. (Interjection)- Before you give me some point of information, let me also help you, I have got the liberty to do so.  I would like to suggest to the Minister for Finance that there are also many accounts that are lying idle in the Central Bank, unattended to and probably unknown, I am only giving him information, a hint so that he can go and find out there.  Now, I can accept information from him. (Interruption)

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: Point of information. Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform hon. Elly Rwakakooko, that it is not true that we have balances in Central Bank that we are not aware if that is not true.  The Shs.4 billion he is talking about is the proceeds from the sale of Government assets, and a law is pending to come through the House to determine how that money can be used; that is the PERD proceeds from the sale of our assets.  If it were not for that law, to respect Parliament to determine on how that money can be used, Treasury would have invested that money, but it is because we are waiting for you to decide on how money secured or got from sale of properties can be utilised.  So that that does not mean that we do not know that this money is in the Central Bank because we are the ones who put it there.

MR. RWAKAKOOKO: Mr. Chairman, I thank the Minister for having confirmed that actually, there is money which is lying there idle not earning him any interest.  Now, I do not think that the Minister is a novice in the matter of financial management, what I was saying, and a I would like to be on record for confirming this is that while the PERD Bill is in the offing, that money can be invested temporarily on a fixed deposit on short term for earning the Treasury Interests Shs.4.5 billion and above is not small money.  So, I want the Minister to continue building up that money so that when Parliament finally decides he has a bigger cake than the one that was left to him to just put there and watch.  

I would like also to suggest that the Minister actually visits the Central Bank in terms of those accounts he says he knows about because f he knows about them, what is he doing about them? They are still also laying idle as the other one.  I want to further suggest, as we have done so already, that the rates of taxes in the economy should be coordinated because you cannot have a drive for reduced inflation to minus points while you are not caring about the redeployment of people whose employment would naturally be affected by issues like anti-inflationary measures.  The Minister for Finance fortunately happens also to be the Minister for Economic Planning.  Once you have a drive to fight inflation successfully, you must be prepared to re-plan the numbers of the unemployed on the streets.  So, it is not just that you have fought inflation yet you have forgotten about other aspects.  I think there must be coordinated planning, there must be strategic planning, the methodology, in any case, which is used where they just write numbers and numbers are matched against number is not quite healthy for our economic development.

I also want again to tie in the issue of UEB tariffs.  Everybody in this House, everybody in this country would like to see UEB develop, would like to see UEB make no loss; but a situation where the UEB tariffs throw out the production sector because rates are too high, is certainly not a well coordinated move.  Moreso, when the argument is that to collect that money is to enable UEB to finance further development, you do not collect money ahead and then be able to start development because we are still in a deficit budgeting where even the recurrent revenue cannot match our Recurrent Expenditure.  So, we have nothing to move from Recurrent Account to the Development Budgets, so how do you again, if you do not have the capacity to sustain your recurrent budget, go and   tax on the development?  This is what I call uncoordinated economic policies.  I think there is need -(Interruption)

DR. BYARUHANGA:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, I would like to give information and at the same time reinforce the point raised by hon. Rwakakooko on the Floor that the abrupt raise of tariffs by UEB has a multiple effect on other factors of the economy.  For example, some of the biggest consumers of electricity like National Water and Sewerage Corporation would have to raise the tariffs, to meet these expenses and it will make the consumption of water very difficult for many consumers in Kampala.  Thank you.

MR. WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  May I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that not banking Shs.4 billion on interest earning account costs this country Shs.33 million every month.  So for a year it is Shs.400 million or Shs.4 billion.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that, UEB is created by an Act of this Parliament, and it is true that UEB is playing an uncoordinated game for it to seek to adjust its tariff, if you care to read the UEB Act properly, you will find that it has to come back to this House, so hat whatever it wants to do, should have the blessing of this place because already consumers are crying and the next move will be only to go back to firewood, other than this one which has become unbearable to the consumers.

MR. BARIGYE:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  May I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor and the House too that, in fact the tariffs - the electricity tariffs in the rural areas and the cost of electrification is completely prohibitive.  In my own constituency we have had electricity lines going through there to Ibanda for the last two years but only one person has managed to electrify his house and unfortunately the person in question is the late Prof. Karugire.  The whole Constituency simply watches these electricity lines, and this is very demoralising and makes a mockery of all the talk about rural electrification.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. RWAKAKOOKO: I thank the no. Members who have given such useful information.  Mr. Chairman, the cost of electricity is very, very out of the reach of most Ugandans.  I am less than half a kilometre from the electric poles that are going to Kabale, I asked UEB to estimate how much money it would require me to transfer electricity line onto my house, they quoted me Shs.33 million.  I am less than half a kilometre.  In fact, I think my land is just about the end of the pole of UEB except it has to go to my house.  So, that means I can never think of having power now, if I cannot have power and it is going through up to Kabale, now the cost of that line will not be met, who will meet it?  So, I think that UEB should sensitize itself to the need to charge affordable rates so hat it can increase the revenue and also facilitate the public using the power.  If you make the tariffs too high, certainly you will not get people consuming power.  

I want to end on a note of participation by this nation into the general issue to budgeting.  I think, time has come when the Budget should be demystified, time has come when we should not be shocked by the Budgets; time has come when the people who meet the Budget have to be involved from day up to the last day.  Time has come when we ought to democratise these operations of Government.  I think, Mr. Chairman, I would like to appeal to the Minister of Finance that while he may keep away the rates of tax on a -(Interruption)

MR. OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform you through the Member holding the Floor of the House, the point he is raising is vitally important.  Why? You see, every page in this book that we receive too late for us to assimilate in buying. When you look at any page - any item, for example, the Ministry of Agriculture in respect of animal Item 120, you find there staff, any number of staff.  It gives the intimation, the tendency to stick that is why we cannot pin down how money has been corrupted, embezzled, or speculated.  Now what should be done here, on this column here, it should be established staff, the Minister, the Deputy Minister, established staff, personal emoluments and then put the scheme amount committed to balance.  Then we are expected to know at any time high control budget but this budget here is just for thieves.  (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Wind up, please.  Order, please. End, please.

MR. RWAKAKOOKO: Yes. I thank hon. Obwangor for that information.  I was making my final appeal to the Minister of Finance to try and involve the people who are affected by this Budget as much as possible.  We should not hide the document and bring it as a shock. In fact, in many situations the Budget predictions should be almost worked out by the general public because after all, for whom is the Budget made?  It is made for the public and therefore, they have a right to participate in making it.  When you make it so collective this Budget will be very successful.  I thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. MORO (Koboko County, Arua): Mr. chairman, I would like to thank you very much for giving me this opportunity.  Mr. Chairman, you will recall that last week we did not have a quorum in the Parliament, how are we to continue postponing our meetings because we could not make the quorum?

I would like to inform you that I think people were absent in the House not for bad but I think for very, very good reason.  You know our brothers, the Baganda, the Banyankole, Batoro, were weeping or lamenting for their ebyaffe and when they got their ebyaffe, I think they were rejoicing, that is why we did not form the quorum.  I am very happy that they have now rejoiced and they have come back to join us.  I am sure the House will now continue and I am sure the future quorums will prevail.

I would like to tell you that the Ugandan economy is growing and it is growing very fast but the citizens of Uganda are becoming very poor very, very fast.

I would like to thank the NRM Government for maintaining the peace and security which is prevailing in the country, which has - in the first place - enabled the Ugandans, through the NGOs and friendly countries, to rehabilitate Uganda which was torn into pieces. The infrastructure was totally demolished and destroyed but I think you can see that a lot of things have been done.  In the first Budget we were gearing at rehabilitation, I understand beginning from this Budget our efforts are going to be diverted to development and if that is true, as the economy is growing, I would like to repeat or echo some of the statements made by my previous Colleagues that Ministers should not sit here, they must now start traveling through out the country.  Hon. Obwangor was saying that this Budget of today is the Budget of thieves, although I did not like the word thieves but I agree with him somehow that the Budget must be a Budget of those kind of people because there are very few ministers and deputy ministers who have traveled widely throughout Uganda to see what developments or what problems are there.  So I am appealing to all Members to appeal to our ministers at least to go out and see that the next development should cover the whole of Uganda.

As I was telling you the economy of the country is growing but then you find that there are also certain things that are relating.  I agree that the economy is growing because you can now see a lot of things that are in the market.  You can see sugar, you can see soap, and you can see Nytil working.  You can see roads improving like this.  I say the peasants become poorer and poorer because if you go to their homes up to now, the way they address us is very sympathetic, and they have no money and I think, I agree with them that they have no money.  Why? Because most of the crops that we are growing, the agricultural crops, both food crops and cash crops have not been properly utilized.  In 1989 we hah famine in West Nile, we had to appeal to friendly countries for assistance, my Colleagues here said West Nilers were used to hand outs, that they were very lazy people that is why there was a draught but I was very happy to see that year, the same thing turned round and in the West and everywhere in Uganda there was also famine. But this time I think we have a lot of food crops, we have also cash crops.  I am very sorry to tell you that our food crops are rotting there without any market and I do not know whether the Minister for Trade and Industry is around! All our mangoes got rotten, our pawpaws are rotting, our tomatoes are rotting -(Interjection) I think if the Ministry would have found ways of at least disposal or of selling those food crops.

Secondly, the cash crops, like cotton and tobacco, well I think with cotton I am happy it is everywhere; people from the East were complaining that their cotton was not bought.  I hope the same happens to Western Uganda, to the Northern Uganda and Western Uganda because cotton has not been bought it is rotting there.

Our tobacco industry; I am sorry my Colleague Romano Asiku is not here, he was defending BAT, I wish he was here i wanted to tell him that defending BAT not defending the growers may not assist us.  This year the growers have suffered very much.  Last year they grew a lot of tobacco they received quite a good amount of money, this year they doubled their efforts, they cultivated more acreage, they got more tobacco but unfortunately from the start these fertilizers were not taken until when the tobacco was flowering, that was the time they took the fertilizers which actually did not do any work, they were kept actually for the next season.  To make things worse when the tobacco flowered the pipes were not there, the barns, those are the houses for curing tobacco, were not ready. As a result, most farmers lost half of their crops.  It maybe, envisaged by some of you or it may not sound as if I am telling you the truth but the fact is, once the tobacco has grown and is flowering, the fist leaves must be harvested but because there were no pipes and the barns were not there, half of the crop got spoiled, got rotten.  

So, this year our farmers are not going to get any reasonable amounts of money. Now, to make things worse, I said the cotton is not bought, the tobacco is being cured, unfortunately these crops have not been bought just like the food crops and yet people are being asked to pay taxes.  As I speak now the cotton is in the stores.  The tobacco is in the barns and others are already being sold on credit but people have no money.  You might have heard on Radio, in Arua Town, there were arrests of people and as I am speaking right now in one of my divisions, people have been rounded up, their goats, their cows, sheep because of not paying taxes and yet the crop is rotting there. Now what is the use of asking people to grow?  

So, I am appealing to Ministers responsible to ensure that whatever is grown by the farmers as cash crops should be bought so that they do not suffer the consequences of being arrested or being detained together with their animals.  If the crops are not bought I will ask the responsible authorities to at least spare the people because what is the used of arresting me when my cotton is rotting inside?  What is the use of arresting me when my tobacco is rotting inside - or is not bought?  So I think the best thing -(Interruption) 

MR. KERMU: Point of information.  May I inform the speaker holding the Floor that the point he is raising is very important and it is the cause of failure of many people to pay taxes.  In my Constituency the pit sawyers who have applied for licences to pitsaw, since January this year up to day they have been denied this license. I do not know what the Minister of Environmental Protection is doing.

MR. SENDAWULA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I am sure as normally hon. Members do attend this House I did, of course explain at the time when I was seconding this Motion that we have had problems with cotton and that was properly registered but all the same efforts have been made, and they continue to be make, to ensure that cotton is bought and it is so shocking that on that very day, the hon. Member who raised the issue of buying cotton, we have discovered from his home district, his home district union advanced him Shs.200,000 to deliver in advance so that he could later deliver cotton but up to this day he has not delivered cotton. 

So, we must be serious I wish that we carry out thorough research on some of the issues before we raise them.  We have had a problem alright, but efforts have been made to ensure that we buy the cotton and for all these other crops, when we talk about cereals, the demand for items like maize, beans is extremely high in this country and I am so doubtful that someone could be saying maize today can rot in the granary at all because maize, as we stand today, we have buyers of maize in this very House who are keen to enter trade transactions, with any of the other hon. Members and take him to his Constituency - It is not an offence for them to be dealing in crops.  For me, to announce their names, you have to be careful whenever they announce your name in the House; it is an offence or something serious.  So, I want to go back to the point that buying of cereals have been effectively done in this country and if anybody has cereals that have not been bought it will help for him to call at the Ministry and then we put him in contact with buyers of cereals. 

MR. MORO: Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister for labouring to explain a point which you should have not explained, you should have put in practice rather than explaining.  Why do you wait to explain when there is already, crisis? I would like you to do it before it becomes a crisis.

Another point that I would like to raise is, one way of also finding funds for paying taxes in our area was livestock. Like in other countries because of the war, we have also lost our livestock, some of it was during the running to exile, we went to areas where there were these animal diseases which killed most of the animals in exile and in other areas, like Teso and Acholi because of cattle rustling some people lose their animals.  Fighting forces throughout the country ate other animals.  I am happy to note that for Teso Region and other areas, I understand there is going to be restocking but for West Nile I have not heard of any restocking.  In the same way, I am appealing to the Minister responsible, through you, to ensure that the animals in West Nile be also restocked so that the farmers can get money for paying taxes, in case their crops are not bought or if the weather is unfavourable.

No. 5; I would also like to appeal to the Minister for Environment Protection - I think it is Energy that one way of developing the country is to apply power.  With power industries can develop, our people in Arua - because of lack of electricity we are now having small scale industries using charcoal which another Ministry will say, no do not do it but I think we would like to appeal to you that energy should be brought to, not only West Nile but other parts of the country which lack electricity or power.  I was arguing with somebody yesterday, when I told him that our electricity had reached Rwanda and Tanzania and Kenya so somebody was saying, no, no, it has not reached.  Today I was happy to hear from somebody that the lines pass near his house to the said countries and yet he is not able to have power.  I think this is a very serious issue. Our Ministers should consider these things very carefully and make sure that Uganda should be in priority, the citizens of this country should benefit from whatever development.

No.6, Transport and Communication -(Interruptions)

THE CHAIRMAN: Try to wind up, please.

MR. MORO:  Yes, I am going to wind up, Mr. Chairman.  For Transport and Communications, the Minister is not here, I do not know whether his Deputy is around, I would like to inform them that we were very happy to have the Karuma, Pakwach, Arua, Oraba road which every now and then has problems, I would like him to have a watch because as I talk now, to travel between Karuma and Pakwach there are portholes very large and deep where a whole human being can also fall in, I am appealing to the Minister to ensure that that part of the country is also considered.

For feeder roads, Mr. Deputy Minister, the Minister is not here; your feeder roads work started particularly in my Constituency, after one or two months the thing came to a stand still, the people were not paid.  I think as I talk now they have never been paid.  The implements you gave, the graders and lorries, excavators are lying there idle. They started a very long road from my place to this place -(Interruption)

DR. CHEBROT: Point of information. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I would like to inform the hon. Member that when I visited Arua in 1992, they had some of the best feeder roads in the country and I wish also to inform him that the Minister for Local Government does contribute 50 per cent towards the feeder roads component but the responsibility to maintain the roads is the responsibility of the Local Authorities.  But the Minister for Local Government has not at any time refused to send money to Arua.  In fact, they get their money on a monthly basis, except this month when recently you did pass the Vote on Accounts, that is when they will get money late but previously they have been getting theirs on a monthly basis and they have no reason to blame government for not repairing their roads.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. MORO: Mr. Chairman, I am not blaming the Minister but I am telling him the facts if he has been sending the money, I am very happy, I am going back to look into the issue if the money was sent and there was no work was done I will keep him informed. Anyway, thank you for that information. I would like to conclude. I think people are getting tire. 

I now turn to my Friend the Minister for Education and Minister for Health, unfortunately he is not here! This time I would like to be a bit more serious, the Minister said development can be achieved when the people are all literate that is to say with illiteracy, development can hardly be achieved and he is appealing that every part of the country should be literate or educated.   So, I ma appealing to him, and to all Members that in my county and Aringa County, up to now we do not have the secondary schools which he said, he would avail to every division or every gombolola, so I would like him to take note with the aim that this year, at least some secondary schools of those areas.  Health as well as education, you have been telling us to go and sensitize the people, let the people do work by themselves and they will be assisted.  In the same way in both education and health, we have gone to the people. we have told the people to construct houses for education, primary education and for primary Health Care, dispensaries which are already done, but unfortunately, I am sorry to say as I talk now, people’s efforts have been in vain.  I think the next time we shall never talk to the people because in my area dispensaries which were Aid posts, which were run by Government were destroyed during the war, we made efforts - people have already rebuilt them like Bamure in Gurepi, that is Koboko County and then Pamodo in Ludira division, these ones were constructed by the people; up to now as I talk, no services have been rendered there.  The kits; these are boxes of medicine which were sent to districts - unfortunately I think this happened throughout Uganda were reduced as a result my Medical Officer says, he cannot avail me drugs and staff, but I feel that at least, something must be done to the structures which the people have already put up voluntarily otherwise, we shall discourage them.  I think I beg to stop here, let other people also talk.  Thank you very much.

PROF. KAGONYERA (Rubabo County, Rukungiri): Mr. Chairman, thank you for allowing me to make my contribution on this Debate.  First, I beg your indulgence to allow me, since during the Debate I had no opportunity to make any contribution on the Debate of ebyaffe allow me to congratulate the people of Buganda and with the forth coming coronation of the 36th King of Buganda, His Majesty Ronald Muwenda Mutebi (Laughter) And why not? Does it take colour to be His Majesty or it only takes to be a leader of the people?  

I also want to congratulate and thank the people of Kabarole on a statement I heard over the Radio, because after the debate here, I got a little bit concerned by what was happening in the Chamber here and outside, and I am glad that the people of Kabarole have risen to the occasion and allayed the fears of those who are genuinely concerned about the possible consequences of the return of cultural leadership in this country and also to disarm those who had hoped that they would use this as a weapon to destabilise this country. (Applause)

I congratulate Members of this House for the statesmanly spirit in which they debated this issue.  What has been the problem in this country, has a ways been political intolerance and lack of understanding but I think at this time, Members of this House demonstrated to their best, their ability to tolerate to understand and to give where necessary.  I am saying this because if we do not put our political House in order, a lot of what we are saying about this Budget can come to not.  I am a little bit concerned by what is happening in the country immediately after the Budget Speech, especially in regard to the effect of the Budget Proposals on the manufacturing sector in this country.  

I was glad when I read the Background to the Budget, the Minister talks about growth and he talks about agricultural growth, he talk about industrial growth.  But it seems that at least in the immediate future the effects of the Budget Proposals, at least, on the manufacturing sector are going to be counter productive.  I am made to understand that I think after about August this year, all people in the manufacturing industry will no longer have excess money at the Bank of Uganda through the auction method.  They will have to go to the Forex bureau and buy their money for importing raw materials.  What this means is that while the importer of finished goods is purchasing his dollar at a little over Shs.1, 000/= per dollar, the person who is importing raw materials to which there is going to be value added will go the forex bureau and buy his dollar at Shs.1, 200/= already the person who is importing finished goods has got a discount of 20 per cent. 

Added to this as if this was not enough, these raw materials are attracting an extra tax of about ten per cent, so without adding anything, without talking about the proposed increase in wages, already you have a 30 per increase in the cost of manufactured commodity in this country.  Therefore, to me a law man, it sounds a little bit contradictory when we talk about encouraging growth in manufacturing industry and in fact, we impose what would appear to be counter productive measures.  Consequently, I read I think that was in the report of the committee on the Economy, that the manufacturing industry may only grow by about 3.3 per cent compared to 19 per cent of the previous year.  Now, we are told that one of the causes of this very poor performance is the removal of prohibition on imported goods.  We would also like Members to know that in the same year 1992/93 imports grew by about 26 per cent. There is, therefore, a very huge trade deficit, we are told that this amounts to about 14.5 of the G.D.P. 

I would like those who are schooled in economics to tell us whether this one is a comfortable situation for this country to find itself in, and we are again told that exports grew by only a mere two per cent.  We are aware that there has been a steady fall in the value of coffee exports and, therefore, it is absolutely necessary that this country must find means and ways of improving on our export performance.  Obviously the manufacturing front, with 30 per cent increase on the cost of producing these manufactured goods, we are unlikely to compete with other countries for export markets.  

However, I am a little bit also concerned that the Minister did not tell us much about what he is going to do about improving our exports; only that there is too much stress on exportation of raw materials.  I had hoped that as it is rumoured in the media and elsewhere that, for example in agricultural production, one of the best commodities we could be engaged in as a country is the growth and export of flowers.  I am told that as it is rumoured in the media and elsewhere that, for example in agricultural production, one of the best commodities we could be engaged in as a country is the growth and export of flowers.  I am told that countries like Zimbabwe, and Kenya earn more than 200 million per year from export of flowers which business they have been involved in the last few years only and I am made to understand that the conditions in Uganda are more favourable than the conditions either in Kenya or in Zimbabwe.  

Therefore, I would have hoped that since this is a commodity that has got a readily available market and flowers are high value products which will even meet the cost of air freight, the Minister should have told us something, at least, in passing on his efforts to get involved in promoting a commodity like this one 

I also want to add my voice to that of Members who have raised concern about the effects of fighting inflation on the rest of the economy. I was talking to a friend this morning, who told me that what we might be doing is to remove an eye in order to save an ear; obviously we should like to save both.  Therefore, much as we must fight inflation, we must not be over zealous.  We need to know that effects, this massive fight against inflation can cause on other components of the economy.  Even in the medical world, if a surgeon is going to operate on a person who has got massive liaison, he has to remove it in stages, because there is a risk of bleeding the patient to death if you remove the whole liaison at once and, therefore, the speed at which we fight this inflation is quite important and either in this House or outside, when he talked about this matter, the speed at which we fight inflation and at what price.  

You know every well, that in order to have a meaningful stabilisation of prices, one of the things you must do is to increase production and, in fact food production, if we read the documents we have, has demonstrated that, actually increased production is an good a weapon against inflation as any. Therefore, the Minister ought to stress those methods that increase production rather than those that reduce expenditure. (Applause)  

Because, if the Minister encourages thrifty spending, he does not realise that he is also constraining his own revenue.  Because if we do not spend, there is no way you can collect taxes.  In fact, increased or very high rates of taxation are false methods of increased revenue collection, because what people will do is either not to consume the products on which these taxes are raised or even more so, to evade these taxes.  I was amused when I read in the Papers that an official of the Government said you see a Kenyan beer costs Ug. Shs.400/=; In Kenya a beer is 24 Kenya shillings and the recent rate was 15 - I am told even 8.5 Uganda shillings can buy a Kenya shilling now, so things are getting from bad to worse, in our case from better to best, but you see what I am worried about in is the temptation that a Ugandan consumer will have to want to buy a beer at 500/= and the temptation a businessman is going to have to go across the Kenyan boarder and bring in one crate of beer and meet his day’s expenses.  We were advised that they were going to apply a punitive tax of 250 per cent on beer; fine, I have no problem with this, but what effort do you need to enforce a tax rate of this magnitude?  Of course, I discussed this matter with the Deputy Minister for Finance and I was interested to learn from him and highly so that we are going through a difficult period when, while our economy is getting organised and growing other economies around us are getting disorganised and actually deteriorating. 

What is happening, therefore, is probably what was happening to us when nearly all of the oil we imported in this country found its way out of the country because it was very, very cheap in this country, but the question is, is it only tax rates that we are going to apply to fight these temptation to import very cheap commodities from across the border?  There is a social cost to reduce the government spending.  Again hon. Rwakakooko taught on this.  Even in the countries like the United States advancement or technological advancement puts so many people out of work unlike retrenchment in this country. Retrenchment is putting people out of work yet in other countries advancement puts people out of work. But what happens is that these countries have got programmes for retraining these people in order to be able to go back to the economy.  

Therefore, what I would like government to think about, is not just getting a package for these people and a miserable one at that, but also to think about but also to think about what we can do to get these people away from the non-productive jobs in the Civil Service to productive jobs in the economy because many of them have the strength Mr. Chairman, to work.

MR. MWANDHA: Point of information.  One of the issues that took a lot of our times was the question of retrenchment.  We debated this on many accusations and came up with a plan that included among other things, the point the Member is making.  That is to say, retraining so that people can acquire skills and, actually, get themselves gainful employment afterwards.  But all the recommendations we made in that report were ignored by government.

MR. KARUHANGA: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank the hon. Member for giving way, having seen the arrival of the Deputy Minister of Labour and Social Affairs in the House, I have always wondered why that whole Ministry which is charged with the responsibility of taking care of our social affairs and labour affairs is not only spearheading retrenchment but it is not taking care of these people where they are and there is no such policy.  So, during the Sectoral Committee or during this debate I would like them to prepare themselves and give us the medicine they have for all these retrenched people because it seems to me they have never ever thought about it.

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR LABOUR AND SOCIAL AFFAIRS (Mrs. B. Okwir): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  In answer to what has been raised, it is not the Minister for Labour who is heading retrenchment, it is the Ministry of Public Service and Cabinet Affairs and I would like also to inform you that our Ministry has vocational training institutes.  We have four of them and we are prepared to train all the people retrenched if only they can afford it or the Government can afford it for them.  Thank you.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr. Chairman, one or two points I would like to raise before I resume my seat, one is the question of taxes.  Having said what I said, I know very well that there is hardly anybody in the world who enjoys paying taxes.  Therefore, people are bound to dislike any proposals that increase taxes.  In fact, many Ugandans, I would say, have lived in a culture of non-tax paying.  I discuss this, with a lot of my friends especially in the business world and we know very well that very many of them do not pay taxes, they evade them and I was angry to suggest to one of them as to whether he would like us to pack up and close government so that they can run their businesses freely because the government has to raise money in order to manage this country and when we propose that taxes must be reduced we must also suggest to the government which services must be cut out because there is no where you can pick up less money and continue to run the same service so we have to balance the two when we talk about taxes.  In America only Bill Clinton was able to win the Presidency after proposing a tax increase.  All the rest of them if you propose tax increase you lost but invariably, after getting elected they all increased the taxes.  That is the truth of the matter.  

So, we have to be very careful when we are proposing to the government about the reduction of taxes we must also propose which services to cut out.  However, I am glad that the government is proposing to increase its spending on the police because the police must be enabled to do their job.  Everything else will come to naught unless they are able to do their job.  I think what you read in the papers today is not a vote of confidence on the performance of our security forces and, therefore, I am glad that they are going to be a bit tough at least regarding financial inputs.

The last thing I want to mention regards people who consult for us on various matters.  I do not know, you read in the papers about lack of experience and what have you.  I am worried about whether we do enough as a country in determining whether the people who become our consultants are actually sufficiently qualified to meet the task they are meant to carry out.  

Therefore, in this regard it is not surprising that some times we get advice that probably does not meet every detailed aspect of the proposals affecting the country.  So, I would like to suggest to the Ministry in charge of planning that maybe, in future, we should have a kind of write up on the procedures used to identify consultants to this country and it should not be only those people who are providing the money but also this country that should determine what qualifications these people should have.  After all we are the people who will be paying back this money and, therefore, we should have a say in how to design the way this money will be spent.  Mr. Chairman, I thank you very much.

MISS OPOTI DHUGIRA (Women Representative, Nebbi): Thank you Mr. Chairman.  I would like to add my voice to the rest of the Members and contribute on this Budget that has clearly shown out its difficulties to the common man on the ground.  The first is, I would like to request the government through the Minister of Finance that I think it is necessary to involve the people in proposing the Budget.  I say this because many times, especially after this Budget, we are being met on the streets by a number of people who are really attacking us and our Budget and I rightly go out to answer that I do not know how the Budget was made and who made it -(Interjection)- I have not talked, Mr. Chairman. (Laughter)

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I have listened very carefully about the involvement of Members of the House in the Budget preparation.  I think it is a procedure that we need to clarify.  In all countries, the responsibility to propose a budget is the responsibility of the government and, right now, we are participating in the Budget making as representatives of the people.  This Budget will not be a budget for the country until the House passes this budget.  

So, if one is confronted, you can explain that my part has not come in yet but to make it appear that it is possible to consult Ugandans when you are making proposals is also to demand the impossible.  As hon. Prof. Kagonyera has said, even in America it is the Government that proposes to the legislature the budget proposals and these proposals are proposals of the government to you as the representative of the people and, through you the people are participating in the discussion of this budget.  So, I wanted to inform the people so that we do not arouse unnecessary excitement that people on the street can all be able to be put together to propose the budget one can bring to the House.

MRS. OKER:  Point of information. I would like to inform the hon. Deputy Minister for Finance that at this stage when we are discussing the Budget, while the Budget Speech is being read, you hear that the price is to be effective mid-night of that very night. How do we then come to be a party to that mission?

MISS OPOTI DHUGIRA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I rise up to thank the two Informers, especially the later. When we demand that the people should be involved we really do not mean that the Minister must go on the street and collect everybody and if he thinks that is it, then the election of representative of the people to a House like this is apparently meaningless if we cannot help -(Interruption)

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I have traveled the whole of Uganda and may I inform the hon. Member representing Nebbi District that the majority of the people in Uganda have never even come across streets. So we should be careful -(Laughter)- we should be careful, especially the people who represent rural areas to come to this House and say they were meeting people on the streets.  My assumption is that they are meeting the wrong people and distorting the budget debate.  So may we know what the people in the fields and the kraals and the banana plantations say because we seem to be settling more on the people on the streets. At least if they were people in the shops those are working but people on the streets are not the best measure for determining the way the nation is going.

MISS OPOTI DHUGIRA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is rather unfortunate that Ministers are just going to stand up and begin debating as though we are in a school debate.  When I talk of a street I do not mean the Kampala road and avenues but in one way or another we get to our homes through roads through they are not called streets.  

The argument of the Deputy Minister is not going to derail me from what I want to come out with.  The issue as raised by the hon. Member from Gulu is actually true.  When the Minister announces that these rates takes effect from mid-night tonight I do not know how again we can really come to control a thing like that.  Secondly, many times me personally I look at this exercise we are going through as a postmortem and it would have been very good if we really sat in this House, debated these things and maybe, compromised and brought you down to where we believe the common man is really going to agree with what we expect from them.  And it is really very unfair to demand too much from some of these people.  

I am talking this because when you look at the Graduated Tax rates the highest being 80,000 and the lowest being above 12,000, when you look at a district like mine and you compare a poor man, the lowest taxpayer in Nebbi and the lowest tax-payer in Kampala, I do not think it will be fair to put the two men to pay at the same rate and when you look at the rich men, the man you would consider to be a rich man in Nebbi is not as equally rich as the rich man in Kampala.  So when we think of a man with thirty or forty  -(Interruption)

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform hon. Members about this minimum tax in the local authorities so that people are not mis-informed.  The minimum tax, Graduated Tax, is still Shs.6, 500 -(Interjection) This is the minimum but we are saying if there are people who can be assessed to have capacity to pay Shs.80, 000 they will pay Shs.80, 000 and because the maximum has been Shs.40, 000 and we have gone to Shs.80, 000 it does not also mean that we have doubled the tax which the people have been paying last year.  East taxpayer will be assessed and each one will pay according to her or his capacity but at any rate nobody will be demanded to pay more than Shs.80, 000. I would like this to be very clear.  Thank you, Sir.

BRIG. KAYLIGONZA: Point of information. I would also like to inform the House, Mr. Chairman, that the society we are representing is sometimes misled by the concept of taxation.  When we talk of a rich man actually he is burdened by taxation because when it comes to taxing this rich man - the so called rich man - he pays much more than what people in rural areas think about because when you talk of PAYE, Income Tax, you have imported goods in the country, all these are levied on the so called rich man who, at the same time, pays the maximum rate.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 

DR. CHEBROT: Additional information. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I would like to draw the attention of Members to my remarks of last week in which I tried to clarify the issue of the upper limits of the tax being Shs.80, 000.  First of all, let me reflect backwards sometime last year the taxes were raised to shs.30, 000, that was the upper limit but no local authority was forced to graduate any person to Shs.30, 000. In fact, some districts, the highest Graduated Tax was Shs.15, 000 and, in fact, in some districts like Mbale had only six people who paid Shs.30, 000.  So, it is the local authority who usually assess.  in this House for example, we have kings, if they are going to assess us here, it will depend on how much each person has.  If the king is here he will certainly pay may be Shs.100, 000 whereas a person like myself will pay be Shs.5, 000.  So, I think this should be very clear to hon. Members.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MISS OPOTI DHUGIRA:  Thank you Mr. Chairman. With the two pieces of information from the two Deputy Ministers, I think we would take both of them to go and educate the Assessors within their Ministries, the Local Government at the District Level because much as they say it is not really a force from above, on the ground that is exactly what is happening.  They see how many heads of cattle you have, they see how big a coffee plantation or your shamba is and they say it is from the Ministry and you find these people are apparently defenseless.

I will also give a little bit of comment on the tax on alcoholic drinks especially the beer.  A number of us who picked the Monitor this morning I think we read the complaint of the Madhvani Company on the sale of their beer in West Nile.  I am saying this because I am from there and I know exactly what	is happening and I just think it will be crazy for a man or woman to buy a Bell beer at Shs.1, 500 which is only half a litre and another one is selling a whole 75 CL of beer at Shs1, 700 and it is coming in.  So from the skol and the Primus the bottle is bigger than the Uganda beer and it is even a lot cheaper.  So, if -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order.

MISS OPOTI DHUGIRA:  So, if we are to consider the people from West Nile, really drinking from the Uganda Breweries, then I think the people imposing this tax must also consider very tightly -(Interruption)

MR. BAMBALIRA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to inform the hon. Member and the House that when we made calculations, if the CTL is going to be paid, a bottle of beer is going to reach Shs.1, 700 and I do not know whether because the Minister of Finance is a tee totaler he does not know how sweet beer is, that he made us to pay so high.  Thank you -(Laughter)

MISS OPOTI DHUGIRA: That additional information, I think, was quite a useful one.  So, Mr. Chairman, to make sure that anybody would be driven to buy one big bottle at Shs.1, 700 other than buying a small bottle and you would need three before you get enough of it.  In addition to that when you look at the way the Kampala bars are selling now, quite a number of people are going to the untaxed sector that is the Crude Waragi and the malwa.  You find a whole glass, a glass of Kasese is selling at Shs.500 and a bottle of beers selling at Shs.1, 700 and it will take a man two glasses to get enough and you will take three bottles of beer to feel that he has also got enough.  So it will only be reasonable for the Minister to also think of looking at all these places where they sell the Waragi and begin taxing them because their budget has really gone high, especially with high prices of bee now. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Proceed please.

MISS OPOTI DHUGIRA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for protecting me.  I would like to also to request or beg the favour of the Minister of Finance to really consider the Minister the Ministry of Women in Development, Youth and Culture.  It was early this year that we passed the Women’s Council Bill and the Youth Council Bill.  But up to now we have not seen the two elections that is for the Women’s Council and the Youth Council taking place and, especially, since the two councils are going to be responsible for electing the Representative of the Youth Council taking place and, especially since the two councils are going to be responsible for electing the Representative of the Youth into the Constituent Assembly and also the women Representative in the Constituent Assembly.  

So, if we ignore them up to now and time is really running out I do not know how we are going to - we are just going to start elections of the two bodies and it is necessary we must elect them, if the two sectors, the Youth and the women are to be represented in the Constituent Assembly.  So, conducting about three elections is apparently a very short time.  I do not know how the whole thing is going to be conducted but I think this goes back to the way the Ministry of Women in Development, Youth and Culture has been marginalised by the government.  I think it was given to us just to show the women that we are also being considered but we are not being taken seriously.

MRS. BWAMBALE: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman for allowing me to give this information; very important information to the hon. Member holding the Floor.  I would like to remind the House that this House has already passed a supplementary of Shs.200/= million which is meant for the exercise of electing youth councils and women councils.  So the youth of this country and the women of this country should rest assured that in the shortest time possible, when the Ministry of Finance releases this cheque, the Ministry of Women in Development, Culture and Youth will be on the ground to effect the mentioned elections.  Thank you very much.

MISS DHUGIRA OPOTI: Thank you Mr. Chairman.  With that information, I wish to request the Minister for Finance to speedily release that cheque so that the exercise can be done.  Before I wind up my debate, I think it will be very unfair if I sit down without mentioning the harassment of the people of eastern Uganda by the - I do not know what to call them because when we were passing the Revenue Authority Bill in this House, there was no mention of some soldiers to commander the collection of taxes on our routes but the way we read from the newspapers it seems the rate of harassment to the level of even extracting a kilo or two of sugar and also bread and throwing some to the monkeys and  the baboons is really very unfair.

MR. BUTAGIRA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member and the House that the point raised by the speaker on the Floor is very, very disturbing.  I happened one week ago, to be in the East also and going through Tororo to Mbale, what I saw for myself was really frightening.  I saw a group of soldiers up to Tororo on the roadside. They were off-loading a Pick-Up that was loaded with small goods and they actually took those goods.  Then when I reached Tororo, I stopped there and I saw that if you are going and they find you with a mattress, even one mattress, they take it from school children.  Some officials of Revenue Authority have become terrorists.  Something must be done, because they are discrediting the Revenue Authority by their anti-people tactics.  

MISS R. ALIU:  Point of information.  This is information concerning the revenue collection.  I traveled on that road this morning and I was very shocked because I was coming from Soroti in a bus but we were stopped and searched including our hand luggage. I do not know what sort of contraband we are supposed to be carrying a bus leaving Soroti for Kampala! And it inconveniences a lot of travelers on the road.  This should really be made clear to the people who are collecting or who are supposed to check on smugglers on the road.  Thank you.

MISS DHUGIRA OPOTI:  I thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is needless to continue on this, especially, when what I raised has been enforced and by the number of people rising, there is a lot of information to be given on this issue. But I remember quite well that during the budget speech, the Minister mentioned clearly that there were going to be no road-blocks. 

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: Point of information. Mr. Chairman, I thank you very much for allowing me to clarify on that point.  The road checks that are for security reason should not be confused with Revenue Authority checks.  (Interjection)- I am giving this clarification.  We cannot argue that a revenue officer takes a handbag of a lady to find sugar in the handbag.  Let us not ridicule this. 

Secondly, one of the reasons why the revenue has managed to rise - I am giving information - why the revenue has managed to rise has been one of the reasons for combating smuggling and I want to inform Members on the debate of smuggling.  Government cannot compromise on smuggling.  You are pleading for unreasonable people trading.  There is no country whose economy can grow when it lets goods freely to flow from one country to another and, therefore, Sir, I want  -(Interruption)

MR. KANYOMOZI: Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, is the hon. Deputy Minister in order to mislead this House when some of these revenue collection check as he calls it, are for internal areas as a place from Soroti to Mbale?  And is he in order, since we know that there is peace that has been ushered in, to continue to say that these are security checks?

THE CHAIRMAN:  He is quite in order to express his view.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.  I am not surprised that people like hon. Kanyomozi would like us to compromise on security and that is not my responsibility to say.  Security people will handle security problems but I am saying for us, we shall also try to fight, as much as possible, smuggling because it is not in the interest of this country. 

Lastly, the people who smuggle sugar, they do not smuggle it in containers.  The situation has been studied where a full lorry load is smuggled, of sugar, when the intake was about twenty kilos per route.  It is a total accumulated effect of the amount smuggled not the quantity smuggled at every point or at every time.  I want to assure the House that government will use all reasonable measures to fight smuggling and I want to tell the people that smuggling will not pay as a business.  We better follow the established channels.

MRS. KULANY: Point of information.  Thank you Mr. Chairman.  I witnessed an incident on the 11th of June, 1993. I was traveling from Kampala to Mbale and on reaching Manafa after just crossing a river, we were in a taxi, we were confronted by a Pick-Up UAB 125.  We tried to explain to this Pick-Up that we were coming from Kampala but these soldiers never paid attention to us and even they pushed away old people and yet they found nothing. So, I would request government to actually identify who are their criminals and innocent people.

MISS DHUGIRA OPOTI:  Thank you Mr. Chairman. In raising this issue, I do not mean that we are out to support smuggling.  Nobody is interested in supporting smuggling and everybody is interested in having government raise taxes. We know that the Local Administration authorities have their own Police who look after their tax collection and what have you.  It is really very unfair to send a team of soldiers to harass innocent civilians or innocent travelers who are just on their own way. So, much as the Minister may be arguing for security reasons or whatever, it is a little bit unfair.  Something must be done about it.  

To end my contribution, I would wish to beg the Minister that in establishing future budgets whatever the case may be, I think it will be important for this House to establish - a committee should be established for the monitoring of the budget so that we can see the performance of the previous year as we enter into the next Financial Year.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

AL HAJI SERUNJOGI (Kawempe Division, Kampala): Mr. Chairman I want to thank you very much for allowing me to speak on this Budget.  Mr. Chairman, my contribution will go to the Background to the Budget; page 18(334). It states that, “despite the pressure on the resources side the 1992/93 Budget had to accommodate significant debt payment of both domestic and external creditors.  Interest payment both domestic and external increased by 13 per cent from Uganda Shillings 86 billion in 1992 to Uganda Shillings 98 in 1992/93.  This built the debt payment inevitably to consume a similar proportion of the available resources in the fiscal year and it constrained development expenditure.  We face a similar constraint in 1993/94.” 

Having read that paragraph, I would like to contribute to this debate by informing the House that I am speaking for 7.500 former East African Community workers, who have been deprived of their rights, the division debt of 1984.  Allow me to inform you that East African Community collapsed on 30th June 1977.  From then all employees in the former East African Community became pensionable before their posts were abolished.  Due to political problems then between 1977 and 1986 pension funds remained unpaid as recommended by the Mediation Agreement of 1984.  

Additionally, the pension funds could not be related by partner states; Kenya and Tanzania as recommended by Dr. Ovirige the mediator, in his report of 15th May 1984 with the three Head of State.  Assets of the former East African Community were divided by Dr. Ombridge.  In his report, they were divided as follows: 42 per cent assets to Kenya, 32 per cent assets to Tanzania and 26 per cent to Uganda.  As a result of this exercise, Kenya and Tanzania had surplus assets amounting to 191 United States dollars.

AN HON. MEMBER: Millions?

AL HAJI SERUNJOGI:  Millions.  Kenya was to compensate Uganda with 145 million dollars, Tanzania, 46 million because Uganda had a shortfall of that amount.  Uganda having received 191 million in form of assets and cash plus #.320 sent or remitted by Crown Agents, Uganda Government has turned a deaf ear to the claim of the former East African Community employees.  Already, the task force which was set by the former employees has already submitted the files to the Ministry of Public Service amounting to 5,555.  East African Community Pension Act 1970 states that, ‘The employees who had attained the retirement age at the end of June 1977 had to retire with all their benefits and those whose offices were abolished on that date, even if they had not attained the age, they automatically became pensioners.’ 

Now, the report also carried out by the same person in 1977 to return exactly how many people were to be involved. A number of former East African Community employees contributions and funds were remitted to Uganda and already money is with Treasury.  It was established by the end of this exercise that funds and assets were vested in Local Government in form of buildings.  We have been to Railways, the Post Office and what have you.  Those buildings were built by pension funds remitted by the East African Community to various countries; partner states that is Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania.  Pension funds held abroad were vested in Crown Agents and Crown Agents have also queried the remaining amount to Uganda Government.  

This is in reference to the Mediation Agreement Article No.10 page 5 of the Mediation Agreement that was given by Dr. Ovirige; Board of Trustees; that is the Bank of Uganda and Tanzania have been managing that fund ever since the collapse of the East African Community.  On 7th September, 1992, Foreign Affairs wrote a letter to Bank of Uganda, External Debt Department under XE 1105018; the Ministry stated that it has started paying pension to former East African Community employees.  The only snag that has been delaying payments is rate of interest.  It was then determined that the interest should be 7 per cent.  The IGG has also recommended in his report, which I have here  -(Interruptions) 

This letter is written on the 12th November 1991 under PS.44/8/58, it is written, it is addressed to Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  I quote one of the paragraphs, paragraph two, stating that,  ‘We have completed investigations into the defunct East African Community pensions and provident fund and found out that Uganda former employees of East African Community are actually entitled to these retirement benefits as per Mediation Agreement of East African Community 1984.  Finally it say, I shall be grateful if the issue therein is re-assessed at inter-Ministerial level between Kenya and Tanzania. I would also like to urge you to settle the dues of Uganda former employees of the East African Community.  This is their right.’ (Hear, hear!) And then I would like to quote another one on the report of IGG page 4 under item 416.  IGG recommends: In summary, it is evidently clear that all community staff who were in service were affected by the break up of the Community of the division debts, they all had their offices abolished with effect from that date and they were accordingly retired by 30th June, 1977.  This is a report made by the IGG recommending payments of the former Community employees.  I have a letter here that was written by Peter Kasumba for Auditor General of Government.  It is also recommending that they should pay these people.  He is writing to the task force, which is handling these affairs. In view of those, I am requesting government to come up with a statement because we are people who are concerned and the people who are concerned are worried.

MR. BABU: Point of information.  Thank you Mr. Chairman.  I would like to give the hon. Member information and even thank him.  I have an interest as a Community employee.  The information I want to give the hon. Member is that from the break up of the East African Community up until now, the former employees of the Community have always been treated as outsiders.  Even within government.  To make it worse, they do not even want to give them their money.  There are people within government who have continuously made sure that these people are kept at bay.  I would like to request that with this information, that the Community, the former Community employees for the first time be accepted as part and parcel of the society. Thank you very much.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, may I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor of the House that the Minister of Finance to me, is not interested in chasing free money that is near here in Nairobi. It is rather concerned in chasing the loans and negotiations in Washington and Parish because they want anything new; but where it should come is not their concern.

MR. SSERUNJOGI: I thank the two hon. Members who have given me the information, but I would like to assure the House, that money was already remitted here; it is only being swindled by the Minister for Finance and his Friends.

MR. HIGIRO SSEMAJJEGE:  Point of information.  The money we are talking about is the money paid by each individual who worked with East African Community.  East person was deducted 25 per cent of his salary and the Community added 26 per cent of that amount; so that for each person, 51 per cent of his salary was dedicated and that is the fund we are talking about and, lots of assets we know here were built on that money when Uganda was making credit using that money and after than, over 30 million pounds in cash was returned to these states and Uganda got its share.  (Applause)

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, as Mr. Sserunjogi has read you a letter from the IGG, the letter was addressed to the Minister for Foreign Affairs.  The issue that concerns the breakage of the Community - these negotiations were led by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  The Ministry of Foreign Affairs sought from the IGG to determine the extent of the obligation of the Government of Uganda.  We are glad that this report has now come out.  As hon. Sserunjogi has also honestly decided, there was an issue of what rate of interest to apply on this payment.  These matters have now been resolved and I want to assure Members who are beneficiaries from this scheme that, now Government is in position to process your payments.  Therefore, your fears should rest. (Applause)

MR. SSERUNJOGI: Mr. Chairman, I said earlier that I am representing 7,500 workers.  If the Minister is now assuring the House that arrangements are being made to pay the workers, then he should tell us in black and white because we keep on writing to the Minister, but the Minister keeps quiet.  We have seen the Minister for Finance, we have seen the Minister for Public Service, documents have even gone to the President but the final word is now wanted from the Minister for Finance because he is holding the Treasury.  If he is prepared to give us the money, to give the beneficiaries the money then we should state here that money is going to be processed, voucher will be processed in such and such a time; so that people rest assured because many of the pensioners have already collapsed.

MR. SIBO:  Point of information.  Thank you Mr. Chairman. The Minister for Finance has stated that the members of the former East African Community should now rest assured that he is going to pay them.  Unfortunately, this provision is not in the present Budget and I do not know where he is going to get the money.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: Hon. Sserunjogi has explained to you that this money is not on the Budget - it is a fund and I said, two weeks ago, Sir, that the settlement of this obligation is from a contract - is from an agreement and I told Members to be settled to determine the legal obligation of the Uganda Government.  One, was the exchange rate; because since then, there have been many exchange rates.  Two, it was the rate of interest at which this money should be charged and three, was the fact that there had been a monetary reform; because we are going to pay you not in dollars - we are going to pay Uganda Shillings -(Interjection) Yes. So, Sir, these matters now, the Solicitor General has given his legal opinion as to what is the extent of the Uganda Government’s legal obligation and this is going to constitute the basis for the Government to pay.

MR. SSERUNJOGI:  Now, the House can see.  This is how they go on changing.  First of all, the money was remitted in dollars.  What has the monetary form got to do with money that is not in dollars here in Uganda? (Applause and Laughter)  Mr. Chairman, my second point, -(Interruption)

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Point of information. Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform hon. Sserunjogi that as much as it is important to fight for those people who were employed in the Community, there are so many of us Ugandans who contributed to terminal benefits in real manner, and are going to get absolutely nothing.  I would rather be interested in every Ugandan like hon. Kagonyera who worked for the Government for over 20 years and is due to get no more than about 20,000/= Uganda Shillings that is not enough for a bottle of a drink.  Therefore, I was informing - if I may be allowed, I hope hon. Adoko Nekyon is disciplined enough if he has anything to say, to stand up and inform the House.  (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr. Chairman, my information was that there is a broad issue of Ugandans who have served their country honourably and have been neglected. (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN: Proceed please.

MR. SSERUNJOGI:  Mr. Chairman, I do not want hon. Prof. Kagonyera to confuse the issue.  We want the claims worked for East African Community that was an organisation for three partner states  -they never worked for Uganda.  We worked for Uganda because we were based here but worked for East African Community an organisation of the three partner states.  So, I want him to differentiate between the two.  The Uganda local administration and the Uganda Government as the East African Community are two different entities altogether.  Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please, order, please.

MR. SSERUNJOGI:  Mr. Chairman, I just want to finish up.  I have already made my point clear that the Kenya nationals and Tanzania nationals got their benefits and we all worked under the same umbrella.  My second point, permit me, to read this statement - I want to read my contribution, it is a very short contribution and I think the House will enjoy it.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I am afraid, it is too long.  It will take most of our time.

MR. SSERUNJOGI: I will summarise it.  Mr. Chairman, you have all heard comments on unnecessary expenses incurred by the Office of the President and Ministry of Justice. I begin by thanking His Excellency the President for having appointed hon. George Kanyeihamba as adviser after having dropped him from the Ministry of Constitutional Affairs.

THE CHAIRMAN: Do not, please, bring those affairs here.

MR. SSERUNJOGI:  These affairs, Mr. Chairman, affect the Budget.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, no. You are out of order, please.  Leave that one aside.

MR. SSERUNJOGI:  Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  I am not going to allow you to read that thing here; or to bring that issue here, please.

MR. SSERUNJOGI: Mr. Chairman, I want to find out from the Ministry of Justice how the Minister released the Solicitor General to go down to Mbarara and take the minutes of the General Assembly.  Secondly, -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  It is not a question time now.

MR. SSERUNJOGI: I thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I stop it.

MR. KASAIJA KABUUBI (Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you, Mr. Chairman, to allow me to contribute on this Motion.  1993/94 Budget, we need Shs.384 billion of revenue, 360 billion will come from taxes.  This is according to the Minister’s statement.  While I do appreciate that we should pay taxes, I am very sympathetic to the hon. Minister for Finance for having protected something which is not workable; because if we want to get taxes, and then you charge people so highly, for example, my Colleagues who have spoken earlier than me, have elaborated it so well.  A question, for example, of beers, you get a Kenya beer at Malaba and Busia at Shs.400 you go to Mbale, you buy a Kenyan beer at Shs.600.  Now, you come to Kampala here, you will get it at Shs.900 Uganda Shillings.  Now, our Uganda produced beer is at Shs.1, 500 onwards.  Really, any simple man who read economics, automatically knows that there is some sabotage somewhere; because, really, why do you want to make our industries out of business?

CAPT. BABU: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that when the NRM Government came to power in 1986, there was a factory built by a neighbouring country very close to our border and that factory was meant to supply this country with beer.  Because of our stepping up of our factories in this country, that factory eventually closed down.  That neighbouring country has never been happy at all to see this country get out of the quagmire of our economy and, therefore, they will do everything in the book to frustrate anything this country might do.  So, when we are arguing about these neighbouring countries, we should be very careful, that we do not fall into a trap of those neighbouring countries fighting us using our own systems.  Thank you very much.

MR. KASAIJA KABUUBI: I thank the hon. Member for Kampala for that good information.  In fact, what is actually being done, if we anticipate getting Shs.360 billion from taxes, we shall not be able to realise this and what will happen?  What will happen is this.  Many of our industries like BAT, Nile Breweries, Uganda Breweries, Mukwano, they are going to reduce production and once they reduce production because, their stocks are not selling, they will not have even to employ people, they will have to lay off the people.  These are all circumstances pertaining to high taxes.  Now, where do we go next? You have found that the private industries have retrenched people, you have also retrenched in the Government, now, really if you are a nationalist, where are we going to absorb those people who are being retrenched left and right. (Laughter) 

Now, I want to sound a big warning to those guys even the list in that kind of circumstance will not be fair.  Because these retrenches are going to be robbers, they are going to be law breakers, you have seen the state of robberies in Kampala and even up-country -(Applause)- this is all coming about because of mismanagement of the economy.  So, unless some of us can be borrowed and we help. (Laughter) You see there is no because, for example when we -(Interruption)

MR. RWAKAKOOKO: Point of information. I think Mr. Chairman, we should not over simplify this issue. I think we should understand regional economics. Right now in the neighbouring countries, it is true they are operating artificial rates of exchange, and this is why the prices are down.  We are not operating at the same frequency because here we have already heard, you just go in the bank, and you buy the dollars, and you pay.  In fact, it is possible that if this freedom was maintained, the Uganda Shilling can appreciate in relation to the dollar.  So, when we are discussing, I think we should bear in mind that the prices in the neighbourhood maybe also artificially low and may not be maintained.  That is a technical matter that could also proceed. 

MR. KABUUBI: Thank you for the information.  What I am saying really is simple.  Let me talk about simple economics, what I am saying for example, I will give you one item that I have talked about; beer.  Now, a beer was costing, before this budget was read, in Kampala and around the areas at Shs.1, 000, and Uganda Breweries had decided even to reduce to Shs.900.  But what came after the budget?  The price was raised from Shs.900 to Shs.1, 500 that is on the average.  Now, if you are a Uganda Revenue Authority Personnel, why do you increase that product by 50 per cent? Is that economics? If they could increase it say from 900 to 1,200 that is realistic, but Shs.1, 500 is not realistic.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: Point of information. Mr. Chairman, I want to inform hon. Kabuubi and other Colleagues, that when you are pleading for these factories, I trust you have done your homework properly.  When beer is being sold, the component cost of beer is not only taxes, and you are debating as if it is only tax that composes the cost of beer.  You have not looked at the minimal acceptable cost of beer.  If all the factories decide to spend on their overheads whatever they wish, which is beyond the reasonable cost of beer, are you going to argue that the people must take it? 

For us by the time, we were proposing these measures we have had access to what it costs to produce beer and what constitutes a reasonable return on this beer.  Now, in the economy, Sir, everything has improved, the interest rates have come down from 48 per cent to now 23 per cent.  I know hon. Luyombya’s interests.  But I think as a Member of Parliament, he must have a national interest.  The Exchange Rate has not all stabilised, has come down, the inflation has been contained.  In all other posts, these should have effects of bringing down the cost, and it is only the beer people and the cigarette people to whom these costs cannot come down.  And I am afraid the way they have used some of us to put to you their case without giving you the production costs of their factories.  We have been to the public rallies, we have been to the Press, we are here pleading for these factories, but nobody is kind enough to tell us that these people have done their honest costing and only tax has been found to be the problem.  I beg you and those who represent them, please, supply Members with a cost of production of your products. 

MR. KABUUBI: I thank the hon. Minister for those comments while I do entirely agree with him somehow. (Laughter) I am not really putting very serious case for the industrialist, but my main contention has been that the taxes should not move so much as to strain our industries, that is my point which I am trying to emphasise. (Interruption)

MR. BUTAGIRA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, what I want to give is along these lines. I was a little perturbed by the hon. Kafumbe Mukasa’s reaction, to a question that he raised in a good faith.  We as representatives of the people, we have been and we have interacted with people, we have seen the ethics of taxes on the goods not moving.  And, obviously this is going to affect revenue collection.  Now the hon. Minister should be very grateful, take our points and do his research instead of reacting as if we are against him.

MR. KABUUBI: Thank you for the information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the House that even some officials of the Ministry of Finance - I have had a chance to talk to some, and they have told me they did advise, they did advise about this budget.  But their advice was not taken, and there are few individuals somewhere either World Bank or IMF who are determining the budget.  Yes, this is a fact whether you agree or not but this is a fact. So, these guys, the Africans, are just. (Laughter) 

So, going on another point -(Interruption)

MR. KANYOMOZI:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, the point of information I am trying to give, is to the advice, it is alleged for example, that the reason why we never got the Budget Speech on time, was that we were consulting the IMF about it.  And that one if it is true, is very detrimental to our own interest. Further, I would like to take the Minister’s point and ask him whether high taxation on certain items that are produced locally here, is in order to effect efficiency in the production of those commodities? If that is the case, then let him tell us that that is the aim of his tax policy rather an revenue collection.

MR. KABUUBI: Because, Mr. Chairman, what we are seeing now, it is the cigarettes and the beer that are bringing a lot of revenue to our treasury.  So, now they make sure that they tax these two items.  Our Minister of Finance has not gone very far to find out how they can tax other things.  Because if you look at our tax structure, it is like a pyramid as someone was telling me this morning.  They only tax a few, and yet down on this side, it moves up like this, then on the base - many people are not taxed.  So, they want only to tax these few, and that is where they are aiming their targets.  So, really, I would suggest that there are so many ways of exploring taxes to tax other people, like farmers. (Interjection)  Yes, they should be taxed, and yet they are not taxed.  People in this country - there are people owning TVs, almost every house, are these TVs taxed?  So, this is another item where government should tax, on this issue of land, where land is left there idle, this is something which should be taxed.

MR. J. KAIJA:  Point of information.  The Member holding the Floor has got a very interesting point concerning this broad taxation, what he termed as a pyramid.  And he went on to say about, especially on TVs, but the problem is at the grassroots.  In some areas even bicycles have been levied on a very heavy tax of Shs. 1,000 whoever has one.

MR. J. NDEGE:  Point of information.  I would like to inform, Mr. Chairman, my hon. Member that it is actually the farmer who pays the most tax.  He buys salt, he buys sugar, he buys soap, and all indirect tax, and the farmer consumes 99 per cent.  So, the farmer is the one upholding all of us here.  So, I would like him to withdraw his statement and, I would like to inform you, Sir that on top of that, government is punishing the farmer by taxing him 2 per cent on what he produces.  You think of the price of coffee is 200/- and the price of sugar is 1,000/-, he needs five kilos to get 1 kilo of sugar.  Is that equitable? It is not, that is why we are trying to tell the government that the whole tax structure is very, very wrong, Sir.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KABUUBI:  Mr. Chairman, I thank you.  I have withdrawn that one regarding the farmer. (Laughter) I am a child of the farmer, so I must defend them.  Mr. Chairman, continuing with my debate regarding this budget, I would like to touch on agriculture.  Here, I think there is very little attention that is being paid by government about improving agriculture.  An example that I have in mind, there are some tractors that came about 3 or 4 years ago, they are laying at Namalere.  Up to now, they have not been allocated.  Some of us, we need these tractors, but we cannot get them, we do not even have money to buy them. So, we would request - I have got a point which I would like the Minister to note - it is not necessarily the Kampala people who are using these tractors to carry sand and bricks.  You see, we could use these tractors to argument our agricultural production by allocating these tractors to people in rural areas. But now when you say its only you who is going to pay  -(Interruption)

MAJOR GEN. TUMWINE: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor and the House that the value of those tractors if it was to be bought in ox-ploughs, every parish in Uganda would have a set ox-ploughs and that will mean 10 per cent times production of that parish.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KULANY: Point of clarification. Mr. Chairman, I would like to know why first of all these tractors came in this country and they have been lying idle for four years.  What are they doing in Namalere?

MR. KARUHANGA: Further information.  I wish to thank the hon. Kasaija for the Floor.  There is also another problem in Agriculture that is affected by the Budget and I would like to draw the attention of the House to this problem.  In the Ministry of Finance they have started what they call “The Core Factor” and this is not very well explained to us.  There are some Projects which are called “Core Projects;” Projects which the Government releases money to automatically. Then there are those, which if they do not fall in the “Core” projects, are ignored and will be shelved.  Now the livestock services project -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: You are not in order to dress like that. Proceed, Please.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I wish to thank you on behalf of my Colleagues at this decision about indecent dressing in the House especially by the hon. Maj. General and I am glad that this has come to the final end because we have talked to him in privacy and in public and he has been defying.  But finally the hammer has come, and we are very happy about that.  Because the dignity of this House must be maintained.

This Core Factor problem, for example, the Livestock Services Project that is funded by the World Bank and African Development Bank at 21 million dollars has a counterpart founders financing of 3 million dollars and Ministry of Finance has not identified this as a Core Project.  Therefore, everything to do with Livestock this year is going to suffer, and I think it is high time that we knew what this Core Factor is, and who decides on the Core Factor and how we can influence it as Members of the House. And I think, therefore, in the Sectoral Committee, the Committee of the Economy must dig and find out about this Core Factor that has recently been introduced by Finance so that our Agricultural Sector is not suffering. 

MR. KASAIJA KABUUBI:  Mr. Chairman, I have got one point and I will be finalising my speech.  Now, I would request to divert you a bit about a report by one of the Kampala Weeklies that came out today.  This is by The Monitor.  The Monitor came out with a story saying that, ‘when you are electing delegates to the Constituent Assembly, you ignore Council Members and Ministers.’  Now, I am asking, why should the Ministers and CMs be ignored in CA elections and yet, this is the same paper when we were debating the Constituent Assembly Bill; this was the paper that was on the forefront always castigating this Current NRC that it was so incompetent, and that it had no guard to discuss the Debate.  Therefore, I would request  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Concentrate on the Budget, please.

MR. KASAIJA KABUUBI: Mr. Chairman, again going back on the Budget I would like also to complete by talking about corruption.  I am happy that this time the Minister of Finance has increased the money on Police vote and IGG. But they have also left out the committees of this NRC, which have been doing a very good job.  Because we had a problem that no money is released to these committees to facilitate their work. I would quote, for example, hon. Nkalubo’s Committee has done a commendable job.  This was trying to stamp out corruption; embezzlement of public funds, but the Committee is not facilitated.  Therefore, -(Interruption)

MR. WAGWAWABI GWAIVU: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, the issue the hon. Member is raising is a very serious issue. Quite a number of people are asking; ‘what has happened to the Prime Minister’s list of 100 corrupt officials. Because he said it; the Press picked it up and nothing has been done.  Does it mean that there is nothing - I am sorry.  I am being interfered with.  But what I am saying is that the people I represent and many other people, I have happened to meet are getting worried. What has happened to the 100 corrupt officials who appear on the Prime Minister’s list and yet there has been a lot of talk by Government that we are fighting corruption. Is Government now embracing it or what?

MR. KASAIJA KABUUBI:  With humble respect, the question of release of funds to the committees of this House is very important because this House, people have a lot of respect for us and they know that we are supposed to be accountable to them.  Therefore, when we do any work here, we do it in the interest of this Nation.  We are not corrupt; this one I know and we are doing a silent job - even better than the organs of Government.

MR. KANYOMOZI: I just want to add on more information on that point. The committees of this House should be considered important.  For example, our own Committee on Parastatal, we started; we have been seeking an office.  We cannot get an office.  We seek the funds, and we cannot get funds. We are seeking funds even to publish a Report of the first work that we did.  We cannot get the money.  So, we find ourselves tied and the efforts that we put in are frustrated. I just wanted to add that on, so that the people feel and how I should feel that the efforts you put in electing to these Committees are not further frustrated.  Because I think they will assist the Government and the Nation to get rid of those problems that the economy faces. 

MR. KASAIJA KABUUBI:  Thank you very much for the information.  In fact the purpose why I brought this was because His Excellency the President, on a number of occasions has been disturbed by Pressmen asking him about this corruption and we must fight it all of us.  Everybody must fight it left and right.  So, really to me, the way I feel, that maybe Ministry of Finance is also trying or they do not want to release these funds.  They do not want to release these funds deliberately so that we do not probe into what is going wrong in their houses.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. LUBEGA WAGGWA (Butambala County): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I stand to support this Motion with a few comments on certain items.  First of all, I would like to comment on the Tax.  It is true that tax is very high simply because the Tax Base is extremely narrow.  The Tax Base is extremely narrow and that the Government continues taxing those items only.  When I come to income tax, we realise that the increase was 51.5 per cent that is on the higher side.  From figure of 34 billion to 52 billion although in this the Minister has put there on page 5 (Roman).  They put there 34 million instead of 34 billion and I request the Minister to correct that mistake.  When you go through that one, on page 5, it says 34 million instead of 34.259 billion shillings. When it comes to Customs Duty, it was also increased by 28.6 per cent.  From 122 billion something to 158, 261 billion shillings. In fact because of the narrow base, people have started complaining that the taxes are very high. In fact I agree with some of the Members who said the Ministry should look into other areas to widen this narrow base.  Otherwise, year after year beer is being taxed; cigarette is being taxed because they are the only items that have to be taxed.  Unless there is a way of taxing other areas, people will start complaining year after year.

On tax education, I sympathise with Government that they need funds to run -(Interruption)

MR. WANENDEYA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. May I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that we appreciate the point he is making but Badadiri are saying that there is a lot of reporting of Government funds which are lost and the Government itself does not do anything.  The reports of PAC are never looked into. The swindles in Government that are reported in the newspapers.  So, let Government collect that money from the people who have swindled, and then from there you increase the Tax Base.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. LUBEGA WAGGWA: It is true there has been embezzlement in Government Funds. I would like at this juncture, Mr. Chairman, to ask the Ministry responsible to organise Tax Education.  This is lacking.  People would like to pay tax true because they have realised that the Government cannot run without taxes. But they do not know.  Most of the people lack education on tax.  There is lack of tax education among our people.  I think the Uganda Revenue Authority should try to organise seminars not on TV because very few have TVs.  There is a programme on TV but who really watches that programme?  If they can go to the people and try to explain, it may help because a good number are evading tax not because they do not want to pay but because they are ignorant, they do not know where taxes go. If that one can be implemented, soon the Government may get something.  I do not think this 51.1 per cent increase will be realised.  We shall be really making a mockery.  

MISS WEKIYA: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Can I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that most Ugandans know where their taxes go, only that the policies have changed?  They now no longer see that their taxes go to schools and hospitals, as the case would be.  That is why they are remaining adamant to pay the taxes.  They do not know that we are first thinking about development before we thank about the social sector. 

MR. LUBEGA WAGGWA: Thank you for that piece of information.  Now, turning to inflation I appreciate the Government steps to fight inflation to a minus. But the people in rural areas have not felt this fight yet because the prices have not gone down yet.  So, if the Government says the inflation has gone to minus, there is a lot to be done because as I speak now, the price of sugar has moved from Shs.1, 000 to Shs.1, 200 in villages.  So, when you say the inflation has been fought to minus, they will be reluctant to accept that. 

Secondly, this Bank Interest, although it was liberalised, the banks have been stubborn, I would say.  If Government says the inflation has gone down to minus, the Bank interest rate is at between 23 to 28 per cent.  So, this interest rate is still high and the poor businessmen cannot afford this interest.  They cannot just afford this interest.  It is still very, very high and these banks have been very unconcerned.  Once they are told to reduce it a bit they are very reluctant.  Even coming are 23 it was a battle.  Yet if they continue charging that high interest rate, poor farmers will not go to the banks to get loans.  Even the businessmen generally will not be able to go to the bank, getting a loan with this high interest rate.  So, the bank should be responsive if the Government says, the inflation is now minus, they should also come down to about 15 per cent.  By now they should be charging between 10 and 15 per cent.  That could be reasonable.

I would like to say something about this U.E.B. tariff.  I concur with hon. Rwakakooko.  This has affected mainly the small-scale industries.  The Government’s policy is to have small-scale industries in rural areas.  But now nobody can talk about small-scale industries in our areas simply because the tariffs are so high.  Nobody can afford and to me it seems that the UEB tariffs are becoming inflationary.  I accept the information. 

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Point of information. Thank you Mr. Chairman.  Besides the UEB tariffs being very high, there is also the problem of installation costs. UEB is not willing to take up the installation costs.  They pass them on not only to the individuals but the industries and they do not credit those industries with the costs of installing either a transformer or the poles and yet they also own those properties.  It is so unfair that you invest in the transformer, invest in the poles, invest in the wires, UEB takes the credit and capitalise them for themselves and yet charges you to pay for them and there is no benefit to the investor.  This has created a crisis for the investors; the ones we are winning to come in the country.  There is one investor who wanted to put an industry in Kajansi but he was asked to pay 280,000,000/= for installation and yet there was no credit for him for installing those machinery.  That is a crisis, and we are developing in the reverse (Laughter)  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Maj. Gen. Elly Tumwine, is that a Kaunda suit? Maj. Gen. Elly Tumwine, please, that is not a Kaunda suit, please.

MAJ. GEN. ELLY TUMWINE: It is a Tumwine suit and I checked in the regulations of the rules governing this House, I found that it states, “of a decent dress, which is a suit” and Mr. Chairman, I am wearing National colours -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please, we do not have to argue about that.  That is not accepted, please.

MAJ. GEN. ELLY TUMWINE: Thank you, Sir. (Laughter)

MR. LUBEGA WAGGWA: Mr. Chairman, as I speak now a pole delivered to UEB here at Lugogo by any supplier - they pay 40,000/= including transport but after treatment, when you ask for a pole it is over a half a million shillings and that is too much for an ordinary person who may wish to have power in his or her house.

THE CHAIRMAN: Proceed, please.

MR. LUBEGA WAGGWA: Mr. Chairman, no this note, if the government is very serious with its policy of supporting the small scale industries - I just appeal to government, especially the Minister responsible who is not here unfortunately, to try and take the electricity to those areas where the government thinks will have small scale industries.  Otherwise, the government thinks will have small-scale industries.  Otherwise, the government should stop talking about supporting the small-scale industries in rural areas.  That one will not work and there is no use talking about it.  Another point is on the capitation grant to schools.  The government policy of sending grants to schools really delays. There has been a deliberate delay in submitting these grants to schools in rural areas and again With this capitation grant, Government gives the grant to the schools which have developed and these schools which are just coming up get very little and very late.  So, the burden remains with the ordinary parents in the rural areas. I would ask government, as it is a capitation grant to schools to review this policy; because when you come to Kampala where there  -(Interruption)

MISS BIRABWA KIWANUKA: Point of information.  Thank you Mr. Chairman.  May I inform the hon. Member on the Floor that the capitation grant give to a school depends on the enrolment of the children in that school? Thank you.

MR. LUBEGA WAGGWA: That information is very good but I said the policy should be reviewed.  This is capitation.  The developed schools with rich parents get more from government.  You see?  So, the policy, I am saying, should be reviewed and instead assist the schools newly built in villages other than assisting schools which are already developed.  Let me come to the pensioners.  I am worried that the government has put in the Budget a lot of money for paying these pensioners but these people really suffer in moving from the villages to the places where they are supposed to get their pensions.  It delays in the first place and it is too little.  Somebody cannot afford to travel twice to collect his pension.  I think the government should consider sending their money to the Sub-county; instead of asking somebody to travel so many miles to pick very little money.  It loses meaning.  Somebody coming the day after; they will say no it is not ready. He spends more on transport than the money he is expecting to get from government.  I would ask the government to consider this policy.  

I am sorry this one touches the Minister responsible for Internal Affairs.  Those are the unauthorised road tolls we see mounted or put there by the police.  When you travel on Kampala-Masaka Road, you get policemen there.  They sit on their motorbikes; every taxi going to Masaka or to Mityana has to stop, get something to pay to the police.  There was a road toll there that was removed and since it was removed, the police decided to put it there and collect money in thousands.  When you travel in a tax, you will see every taxi-man stopping to take money to a policeman seated on a motorcycle.  It is too much and the taxi operators are disgusted with that road toll which goes to the police.  Even if you go now, you will find them there: they come there from 7.00 a.m. to 7.00 p.m. seated on motorcycles getting nothing but money from those people.

MR. WASUGIRYA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, actually the issue, the hon. Member has raised is very true.  In places around Mbale, Tororo, Iganga - this is exactly the way the police is behaving.  A taxi operator has got to come and stop and he is able to pay either Shs. 3,000 or 5,000 for that day.  That is actually going on and it is very serious and the taxi operators are almost getting out of the game.

MR. KALULE SSENGO:  Point of information.  The lorry men are also not spared by these policemen.  Let us take the example of Masaka Road. A lorry men is stopped at Kyengera, he gives in some money.  He comes to a roundabout at Busega, and he pays some money.   A few yards from there, where you see a Mvule tree, the policemen are there, they stop him again.  He comes down to Natete, the same story.  So, that by the time this man comes to Nalukolongo, there you have about three points where the lorry man has to contribute money.  I hope something will be done about this. Otherwise people are getting fed up with the whole thing.  Infact, at times you maybe surprised, when a lorry man is stopped, he does not take there the vehicle to check.  It is the lorry driver who goes to be checked.  I do not know whether the fault is with the lorry man or the vehicle! Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. MUTEBI MULWANIRA: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  We have been virtually blaming the police and those of you who have had the courtesy to listen to Mr. Yiga in charge of traffic.  He even requested the taxi driver, if you are stopped by Police, please, remain on your seat.  If the fellow has got nothing to do with you, you go. On the other hand, I would like to inform the Members that this is a two-way traffic and some of the accidents you get are coming out of that practice.  These policemen or the taxi-drivers know very well that their vehicles have got problems.  The best way to avoid problems is to confront the policeman with the pocket money.  So you cannot just talk of the policemen encouraging bribery without looking at the lorry drivers, the taxi drivers who are encouraging the practice.  I think we have got to fight it out as Members of Parliament to make sure the Law is enforced but do not just take it as a one way traffic.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. LUBEGA WAGGWA:  Mr. Chairman, I want to leave that note and go to another point. (Interruption)

MRS. M. OKWER:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I just wanted to give information to the hon. Deputy Minister that these policemen are everywhere in all the trunk roads and what they do is that if the taxi man or the bus driver resists, they pull out their note-books and they start recording the number of the bus, just to threaten these people that they are going to be taken to court and so many charges.  Definitely the guy is bound to be frightened because if you are taken to court you will pay more than this and also the passengers are exposed to the hazard of all these inconveniences.  Thank you.

MR. LUBEGA WAGGWA: Mr. Chairman, I thank those who have given me that Information. Now, let me turn to the RC III executive with their 30 per cent collection retained for developmental projects.  Some 30 per cent of the total collection maintained. I think at this point we have seen some development being done by these RCs. I think, at least we can see iron sheets being given to schools; we have seen people putting up police posts with that money.  I would like to appeal other Minister responsible for this; the Local Government Minister to consider increasing that one from 30 per cent to about 40 per cent because we have seen some tangible development being made in some areas. 

Now, coming to some of the issues in the Budget.  It is government policy that we have police posts at the Sub-county level.  People have tried to put up those police posts supplying the local materials.  Now, under Programme under the Budget, I have forgotten the programme number, I think if the Government is encouraging this policy, they should try to give iron sheets and cement to those RCs or the local people who have tried to put up police posts.  Now, they have even accommodated those policemen year after year and government has not done anything.  I wish the government could give the materials required so that the police is settled. 

About the Ministry of Agriculture as a final note.  The Ministry of Agriculture has been allowed to spend a lot of money in form of salaries; but those people - the Field Staff, the Extension Officers are not mobile.  They just get salaries, they are in the office when they are supposed to go and meet the people and advise them.  I think the government should consider making those people mobile and reach the farmers; imply because our country is an agricultural country.  It is producing a lot of revenue to government and they are neglected or not advised.  With that big vote on the Ministry of Agriculture, they should try to give bicycles, motorcycles, tools to those people so that they reach each and every farmer. I am talking about the agricultural men and the veterinary staff. They are not reaching each and every farmer.  


Secondly, when I look at the programmes in the Ministry of Agriculture, I get worried about the vehicles in every programme and most of the money in those programmes goes on vehicles! Wherever you go vehicles, even if it is a small programme.  They will say staff vehicle, pick-ups, and vehicles in every programme.  So, the entire Ministry of Agriculture is spending almost 60 per cent of the money in the programmes on vehicles.  Some of those projects should be decentralised.  We have our District Farm Institutes in every district. Instead of keeping them here, they should be decentralised.  There is no use keeping them in Kampala here when there is a District Farm Institute in Masaka, in Mpigi and other districts and Iganga too.  They should be decentralised.  

Lastly, let me say something about these competitions. The agricultural competitions.  They are losing the meaning, in the sense that once people enter the intentions are good but the problem is that when people win those competitions, they have the facilities to win even the following year.  For example, if I go into that competition and get a tractor and other prizes then nobody can compete with me in the following year because I am already facilitated.  So, I just appeal to government - when somebody has won three times -(Interjection)- in my opinion, I say, three times, the next time he should be asked to stand down because it demoralises the other people who would like to come in and compete. I have seen farmers who have been getting tractors year after year and for three years this man is having three tractors and other implements.  So, in that case nobody will be able to compete with him.  

So, on that note, I am supporting the Budget with a few observations.  Thank you Mr. Chairman.

ADJOURNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN: With that we have come to the end of today’s Session.  We adjourn until Wednesday, 28th July 1993 at 2.30 p.m.

(The Council adjourned at 5.30 p.m. until Wednesday, 28th July, 1993 at 2.30 p.m.).

