Thursday 21 July 1994

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Vice-Chairman, Mr Ekemu, in the Chair.)

BILLS 
FIRST READING

DEPUTY MINISTER FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Mr Kafumbe Mukasa): Mr Chairman, as hon. Member will recall the Non-Performing Assets Recovery Trust Bill was read for the First time in the last Session. According to our regulations if the Session ends any business that was not completed lapses.  Therefore, since this is a new Session, I beg to read for the first time and I know that the Non-Performing Assets Recovery Trust Bill, 1994, be read a first time. I beg to move.

THE MINISTER FOR NATURAL RESOURCES AND TOURISM (Mr Sam Ssebagereka): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, ‘The Environment Bill, 1994’ be read the first time I beg to move.  (Applause)   

QUESTION FOR ORAL REPLY

(Question 16/94)

MR ATUBO: asked the Minister for Finance and Economic Planning that during the enumeration of people of Teso, there was war, many people left their homes for refuge and many places were inaccessible and deserted.  Even some of the enumerators who braved into some areas were killed and in other places enumeration papers were burnt.  The NRA soldiers who later took over the exercise could only reach the Iteso in the population manual.

(a) Is the Minister satisfied with the population results in Teso, and if so can he account for the drastic drop in population that has brought the position of the Iteso from 2nd to 5th.

(b) If the Minister is not satisfied with the results what step does he have in place to update the population data in order to correct the anomaly?

(c) The Financial Year, 1994/95 Soroti District has been decentralised and resources allowed presumably on the basis of the doubtful population results of 1991, but in case the number is found to be more than what is contained in the present population manual, what steps does the Government intend to take to correct that inadequacy in budgeting?

(d) Can the Minister assure this House that this same situation does not obtain in other districts of North and North-Eastern Uganda?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Mr Rukikaire): Mr Chairman it is my privilege to take this opportunity to clarify some issues surrounding the last census particularly in the contest of the question which has been circulated by the concerned hon. Member.

I would like first of all take the opportunity of informing the House, that the 1991 census conducted in Uganda is recognised internationally now as the best well conducted census in the whole of Africa -(Applause) And in this respect I wish to extend my thanks to the RCs to all the people who were involved to a director of the census hon. Member here by the name of hon. Opio who was the national field organizer having made this very important exercise a success -(Applause).  

The 1991 Population and Housing Census was conducted between the 11th and 19th of January, 1991, when there was insecurity in some parts of the country particularly the district of Soroti and Kumi and also in the district of Gulu and Kitgum.  This has caused some speculations that there was probably under a numeration in the district of Teso and the question that we have - in the district of Teso, and this has caused some concern and has resulted into a question, which has been presented to the House and is being answered today.

Now, deliberate effort during the time of enumeration was made to stop enumeration in the two districts under question, but this was largely counted by rebels to carry out threat to the population not to participate in the enumeration exercise but Government through the RCs, through the corporation of the district administration and through the security forces endeavoured tried very hard to ensure that there was a coverage of the whole country even including those districts where insecurity appeared to be prevailing.  

We have every reason to believe that even in the case of Soroti and Kumi there was wide coverage of the district building enumeration exercise, there, was however, some subcounties which has enumeration progressed became clear that the threats and the rebel activities were such that it would be technically impossible for our enumerators to cover those areas and this insecurity was particularly in Kumi and Soroti and in Kitgum and some parts of Gulu.  We looked at it and decided on some strategy we got in touch with our armed forces the commander of NRA and decided that for the protection of our enumerators and also to secure national coverage it is important for our enumerators to be accompanied by security personnel to enable them to reach all corners of the areas insecurity was prevailing.  

Now, we have some reasons to believe that because of the threats, which are going on, because of the leaflets which had been circulated when the security personnel accompanied some of the enumerators that it is possible that some would be respondents to the enumeration exercise may have been scared away and decided not to present themselves for enumeration. 

There is also some reason to believe that prior to and during the enumeration exercise there could have been some movement from these two assisted districts to neighbouring areas. There has been, therefore, a speculation that many people from Teso at the time of enumeration were in the neighbouring districts of Mbale, Iganga, Tororo, Jinja and Pallisa, as well as Kampala City.  This is how you go on to say that these people have now gone back to Teso now that the rebel activities are no more implying that the population of Teso is larger than what the normal growth rate derived from the 1991 census would portray.  

Now, the proportion of the population born in Kumi and Soroti and enumerated in these two districts was 77.3 per cent and 78.7 per cent respectively, I will try and elaborate on that one to clarify on that point.  There were large numbers of Itesos’ in Iganga, Kumi, Kapchorwa and Pallisa District who were already there even before the insecurity was experienced in both areas. Be that it may, looking at the comparative figures of all district and taking into account the national average, it is clear that the population born and enumerated in the District of Soroti and Kumi were lower than many district and lower than the national coverage.  This tends to confirm the view that there was additional movement of Iteso from Soroti and Kumi to neighbouring district before and during the census as a result of insecurity.  

To illustrate this point I have already said that the proportional of the population born and enumerated in those two districts in case of Kumi it was 77.3 per cent meaning that the difference between that and hundred were in other districts, either because they had migrated or because they have moved there during the period of the called enumeration exercise.  And in case of Soroti the percentage is 78.7.  This is to be compared at randomly pick take up some other districts to be compared for example with the district of Apac where the same percentage was 92.1 per cent, Arua where the percentage was 91.9 per cent, Moyo where the percentage was 91.7 and so on and so forth.  

Of course, we had some districts which had some technicalities like Kabale where we had 44.5 per cent but this is illustrated by the fact that between 1980 and 1991 there was very considerable movement of population migrating from Kabale to some other areas explaining a very low level of the percentage of the people born and enumerated in the district of Kabale.  We have other peculiar cases, which I do not have to go into like Hoima and so forth at present can be explained.

Now, having said that, I should say that there has however been the factor of slow population growth in Teso, which must be counted against what I have just stated. The slow growth of the Teso population is not a new finding; in 1959 and 1960 Population Census, for example, indicate that Teso, Kumi and Soroti District had the lowest fertility rate in Uganda.  A crude birth rate of 31 and 37 respectively while in Ankole that is Bushenyi Ntungamo and Mbarara had the highest fertility a crude birth rate of 53 and 55 respectively.  Now, the question has raised the point that Teso as a whole has removed from position number 1 to position number 5 over a period of 10 years.  

Now, I want to point out that a change in position of the tribal ranking with this kind of birth rate differential is inevitable.  A crude birth rate is the number of children born to 1000 population of mixed sex and age within a period of one year.  Even the 1991 Census results, that is the recent Census, indicate that Teso’s birth rate in terms of total fertility rate is still low at 6.34 for Kumi and 6.35 for Soroti and apart from the urbanised areas these two districts still show a much lower fertility rate than the national average which stands at 7.1.  Now, a total fertility rate is average number of children a woman bears through her reproductive life of from 15 years of age to 49 years of age.

Now, in the interest of the person who asked the question particularly -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, hon. Members.

MR RUKIKAIRE:  In the case of the concern of the question that these two districts have moved from the position number one to position number 5, I want to reassure him that it is not the only case where that has happened.  In 1969, the district of Mukono taken as a whole it was number one; during 1980 it had moved position to number 4. Mbarara District which in 1980 was number 1 as moved to position number 2 and so on and so forth. So, there is some kind of movement that takes place and therefore, the fact that the two districts combine have move from position number 1 to number 5 should not indicate that there is anything peculiar because it applies to many other districts.

These changes occur even between district as I have illustrated, the changes depend on different variables or a combination of variables under normal circumstances the birth rate is the most effecting variable, other variable may be population density, intermarriages, death rate, soil carrying capacity and so on and so forth. These changes occur even between independent states it is a normal change and more changes should be expected in the future.  If we continue at this rate of reproduction I can assure you that in the years to come the population of Uganda will be much higher than the population of Tanzania.  

Indeed I can even tell you that since we carried out the last population census there has been considerable change.  In 1991 when we carried out the census the population was put at 16.67, we have recently in September 1993 conducted what we call the integrated house hold survey and the result of that survey showed us that as of September, 1993 the population of Uganda within a period of slightly more than two years had moved from 16.67 to 17.7.  Using the same growth rate it means that in September 1994 in only two months to come the population of Uganda should be 18.2 so there you are.

Now, I want to move to the next answer.  Many other national surveys have been conducted, many more will be conducted between now and the year two thousand and one. This is in response to the question that if we think that there may have been some irregularities or inaccuracy what is Government planning to do, and I am saying many other national surveys like the integrated house hold surveys just conducted will be conducted between now and the year 2001 when we hope to carry out the next national census. 

For example, the integrated household survey and first monitoring survey were conducted in the whole of Uganda including Teso in 1992/1993 and 1993/1994 respectively. The second monitoring survey is right now ongoing and the democratic and health survey will be conducted between 1994/1995.  Other surveys will be conducted between 1995 and the year 2001.  Results from these surveys will be compared with the results from the 1991 census to find - and adjust them, there is no immediate plans to conduct another census in Teso or in any other district simply because the exercise is too expensive and in any case there is no way you can conduct a census for just a basic district because the whole exercise of a national census is and carrying out just one exercise in one district or in one corner of the country is absolutely meaningless in terms of the census process.

Now, as I said there is no immediate plan to conduct another census in Teso, another census is planned for the year 2001.  This does not mean that other collective measures cannot be taken.  In fact, I have directed the commissioner for statistics who is sitting right there to put special emphasis in two districts during the on going monitoring survey and it is my hope that as soon as the exercise is completed I should be in position to give you some more - into what may have happened and how we can carry out any administrative collective measures in terms of resource allocation which was next concern raised by the concerned Member.

Resource allocation in form of block grants to the centralised districts have been obtained by putting together all the money that has figure to been given to the different department or different ministries or sectors.  This does not entirely depend on the population, however as I have told if the information becomes available any necessary adjustments will be made.

Secondly plans are under way in the decentralised secretariat Ministry of Local Government to work out what is termed equalisation grant through the determination of endorsement profile for each district. Apart from population the profile will take into account natural resources, physical infrastructure, revision of social services, economic status of the district, industrialisation and so on.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR ADOKO NEKYON (Maruzi County, Apac): Mr Chairman, it is such a complicated question or distinguished question.  Could the Minister consider introducing or recording back unless we have a continuous record for our population and so as to make it easy for our people to obtain birth certificates, instead of forging them when they require them.

MR RUKIKAIRE: Mr Chairman, if government were to conduct such exercise on a regular basis, it will not be part of the National Census, it would have to be a separate exercise.  But I have every reason to believe that the system, which we have, requires that all births should be recorded regularly in the place where they are born.  These people are not in dispensaries or hospitals, the system of the RCs as established should be in position to carry out record for that, and my Ministry and my Department of statistics, could use that crude information for compiled together the information, that the hon. Member required. But even if it will have to be done through the RCs at the lowest possible level, and we can facilitate -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order, please.

MR KANYOMOZI:  Mr Chairman, I would like the hon. Minister to explain from the data, which we have, and given that, he has said that, people might have shifted from Soroti and Kumi Districts. How does he explain the drop of equivalent 7 per cent in Moroto?  It is the second highest, Mr Chairman.

MR RUKIKAIRE:  Mr Chairman, there are now 39 districts, today I train equipped with detailed information to deal with the districts of Soroti and Kumi.  As you can see, it is and I am not incapable of giving you the same information, if you can and formulate question line this one, I will be prepared to come back and give you the answer. (Interruption)

MR OKURUT: In view of the fact that, this was a question to be answered orally; and in view of the fact that, the Minister of State for Finance and Economic Planning, has given a very comprehensive answer.  So that, we can cross check and see whether to all that he has said is valid.

MR RUKIKAIRE: Mr Chairman, I can vow that, all I have said is valid; but I will have no problem in reproducing everything that I have said, plus the tables for circulation to the Members by the middle of next week. Thank you.

MRS OKER:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to give a clear definition of recording of births and deaths, to the Minister of Planning and Economic Developments, if we get an accurate finger in the country.  Initially, all births rates are recorded in the division 8 quarters, even those children delivered in the village; their parents are supposed to go to the Division Headquarters and book - the registry books are there and recorded; including death and this can bring us an accurate figures, of the number of children born during a certain period and also death. And this will make the Minister of Planning and Economic Development -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Put your question, please.

MRS OKER:  This will enable him arrive at a specific figure.

MR MWANDHA:  Mr Chairman, I probably I can put the question, because my question relates to the question which was raised by hon. Nekyon; which I thought the Minister did not answer adequately.  I think the question was, is government going to ensure the proper records of births and deaths are going to be maintained, so that the population can be updated as we go.  The answer, which was given, that the RCs should do this. I do not think this is the answer which hon. Nekyon was looking for.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MR RUKIKAIRE: Mr Chairman, I have already found out that, as of now, government does not have system or a department whose job is to record all births and deaths as they happen.  But as the hon. Member has pointed out here, it does appear that, in fact these records are available and that, well, I am going by the information provided the lady. And that, if such information is available, my Ministry will have no problem in establishing system whereby for instance, somebody - District Executive Secretary, can assembly this information together, and we can obtain in from them, and compile it together, and circulate it.  

In between censuses, like the one we had in 1980, and 1991, we do know the exact number of people who were born, we do also have the number of the people who dies. But that information is available only at the beginning and the end of the Census.  What the only Members are asking for, is that this information should be made available in continuous.  And, what I am saying is that, if this information indeed is available, I will be quite happy to organise that the commissioner of census, organises a system where by this information can be compiled and circulated to Members and the country at large. (Interruption)

MR OKWARE:  Point of information. The fact that, the census of 1991, and the last one, were not properly carried out on the ground.  For the following: one, the liberation war of 1979, disorganised the arrangements and it had to be postponed  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order.  I think you can only put a supplementary question, which you have.

MR OKWARO: Okay, thank you very much.  I would like to put a supplementary question that, is the Minister aware that the War of 1979 and that one which followed, interrupted the census which were to follow?  And also, I am not sure whether the Minister; is aware the last census was also interrupted, it was supposed to take place in 1989; then it had to be carried forward. (Laughter) Now, in view of this, can the Minister take into account so that there is a proper account on the ground, in the region both in the North and North East?

MR RUKIKAIRE:  In hearing all this information which has been given, and in our own analysis, and our own usage of census information, we have tried to discount the results of the 1980 census because we know that not only, were these conducted with extremely difficult circumstances, but most of the documents which were received from the various point of enumeration when they got to Entebbe, many of them were damaged and others were burnt. So, that the results we had were only partial.  That is why, we have relayed very little on the information which came out of the 1980 census, and that is why the census we carried out recently was so comprehensive as to try and cover some of the potholes of the previous one.

MR OBINA OKUMU:  Mr Chairman question No.18 of 1994. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI:  Mr Chairman, I think there are three questions in one. The first question is, whether insurgency decreased because of the peace talks between the government and the rebels.  And the short answer is a categorical no; the rebels’ sense signals or their desire to come out of the bush, through negotiations because the NRA had been heard from their hills.  The NRA has put tremendous pressure, on them.  They were constantly on the run, had lost moral, and suffered many desertions.

It is the well-known policy of the NRM to resolve conflicts, or disagreements peacefully.  Government, therefore, welcomed the rebels’ gesture and peace talks followed. So, the answer is that the insurgency was forced into a situation where in order to service, they tried the route.  The second question is whether government intends to resume negotiations with these rebels? The government policy and position has never changed. The amnesty and the Presidential pardon are still in place.  So, resolution by peaceful method, are still on the agenda.  The rebels have however, up this moment not indicated their willingness to talk.  

The third question is whether government can withdraw artithmate term it gave to rebels? The artithmate term was for freedom base, and at the expression of that period, hostilities resumed.  So, I do not see how practically that artithmate term could be withdrawn? If what hon. Obina means, however, is that there should be a ceasefire, if he is asking for a cease-fire, again the answer is categorical, there will be no cease-fire.  This is so, because the last ceasefire was abused by the rebels.  Kony wants a ceasefire to use it to prepare for war, and not to prepare for peace.  

During the last peace talks, they did not show any seriousness at all.  They continued to abduct girls, they bought pangas, ropes and other instruments, clearly in preparation for war; and they got fresh supplies of ammunition from outside the country.  Even now, they would use a ceasefire, to collect supplies of permanent ammunition and so on from their foreign backers.  So, a ceasefire therefore, is out of question.  After all, they are free to come out of the bush, any time they wished.

So, I would like to appeal to the local leaders including NRC Members from the region to try their best and persuade Kony and his rebels to give up their attempt to get power by force. As their efforts are futile and will not disrupt the successful completion of the democratisation programme, the National Resistance Movement has put in Motion.  Thank you.

Mr WANENDEYA: Thank you, very much, Mr Chairman.  Is the Minister aware that, some of the government informers, tell lies on which government bases its information of those rebels not willing to come turn to his government? I will give an example to this House, that a person like Central Government representative in Mbale, was giving wrong information; of saying that I want to be a Minister for Finance. (Laughter) I will finish off this point, because you would not get -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, hon. Member.  Please, if you are putting your supplementary question, you should be relevant; do not wonder into other region.

MR WANENDEYA:  No, the relevance is this Mr Chairman. That somebody says something in order to implicate somebody and as you would very well remember, even during Obote and Amin times, people were just implicated into giving information which was incorrect and most of our people, Members of NRC plus CADs in the North, have said, they are willing to talk to these people.  So, could the Minister be aware that, some of the information should be wrong.  Thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, government is fully aware that some of the information it gets sometimes is unreliable.  We have, therefore, over the years set up and perfected, the system of collaboration of information.  The National Resistance Government never acts on uncollaborated information.  Thank you.

MR TIVU:  I thank you.  Mr Chairman, the insecurity in the North is regrettable.  I remember when I was a kid in 1978, Amin moved with a lot of APCs and so on, trying to demonstrate his military power, but he was defeated.  Even in Obote II, the government resources were under Obote but it was seven men who went to the bush and defeated Obote and that is the peace we are enjoying.  I would like to ask the Minister, how come the NRM in whom we have faith has failed to defeat or to try to route out the insecurity caused by Kony whom we are told is fighting with rocks and stones?  And what assurance can the Minister give to the people of the north as a solution to this war, which is disrupting all sorts of development in the region? 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI:  Thank you very much for that question.  It is not true that of course - I think what is implied in the question is that Kony might defeat us.  I would like to give a categorical answer on that one that Kony is not likely to defeat us, he is not comparable to the NRA simply because the NRA had a good cause and it enjoyed the support of the population.  I have said before in this House that we changed tactics in prosecuting this war. It has been prosecuted in a manner calculated to inflict least damage and injury to the civilian population. Consequently, it has taken a bit of time; it has taken longer than we would have wished ourselves.  We are, I think reaching a stage where we will apply all means at our disposal to deal with Kony and this coupled with help and collaboration by the local leaders in the community there, I do expect Kony to be defeated in the near future; not very far from now.  Thank you.  

I said in my answer, that Kony used the last peace talks to replenish his stock of arms from a foreign power. I have told you before and I think I said so even today that Kony has been making desperate efforts to get supplies because he is running short once again and the reason why they are asking their foreign backers.  So, Kony is not throwing stones.  He has arms and very fresh arms too. Thank you.

MISS OKER:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  In view of the fact that the insurgence in the north has actually caused a lot of concern and embarrassment more so to the people of Acholi Region to our neighbour, the Acholi have actually denounced this for a long time ago and the Acholi elders plus the leaders including ourselves have joined hands to try to wipe out this insurgence.  

My question to the Minister of State for Defence is that we find it difficult despite the fact that there is heavy deployment in Acholi Region outnumbering even the population of the region –(Laughter)- I am speaking from experience because if I see the number of the troops on the ground, I find it very difficult when the Minister of State for Defence says the insurgence is going to be wiped out in less than a few days and yet it is continuing.  It is worrying us and we are very, very much concerned. We are actually fed up and I am telling you that I have gone through so many ambushes.  I have also tried to fight the insurgence as if I am also a military fellow. We have denounced this war and nobody is supporting this war.  The question is, why is the war prolonging and why is it that it is not being wiped out?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, like the estimation of hon. Mary Oker of the troops on the ground in Acholi, I would not mind having those figures because the population of Acholi is about 700,000 thousand.  So, if you have more troops there than the population, you must be having close to three quarters of a million people.  No, we do not have so many, and we do not need them, but I think really I had answered your question that we had been taking deliberate steps in prosecuting this war.  

Of course, one of the factors that hindered the speed was the fact that we were reorganising the army itself, demobilisation and so on. I can only say I thank those leaders of the area who have put in an effort towards bringing this way to an end and I would urge them to do even greater work towards persuading these people to put up arms so that the matter does not have to end militarily.  Thank you.

MR OTENG: Point of clarification. Thank you Mr Chairman. I want clarification on this. There were rumours that some of the mobilised force of the Acholi origin and a few others were marching from one camp directly into the bush and so reinforcing the Kony group.  I do not know how true this one is.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI:  Mr Chairman, it is not true.

MR NEKYON: Mr Chairman, in view of the fact that about two weeks ago, the new commander of the fourth division by the name of Sheikh Ali, while addressing a rally at Kitgum said that government is not in any way prepared to negotiate and that he was going to crash the rebels by force and due to the fact that this very week in CA, we were informed that the government is no longer going to negotiate with rebels and that they are going to use force to crash and due to the fact that the Minister himself has today told this House that the government is still prepared to talk to the rebels if they are willing, how is the Minister going to reconcile his statement and those of the commanders under him?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, I would like to assure this House that I am in charge.  Thank you.  (Laughter)

MR BAKABULINDI:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Mr Chairman, we are told and we have been told that NRA when it was still a rebel group in the bush, won the war because of the sympathy of the people and of course the support.  Should I know if that is the reason why they cannot win the Kony rebellion group because also Kony is having the same sympathy and support of the people? And if that is the case, what is the Minister trying to arrange in future to win such a support?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, Mr Chairman, I think again I had answered that question the last time I talked about the rebellion in the north.  I did explain in detail the causes of the failure, the reasons why the talks failed and one of the reasons I gave this House was that Kony demanded that we give him immunity against prosecution by people in that area for the crimes he had committed against society.  i did say, and I would like to repeat, that government was not prepared, is not prepared now or in the future to grant immunity to Kony or anyone that has committed crime against society.  I said we are not willing to give immunity to Kony from prosecution for the lips that he cut off of our women, the breasts, and the ears.  We shall not do that.  Therefore, it is obvious that Kony is more afraid of his own population than he is of government.  Therefore, to answer is, he has no support there. Thank you.

THE MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mr Amanya Mushega): Mr Chairman, and hon. Members, you may recall that there has been and still there is an outcry about the cost of education especially secondary education.  Some have blamed Parent Teacher Associations, while others have praised them.  

The Ministry of Education has been particularly singled out for criticism.  Some have even asserted that the NRM Government does not care about education.  Some brief background. It will be recalled that the introduction of grants in aid system in 1962, secondary education was for a long time supported funding through three major provisions. That is, capitation grants, block grants and capital development grants.  Capitation grants were calculated at a rate per student per day.  This was for the purpose of maintaining student’s welfare aspects of the school life.  In this respect, boarding schools received a higher capitation grant than day schools.  Block grants on the other hand were calculated at a rate per class per annum and this was intended to care for the student’s maintenance and pedagogical recurrent needs in class.  

Unlike the two grants already mentioned, capital development grants were planned and deliberately located to support capital development such as putting up of laboratories and workshops.  the support capital development such as putting up of laboratories and workshops.  The student was expected to contribute by paying regulated statutory school fees fixed for a year and payable in three equal installments.  

In the mid 1970s, government funding for education in this sector decreased dramatically. This continued in the 1980s. Parents were charged to meet the shortfall commonly referred to as PTA charges.  This earlier system of government grants as a way of funding secondary education would probably have been sustainable if it was subjected to frequent reviews.  However, owing to widespread outcries from the parents and the general public, including hon. Members of this House, the Ministry of Education undertook a serious assessment of the actual cost of education at this level in the year 1969, and was able to come up with reviewed statutory fees structure and capitation grants in a deliberate effort to rationalise and standardize both grants and statutory fees.  It was largely as a result of that concern for curbing the escalation of fees that the current government fees structure was adopted and that is at primary, lower primary, primary one, primary four, the parent will contribute Shs 2,500 per annum and the government would put an equivalent amount. Primary five to primary seven, the parent would contribute Shs 5,000 per annum and the government would contribute an equal amount making a total of Shs 8,000 and that secondary level at that time, having abolished the difference between day and boarding scholars as far as the government plans were concerned, the figure was fixed at Shs13, 200 as a parent’s contribution and Shs 10,800 as government contribution making a total of Shs 24,000 and you may recall this was shortly after the conversion of the currency and the figure at that rate appeared adequate.  

It will be appreciated that in spite of government’s intervention, the cost of education has continued to rise and in some cases the rise has assumed alarming proportions, let alone the related problems of lack of proper accountability for these funds in some cases.  Initially, parents intervened at various stages to subsidize the recurrent as well as capital development school budgets.  As a result of this, some schools have been able to put up teachers’ houses, classrooms, laboratories, recreational facilities as well as provision of transport and the like.  

The reality have is that schools have tended to overload the parents by overcrowding their development plans in a short space of time. Some institutions even present irrational assessments of say, one school charging a moderate sum of Shs 60,000 per term and yet another one in the same catchment area and at the same level of establishment may charge as much as Shs 200,000 per term while both claiming to have arrived at these charges democratically and in accordance with their needs.  

It is in this context that the general outcry against rising costs of secondary education in particular is a real and national concern, which ought to be addressed as such.  Whereas the fees structure in primary schools has been reactively boosted by the 50 per cent government contribution; that of secondary education calls for a reviewed in which public participation is necessary.  

It is against this background that it has been found necessary to appoint a team of very competent knowledgeable independent and distinguished members of the public to constitute a national task force to probe the cries about school charges and be able to recommend ways and means of harmonizing this charges; to find out whether the charges are realistic or not and if not realistic to recommend a realistic figure and ways and means of its management and control. The ultimate objective of the task force is to accomplish the actual cost; to establish the actual cost of education in day and boarding schools, and in urban and rural areas, as well as established and developing schools and be able to recommend what can be done to rationalise school charges.  

The people may ask why I make this statement here. One, originally, we did this work in the Ministry of Education, that the outcry has been from this House and the general public. Therefore, we want a credible task force to handle this because we want transparency and involvement of the public. Education is too important to be handled in the offices of Crested Towers alone.  

The terms of reference have been properly spelt out to the task force and will be communicated to this House by way of circularising at a later date.  The Members of this task force are: Bishop Gonahasa, the Assistant Bishop of the Kampala Diocese, as chairman. He is a distinguished man and bishop of good credentials; Mr Basil Kiwanuka as deputy chairman. He is a distinguished teacher, education administrator and currently chairman of the University Council of the Institute of Teacher Education at Kyambogo (ITEK), and also works with the Catholic Secretariat; Mr Moses Otyek, he works with the Ministry of Education and will be its secretary; Mr James Kalebo he is currently the Principal of the Uganda Institute of Management (UMI), as a member; Mr Tibarimbasa, he is currently the secretary of the Institute of Teacher Education at Kyambogo (ITEK), and wrote a thesis for his Masters Degree in the area of financing education; hon. Gertrude Byekwaso Lubega is an hon. Member of this august House and a Member of the Sectoral Committee on Education, and a former deputy head teacher of the school. Mr Mohammed Mayanja is an economist and statistician; we assure you that he will help from the angle of technical matters. Mr Byangulagone, a graduate of commerce specialising in accounts and he is working in one of the government departments.  Dr Richard Nduhura is a distinguished student in the field of Veterinary Sciences and an able farmer and school manager. Miss Florence Asimwe worked with the Uganda Martyrs University at Nkozi. Mr Sam Mulumba is the chairman of RC V, Jinja, and has played a great deal in trying to manage and assist education facilities in Jinja District; and Mr John Mark Tivu is a Member of the NRC representing the Youth in the North and a recent graduate in the field of Education, and we thought we would borrow from his youth and vigour to balance the forces that have been here for a little bit of a while.  They will study documents, visit some education institutions and receive views from the public. 

I appeal to this august House, heads and management of educational institutions and the public at large, to cooperate and avail to them all the facts that you may have.  I would have announced this task force in October last year, but due to the prevailing elections at that time, we refrained from doing so, because we thought it would have been a disservice to this noble task, we had been confused as part of electioneering. We are ready to so early this year, but then as you all know, Mr Akabway postponed elections to the end of March.  Now, the dust has settled down; it is time for business.  

It is my sincere hope that this will be a task for the whole country and their report will reflect the views of the people of Uganda and their recommendations will be an effort to ensure that education charges in Uganda are rationalised and they are controlled - are publicly known.  Thank you, Sir.

MR KANYOMOZI (Kajara County, Ntungamo): Mr Chairman, much as I welcome the task force, given the tendencies of our Commission to take too long, has the Minister given them a target so that they do not report in the year 2000?

MR AMANYA MUSHEGA: Hon. Yona Kanyomozi knows that we are not people who relax over serious issues and we have asked them to make their report in a period between one month and two months.

MR WOGWAWABI GWAIVU:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, I want to commend the Minister for the related report he has written. However, incidentally, we have just discussed and approved the White Paper and we are all aware that the White Paper came out with certain proposals, which of course, we have adopted.  Is it a vote of no confidence in findings of the White Paper vis-à-vis the fees or what, because, as you are aware, our Commission would have ended producing very little results and now that there is something tangible, as it is spelt out in the White Paper, these people - the commissioners who produced - the commissioners of the Kagimu Report, produced a very comprehensive report on our present structure in our schools.  What more would this task force really do?

MR AMANYA MUSHEGA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman, you may recall when I was resenting the White Paper here, and when I was summing up, I stated then and I will state now that we implement the White Paper, some of it will be implemented by the administrative measures and others will be implemented by legislation; and if it is an administrative measure and I mentioned then and I repeat now, that my Ministry will regularly report to this House for its consideration and approval and this is one of the steps being taken.  The Kajubi Report Commission was established in 1967, and it reported in 1989, and the White Paper was tabled in this House in 1992. A lot of water has passed under the bridge.  

So, this is not a vote of no confidence in the White Paper, but a vote of confidence in the White Paper and implementing the broader policies of the Paper to the reality of today and one of the terms of reference will be for the Commissioners to report the immediate measures to be taken, the medium term and long-term measures, always taking into account the recommendations in the White Paper, which this august House has approved unanimously, although I occasionally hear some people raising that when it was passed, they may have been a little bit unaware, and this report will be soon. 

I mentioned earlier that in 1989, we had an in-House Task Force, which did an internal job, but we think that education is fully important and so critical.  In actual fact, turning education around, is like moving a huge tanker at sea, you need a lot of guts and a lot of patience.  So, we are not making a vote of no confidence, and we want the public to be involved, to give this Commission information, then they concretise it and make definite recommendations to us for implementation; because this education is not for NRM, it is for the future and the people of Uganda, and I hope that this will be appreciated and I can assure you that this is not a political gimmick, it is a serious exercise to seeking for solutions involving the public on matters that affect the population as whole. Thank you, Sir.

MR WASUGIRYA GOLE: Mr Chairman, can the hon. Minister explain the discrepancy where by you find that some Government aided Primary schools, received the 50 per cent, Government contribution and others, have never received. (Interruption)

MR BUTAGIRA: Point of order. On standing orders, you can only ask questions following the Ministerial Statement, which are elucidatory.  Mr Chairman, is the hon. Member in order to raise a totally irrelevant question?

THE CHAIRMAN: The hon. Member is in order and the Minister was in the process of answering.  I direct that you answer.  Please answer him.

MR AMANYA MUSHEGA:  Mr Chairman, in a formative democratic process you cannot be too legalistic, sometimes you have to be adjustable, but the first things of course, is, the Member has made a mere allegations, which is not substantiated.  Secondly, when this money is handled - this vote, until recently has been handled by the Ministry of Local Government, but I am aware if I help him. Thirdly, money is released by the Treasury direct to the districts that also in turn makes cheques direct to the schools.  

So, what the hon. member needs to do is that, if this matter is in his Constituency, then he should go to the DEO and DEF of the district and he will be in a position to assist him.  My role is not to encourage intellectual laziness, but to encourage communities also to look for information where it can be quickly found.  I thank him for raising the matter.

STATEMENT AS CHAIRMAN OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE OF NATURAL RESOURCES, AND TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES

DR MAGEZI (Jinja Municipality, East): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for allowing me to make a statement as Chairman of the Sectoral Committee of the ministries of Natural Resources and Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, to the NRC this afternoon.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

DR MAGEZI:  Mr Chairman, it has come to the knowledge of the Sectoral committee of Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, that the Public Enterprises Reform and Divestiture Committee is in the process of selling off hotel units which have hitherto been the embodiment of Uganda Hotels Limited - a parastatal under the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities.  We have also been made to understand that bids for various hotel units have been processed by PERD and approved by the Divestiture and Reform Implementation Committee chaired by the hon. Minister for Finance.  

The Sectoral Committee has received the information to the effect that PERD on and above the 6th of July 1994, wrote to successful bidders offering them the outright purchase of the units as follows: Acholi Inn, offered to Messrs Rwani International Limited, for Uganda Shs170 million, Hotel Margherita offered to Messrs RECO Industries Limited for $.400,000 dollars, Mount Elgon Hotel, offered to Messrs Mbale Steel Wire Industry Limited for Uganda Shs1.25 billion, Mount Moroto Hotel offered to Messrs CODET International for Uganda Shs40, million, Rock Hotel offered to Messrs SWISA Enterprises Limited for Uganda Shs300 million, Soroti Hotel offered to Messrs Speed Bird Aviation Limited for Uganda Shs150 million, White House In offered to Kabale Development Project Limited for Uganda Shs600 million, White Rhino Hotel, offered to Messrs Odriga Estates Uganda Limited for Uganda Shs200 million.  We have also been inadvertently advised that Hima Cement has been offered at $.14 U.S. dollars.  

Mr Chairman, you will recall that we passed in this House a Bill entitled the Public Enterprises Reform and Divestiture Bill, 1993.  In this Bill, Uganda Hotel Limited was classed in class 11 of the first Schedule and according to Clause 21(a), the State has to retain the majority of shares of the company or enterprises.  

According to Clause 19 of that Bill, the Minister responsible for finance was required to open a redundancy Account at the Commercial Bank for the purpose of payment of compensation to employees who are declared redundant as a result of restructuring or repression of a Public Enterprise. Our concern as a Committee therefore, is: 

(a) How come the hotel units, which formed Uganda Hotels Limited, are being offered to outright purchase contrary to the Bill passed i this House?

(b) Even if it was necessary for outright disposal of these units, as indicated above, really reasonable prices for disposal of such important public assets.

(c) As the Minister responsible for Finance under whom PERD falls opened Redundancy account as required by the law.

(d) According to Clause 31 (i) of the Bill, the Minister, with approval of Cabinet by Statutory Instrument amend the first schedule by transferring one enterprise from one class to another, but then sub-section 111 of that Clause, required him to lay statutory instrument before the legislature within six weeks from the date of application.

Mr Chairman, the committee does not recall this House having seen such an Instrument in respect of Uganda Hotels Limited.  

(e) What steps has PERD put in place to ensure that the new owners take on the existing employees of these units?  Even if the new owners accepted to take on these employees, the fringe benefits like gratuity, leave allowances etcetera, earned while working for Uganda Hotels must be paid to those employees and this would definitely amount to a substantial sum of money as PERD or Government allowed for this.  it will actually include Uganda Hotels Headquarters staff; as the company cannot exist when all the above units have been divested.

(f) Should the new owners decide not to take on most of the existing staff as Government considers the political implications of throwing so many Ugandans out of employment.

(g) The offers extended to successful bidders are open ended, i.e. no time limit has been mentioned as to when the bidders must respond to the offers. This makes it very difficult for the management of Uganda Hotels to plan s for how long they will continue to manage those units before they passed over to the new owners. Also staff performance must be affected as they are now not sure of their future as no proper explanations have been made to them on their future.

(h) The terms under which offer for sale of these units to bidders seem to be unfair to the Government and therefore, the people of Uganda. There are no definite commitments required from the bidders, as to how they will make payments of the balance of money after the initial payment.  It is only in respect of Mount Elgon and Soroti Hotels, that the Bank guarantee of the balance was demanded; nothing has been mentioned should the bidder fail to pay the balance after taking possession of the property after the initial payment.

There is also a case for Nile Hotel Complex which was offered Allan Kay Tahar Fulwuti and Sembule Group Consortium for a joint venture in December last year.  Up to now, there seem to be no concrete measures put in place to incorporate the joint venture and staff and management of Nile complex are not sure of their future in the Complex. As stated above, this makes it difficult for management to plan for the unit and can lead to loss of morale among the staff.

Mr Chairman and hon. Members, we all accepted that divestiture was necessary, but requested this should be done systematically and openly.  However, considering the above and any other implications that may arise, as a result of this hurried disposal of public assets by PERD, the Sectoral Committee under which the Ministry of Tourism falls, decided that we should bring to the attention of this House these developments as a matter of national importance.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.  (Applause)

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I want to inform the Chairman of the Sectoral Committee on Tourism and Natural Resources that when it comes to PERD, some of the things that are going on, with never be in our national interest, the example, is that of Agricultural Enterprises which were sold away literally for peanuts without following the even proper procedures.  

I want to inform this august House and Uganda at large, that unless the policy on PERD is changed, foreigners will take over the economy of this country and it will never revive until it is reversed almost in the same manner as Amin could have done it in a crooked manner.  

Therefore, I am appealing to our Government - and when I talk as I do, some of the Newspapers call me controversial when something is in the best of national interest; even the Government itself would say that I am controversial perhaps, but I talk of what I know and it is what I know.  As an example, money was banked on Nile Bank Account, which was fine, that is for the Nile Breweries, but when, Mr Wakweya come back, he was dismissed for his job unaware and now they are banking money in private banks.  Was this tribalism or what was it? Unless policies go on changing. 

Not only that, but I request, since the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has come, he is most welcome, but I want to tell him that, that through the Chair of course, that we better look at PERD Policies; otherwise, this country of ours is going to be in foreign hands especially as far as the economy is concerned, even small things like selling bagiya, you find some people on the streets.  Is this the kind of investment we want in the country; and even when we think so much about Uganda Investment Authority, we have yet to see the billions of dollars and what has happened, and we want to see it on the ground rather than in rhetoric talk.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR ONGOM: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I wanted to have some clarification on the statement made by the  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MR ONGOM: I wanted some clarification on the statement made by the chairman of the Sectoral Committee covering the sales of the Uganda Hotels Limited.  He quoted sections, which required the Minister, if you wanted to change the schedules of the list of the various enterprises, which are either to be sold or retained to issue a statutory instrument and those instruments also were to be laid before this House.  I also, I am aware that one of the Articles of that statute requires that if before a company was completely divested, it should be turned to a Public Company, I want to clarify, first of all whether Uganda Hotels fell under the category of public companies and if so, and if not, was it turned into a public company before these sales were made? 

Secondly, in view of the fact that the committee is not aware of any Statutory Instrument issued, are these sales valid, since it would appear that these Statutes were violated in the sale of these properties.

MR KARUHANGA: Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I just wanted the chairman of the Sectoral Committee to clarify to me three points; some of them arising from the contribution from the Members on the Floor like hon. Wanendeya.

(i) Whether these companies, which bought these hotels, are foreign companies, like Rannie, RECO, Mbale Steel CODET, SWISA, Speed Bird, Kabale Development Project and URIGA; since the hon. Member were saying that foreigners have bought these hotels.

(ii) I wanted to find out when, especially now that the Prime Minister and the Attorney General are in the House, whether the contract committee, which this House has been demanding from Government, and also we were promised that it was about to be in place, has been put in place and has looked at these contracts between PERD and these buyers and advised that everything is being done according to the law.

The request I want from the Chairman of the Sectoral Committee is why this paper which he has read to us, has been left hanging; why is it that the sectoral committee has not come up having realised these anomalies which have taken place in the management of the Hotel Industry, why they have just alarmed us and then stopped.  Why did they not go on and say concretely, we require now a full House to take the following measures. A, B, C, in light of what they have found. Why have they left this situation hanging and what do they actually want us to do? To take note of it and leave it or do they want us to take concrete action but I think that the Sectoral Committee should have been man enough  -(Applause)- to say, ‘having noted these anomalies, we call upon the House to do the following.’  I think just coming up with this statement is just alarming us and it just excites maybe newspapers; but it will not be effective, in my opinion.  

Lastly, my own view on one of the things I have also found not being a member of a Sectoral Committee in the hotels.  For quite some time, there has been a problem lingering around Nile Hotel with the workers there.  I know and every time we are in the CA; we go out - some of the people who work there they come and complain that there is trouble here.  Sometimes we refuse to listen to them because we say this is not our business, a sectoral committee is there, the Minister in charge is there, who is now for the women and youth.  They probably should take their matters there.  

But why does this matter? Because it came to me sometime ago when hon. Wapakabulo was a Minister; I told him the matter to him, he promised to solve the problem but this problem has been hanging around in Nile.  It seems there has been a lot of mismanagement in terms of dismissals and new recruits and stuff - like that and since we do not have an institute for corruption in the country - in any university, it seems that these matters also hang around that department of corruption.  

So, I would like to know whether these matters in that hotel will come finally to an end.  Having said that, I hope that the chairman of the Sectoral Committee whom I am sure is also in the know of these matters will also clarify to us and maybe tell us what type of recommendation he has put in place and since some of our Members are members of the Board, I am very sure that they are in the know and maybe, this is the time that my Brother Levy will come up to satisfy us.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR OKODI:  Mr Chairman, the point hon. Karuhanga has raised is important.  There has not been noticed any mismanagement in Nile Hotel and when dismissals are made by a higher authority, that is a hon. Minister - the Board has got very little to do. (Interjection) I am right. I want to assure you, I am right.  The Minister is the appointing authority of the Board.  Once he decides to dismiss workers, the Board has nothing to do! (Interjection) 

Secondly, having heard a lot of public outcry about Nile Hotel, the Board has taken some action.  We are in the process of making some changes here and there to clean up the place.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

DR MAGEZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to be explicitly clear that we have not brought -(interjection)- a Motion to this House. The Sectoral Committee decided that we should make a statement to this House concerning aspects of Uganda Hotels; an area under our Sectoral Committee and I think this was in good faith so that Members of this House should know what is going on because you are answerable to some other people outside this House and you will no longer be taken unaware.  There are irregularities and put the record straight.

MR ABU MAYANJA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the House that under the Statute PERD will be making  - in fact, I have seen a draft of a Statement. A statement to this House is being prepared and I would ask hon. Member to hold; we are required to report to the House.  We shall made a report to the House in due course and that is not far away because the paper is being prepared and when the paper comes, it shall be debated; but I also wanted to say, of course I am still getting used to the new methods of procedure under this Sectoral Committee system, nevertheless this thing - the Sectoral Committee would want to come and make a statement to this House without having consulted with the people concerned with the administration of that particular sector. Neither PERD nor DRIK nor what.

MOTION

(General Debate continued.)

MR MARK TIVU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, to allow me to say something about the 1990/94 Budget and 1994/95. Mr Chairman, before I proceed, I want to inform the House and Uganda at large that the 10 per cent of our GDP is already in jeopardy. You remember His Excellency the President informed us that tobacco alone contributes 34 billion shillings in form of taxes.  On the 7th of this month, there was a hot meeting between the management of BAT and the farmers’ representatives in Wandi. The meeting ended up in a deadlock and the farmers have sworn not to sell their produce. Normally, at such a period, from July, tobacco should have been marketed, but because BAT has become arrogant and adamant to the farmers, the farmers have called the government to come to their aid because normally pre-plant prices are supposed to be given to the farmers so that a farmer can decide when to plant.  This one was done. But just two weeks ago, BAT decided to reduce these prices drastically.  Moreover, the input prices have been skyrocketed.  

Now, the farmers are asking if you are increasing the input prices, and you are reducing the product prices, how are we going to gain?  So, they are asking the government to come to their aid so that they can come to compromise with the BAT so that they can sell.  The other question they are asking is - last year when BAT gave 34 billion shillings to government farmers only got 4 billion shillings.  They are asking what rationale is there that you produce something, you are given 4 billion and the government is given 34 billion.  

Moreover, this tobacco of West Nile is exported.  Therefore, the question of saying value has been added, is not there.  The taxes are purely on the tobacco, which is exported.  Therefore, the farmers feel cheated and they are calling upon the government to come to their aid so that these taxes are not shifted on the farmers in form of reduced prices.  That was information on tobacco.  

Now, I come to the Budget.  It is a pity that we are depending on agriculture. I am concerned that Uganda has a lot of natural resources.  We have got minerals over.  Just some two weeks ago, I read on papers and heard over Radio Uganda that Karamoja alone has got 15 types minerals.  That is only what is discovered.  If you go to other places, you discover that in fact, all over Uganda we have minerals.  In West Nile, if you look at Mt. Wakini, you find that there is iron.  Even Bunyoro-Kitara used to produce iron, and they used to have their own hoes.  

Now, what is the state in Uganda today? We are saying we should get rich from scraps.  This is a very pathetic situation.  I am, therefore, calling upon government and therefore, the Ministry of Natural Resources to try to improve the mining sector so that we have our own mineral resources developed so that we can also develop the industrial sector other than over depending on agriculture, which is faced with a lot of natural hazards.  

It is pathetic to note that the agricultural sector does not contribute; the reason given to us was that there was drought but I think there are also some other reasons.  I was in Mubende and Masaka, I found there were a lot of -(Interjections)- I discovered that we have large areas there, which are owned by what are called absentee landlords.  Some people get land, they lease, they even receive loans and they divert these loans to other sectors.  

I am, therefore, calling upon the ministries concerned that we should not be deceived and also we should come up with a proper - especially my colleagues who are in the CA, we should come up with a proper land policy so that we must utilise properly those lands and we must give those lands to people who can utilise them.  Why should you get land, leave it idle, get government money and you invest it somewhere.  You are cheating the agriculture sector.  This is a very pathetic situation we must address ourselves to. 

Let me also address myself on the health sector.  I wish to inform, Mr Chairman, those of us who have been reading newspapers we have learnt of outbreak of Malaria.  Indeed very many people are dying of malaria.  I am just three days from the rural areas; I discovered that in the hospitals of Maracha, Yumbe and Arua alone we are losing at least 10 people per day because of malaria.  This is a very pathetic situation, which the Minister of Health has to address himself to.  Another issue Mr Chairman, the -(Interruption)

DR MAGEZI:  Point of information.  I wish to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that the issue of malaria is a very serious problem in the country and in a place like Kabale where there used to be no malaria, the strand of malaria that is in Kabale now is very resistant. There are no medicines in most of the dispensaries in Kabale District.  The situation is so bad that burial is becoming a full-time job and I think the Ministry of Health must come to the rescue of the ‘wanainchi’ because the situation is getting out of hand.

MR KABUGO:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to inform the hon. speaker holding the Floor that the situation of malaria is not affecting only Kabale and his own area, but it is just even near here in Nakaseke and in Nakaseke, we heard a news report - the District Officer sent just a junior staff to check on the information and the man met me at home; I gave him the RC authority to go around and the following day I just heard the District Medical Officer refuting the reports that appeared in the newspaper that there are no deaths in Nakaseke.  Whereas, even on Saturday I attended the burial, and it is on now and then - we do not have hospitals, we do not have dispensaries, not even AID posts there.

MRS KULANY:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to inform the speaker and the House that actually even for us in Kapchorwa, we had no malaria cases but this year the situation is very grave, and as I speak, almost everyday a person dies in Kapchorwa Hospital out of malaria. So, I think government should take note of it and take some measures about it.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR A. MAYANJA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, out of the information, especially given by hon. Tumubweine about Kabale; I would like to inform the House that until recently, there were no mosquitoes in Kigezi and in Kabale.  This has been brought about by the uncontrolled use and wastage of the wetland.  This has disturbed the climatic conditions there; the temperatures have gone up resulting in malaria, mosquitoes and so on.  

Now, the government is in the process of bringing a Bill to this House and to control and manage the use of wetland throughout Uganda.  I hope it will be supported by the House but before doing that even before the Bill comes, I would like to appeal to hon. Members of the House; especially those areas like Kabale to take immediate steps to alleviate or to ameliorate the situation by instructing or appealing to their constituents to refrain from uncontrolled, unrestricted use and misuse of the wetland.  Thank you.

DR LUYOMBYA:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the House that the problem of malaria may not be as simple as Members may think.  While there have been environmental changes in Kabale, and somewhere else, change in temperatures to levels where mosquitoes which carry these organisms can breed - if you have mosquitoes, they need to take infected blood from someone who is carrying those parasites.  There is also movement of people to somebody who was in Kabale, those who remained there, they rarely got this problem - but there is also movement of the population.  

Secondly, it is not only the drags people should crave for.  The best way is to go for preventive measures.  That is to interrupt the cycle of the mosquitoes.  You have to avoid stagnant water, you have to spray and these measures were in place at one time but unfortunately, the services broke down.  They need to be revitalised.  Thank you.

MRS SEBAGEREKA:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the House that a seminar was held in Mbarara about three weeks ago and another one in Jinja by the Medical Association on the eradication and methods and use of drugs to curb or control malaria.  Most of us here were invited but only very few attended. The Mbarara one was attended by hon. Elly Karuhanga and myself -(Interjections)- I want to clarify to the Members in addition to what hon. Dr Luyombya and the Attorney General, what they have stated; the onus is still on us also to make sure that we spray the breeding places of the mosquitoes and carry out proper usage of drugs and control of malaria.   I thank you.

DR MAGEZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I wish to seek clarification.  It may be from the Minister for Health but also through the 3rd Deputy Prime Minister. I appreciate that in Kabale, we might have participated in restoring the ecology and balance of nature.  I also appreciate that we need to do something about it now.  But the clarification I am seeking is that as we talk now, people are dying.  As we talk now, no Member of this Parliament has the capacity and resources to spray anti-mosquito medicines. I hope I am right.  Nobody has the capacity and the resources to do that. I appreciate that we need to educate our people to ensure that we control mosquitoes and actually have preventive measures. But in the interim situation, are we going to wait until that Wetland Act is passed?  Are we going to wait until people are finished and they cannot actually see the wetland restored?  The issue is, I need clarification, what do we do now?  What is government trying to do to ensure that in areas in Kapchorwa, areas in Kabale, which were formerly without mosquitoes and people, had no immunity and now they have mosquitoes and they have no immunity and they are dying in plenty?  What do we do now?

DR MATOVU:  Point of information.  The information I want to give is that as Dr Luyombya has said, the malaria issue is very complicated and that there might be some resistant strains of malaria, which have got to be studied, and this is connected with the abuse of the use of malaria drugs.  This has got to be studied and as far as I can remember, I think there is a study being started at the Virus Research Institute on the question of malaria issue to answer most of these questions.  It has started and some medical research does not end within a week or so.  But then I think that most of these questions will be answered soon.

MR TIVU:  Thank you very much hon. Members for this information.  It really shows the gravity of the issue.  Also related to the issue of malaria, I also noted the outsprings of drug shops.  I was in Kumi and I found there was a drug shop, which was being run by malnourished personnel, and I asked categorically for him to give me a drug and I use. I said I use paracetamol and he told me there is no paracetamol but when I asked for panadol, I was given.  I did it deliberately to test whether that was a medical personnel because paracetamol is a medical name for panadol.  So, this goes to explain that we are making health, which is a very important and cannot be replaced; life that cannot be replaced being attended to by unprofessional people, that is a criminal act. Therefore, I call upon the Minister for Health to regulate the activities of these drug shops, which are being run by non-professionals. They are selling retired drugs, which are poisonous.

MR ROMANO DRATROTRU:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, in connection with the careless use of medicines throughout the country, there are P4 or P5 leavers who go around administering drugs, now in Uganda which acts as an easy way to spreading diseases.  It therefore, appears that our Health Ministry is not having a control of the use of medicine and there is no category of qualified people who should administer these very important drugs to our country.  This is giving us a very big concern.

MR BART KATUREEBE:  Point of information. Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Unfortunately, I cannot start on my area because I was not here when the question was raised and until I grasp the question, I cannot answer it.  But on the immediate proceeding question that has been raised by the Member, I want to say that the Ministry has been concerned about the proliferation of drug shops and misuse of drugs and indeed the bringing here of the policy on drugs, the Bill that we passed here, it was aimed at the control of such things as well.  We have now put in place a Drug Inspectorate which will have the task of inspecting such drug shops and making sure that whoever is dealing in drugs first of all, is qualified to do so and he is selling the drugs that is licensed and classified to sell.  This has now been put in place and it will be an inspectoral role throughout the country.  Thank you very much Mr Chairman.

MR ABU MAYANJA: Point of information. Mr Chairman, this matter is very important and it affects the health of the people.  If hon. Members know like my Friend over there, our people who are not qualified but who are administering drugs; part one drugs and that is criminal. The selling or the administration of drugs by unqualified personnel; that is to say poison, part one poison drugs and the Drugs Act; it is illegal, it is a criminal offence and it is a police matter.  Therefore, in addition to the Inspectorate which had been set up by my Friend there.  I would say that it is the duty and responsibility of every person - (Interjection)- you will inform me.  For me, I am informing.  So, wait a minute.  The hon. Members especially the leadership of our people, the RCs and so on, these people who call themselves doctors and do injections whether they are not qualified, must be reported, prosecuted and punished in accordance with the law.

MR TIVU: Thank you very much for that guidance in that information. Mr Chairman, I also call upon our professional medical personnel.

MISS BINTU:  Point of information. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to inform the hon. Minister that some of these clinics are being manned by the doctors, but then they put their wives and relatives to operate in these clinics.  I have true evidence in my district. I took a relative there in a clinic with prescriptions on the paper but this lady did not how to read.  She first rushed out to go and find out where the doctor was so that he may read and explain back and then she should be able to give the drugs.  Thank you.

MR TIVU:  Mr Chairman, that is over commercialisation of our profession, which is very dangerous.  When you over commercialise your profession, it becomes dangerous to society, which we should avoid.  I would say our medical trained personnel should show professional ethics and I call upon them also to detect and that at times, I get annoyed when the few doctors we have been appointed to other positions.  I now call upon them, if they are doing those jobs, please let them also try to devote some time to maintain our lives.  

To wind up, let me talk about the number undisguised youths in urban areas.  Right now, if you go to the taxi park, you find there is only one taxi and there are about five boys shouting to direct you to enter that taxi. The question I have been asking is, how much money is being given to these boys and if at all they are given money, how does this money really contribute for their lives in full? Now my analysis has been that those boys are just pretending themselves to employ themselves there and at night, they may turn out to be very dangerous elements.  Because that money is not enough to sustain their lives.  They are disguised as employed and they are just pretending to do something there and then there are pickpockets and so on.  I therefore, call upon the responsible Ministries to find ways and means to regulate the activities of urban dwellers who are disguised as employed.  

To end, I was in Mbale and I found that there are a lot of street boys.  When I asked some of those boys, they told me that their parents died and so on.  I went to Katanga, I found there were also a lot of boys who are stranded.  Katanga is a place around Makerere.  I am a sociologist by profession, and I always go and do research. They told me that they do not know their parents, but they are surviving on very bad methods.  I am, therefore, calling on the responsible Ministry, to try to take into consideration the elements of these boys because when we leave them like that, they become dangerous citizens in future.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MRS BAKOJJA (Women Representative, Mpigi District):  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I thank you for availing me this opportunity to address this august House.  I feel privileged to belong to such an august House and I would like to thank Members for the warm welcome that was accorded to me when I came into this green House and I would like to assure the hon. Members that definitely in about five or ten years, I will be sitting in the first place I was introduced to when I came in this August House.  I would like to thank the NRM Government and this august House for the wonderful work done and for the peace and tranquility brought to this country.  (Applause) I would like to thank the President for opening this 8th Session and the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning and Government for bringing about a balanced speech.  

In my capacity here, I represent the people of Mpigi District. When most people hear of Mpigi District, they think it is a very rich district, but that is the contrary.  My district is very poor. The people are generally very, very poor in the rural areas. I wish government would find ways to develop the rural areas; like for instance, my district in one of the towns that is six or seven miles from here, which is called Bulega on Mityana Road, there is no electricity and there not social services like water.  

So, this makes it very difficult for anyone who would like to engage in farming because there is lack of water in my district. My district is very potential for agriculture but the agricultural policy needs room to be desired.  The policy is not interlinked with the liberalisation in marketing because due to the extreme poverty of farmers, they sell their products to send their children to school and be able to get paraffin or medicines if available.  

I would like to request the Ministry of Agriculture to see that gets a way of establishing an agricultural bank, which could help small-scale farmers.  I understand that the UCB has such programmes, but I fail to see them completely.  

I would also like to seek guidance from the Ministry of Agriculture and the hon. Minister for Agriculture about the coroner coffee. A lot of our people are encouraged to grow coroner coffee but from the rumours they have, I understand that robust coffee is still very popular in Europe and it is the coffee they find that it blends well more than coroner coffee.  So, I feel that if this rumour is true, that our farmers are being encouraged to grow something that is not accepted on the international market but as I said Mr Chairman, I need guidance. (Interruption)

MR NTIMBA: Point of information. If the hon. Member giving her maiden speech, it is that the agricultural experts have told us that coroner coffee is a form of robust coffee which has scientifically been worked in such a way that it grows faster and is comparatively more disease free and more economical to grow and process.

MRS BAKOJJA: Point of information. Thank you very much hon. Member for the information. I would like to go on the breakdown of the social welfare especially in my district.  Our youths in my district - I do now know about the other districts - but in my district are engaging more in alcohol intake. I do not know the cause of this activity of alcohol intake but I think it could be due to the lack of economic activities. I appeal to the Ministries of Local Government, Internal Affairs and Health to devise strategies to see how they could assist our youths in their economic strategies. 

MISS BINTU:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that during this Budget presentation the government gave the youths and the peasants a soft loan of six billion shillings.  Thank you very much.

MRS BAKOJJA:  Thank you hon. Member for informing me but my youths have not had a share of that loan as yet.  As regards education and White Paper, my concern is the school-going children in my district.  Most of the problems concerning the school age going children in my district who are not going to school - I am sorry to say that emanates from men.  I am speaking on behalf of women because most men abandon their children and most office men actually engage themselves in drinking alcohol.  I have seen some men who drink one crate of been or more than one crate at Shs 1300 per bottle but yet their children are not going to school.  So, they leave poor women to support their children. 

I appeal to government to devise ways of protecting these children and prosecuting such parents who are abandoning their children because it is an offence not to be able to support a dependent child.  And, in my district, we still have a lot of children who are not going to school.  They are being employed when they are underage.  I still appeal to government that at least it should make a research and go for example into some of the houses here is Kampala. You will find that most children who are employed  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, you will not that the hon. Lady is making her maiden speech and she deserves courtesy from all of you. So, that is out of order.

MRS BAKOJJA:  I thank you Mr Chairman. I think there is a law against people who employ young children under the age of 18.  This should be emphasized upon and implemented. The Ministry of Education I think, should try to bring model schools in all the districts.  For example like my District in Mpigi.  If the Ministry of Education were to bring a model school in our districts, I think, education would be improved upon; like for example, I come from a district which has most of the best schools in Uganda; St. Mary’s Kisubi, Nabbingo, Budo, Gayaza, etc.  

But if you would make statistics in the schools, you will find that, most of the students in the schools are not children from Mpigi District; they are from other areas; those schools are made for the well to do, not for the local children.  So, I would urge Government to take up model schools whereby they are fully supported by Government and well equipped and with teachers to enable those children in the rural areas to obtain a good education.

On environment, I am a bit disappointed the policy on environment and the laws are very weak, if someone is caught with a full lorry of timber, he has obtained legally to other -(Interruption)

MR ADYEBO: Point of information. Mr Chairman, may I inform the hon. speaker, that Government is aware, to assist and update as many schools as possible in the country, so that they could have the Gayazas, the Kings College Buddos, the Kisubis, the Namiryangos, spread throughout the country.  In that respect, as a modest start, my office has earmarked 23 secondary schools in 11 districts of Arua, Nebbi, Moyo, Gulu, Kitgum, Apac, Lira Soroti, Pallisa, and Kumi as a start -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order, please.

MR ADYEBO: I said, that is a modest start and I am thinking that of those selected secondary schools, two per district, in each district one should be for girls so that we can bring up the education of our women alongside of men.  This is just a modest start, which came through a small branch under the office of a Prime Minister and I am thinking of inviting the hon. Members from those 11 districts sometime, towards the end of this weekend, so that I can officially tell them what we are doing.  I hope, if you take these steps in few years time, we shall create the Buddos, the Gayazas, the Namilyangos, throughout Uganda.  Thank you.

MRS BAKOJJA: I would like to thank, the hon. Prime Minister, but I would like to request him to spread the distribution in all districts.  Mr Chairman, as I was saying that the law on environment is being weak.  If someone is caught stealing timber illegally, they are either fined Shs1, 000/- less than Shs10, 000/=.  If we are to protect our forest, we should look into this, and there is no monitoring.  Once a policy is put up, there is no monitoring, for instance, the President instructed that every homestead should plant trees at their boundaries, but how many have done this? How far have they achieved this? There is lack of monitoring.

Finally, in my concluding remarks, I would like to thank you very much for your wise guidance of this august House, and I would not like to go without mentioning the Constitution-making process that we are going through. I would like to appeal to all Members of this august House, that when we are debating and discussing the Constitution, we should reason, we should use reasoning and not the emotions; we should try to live together, we should try to forgive each other, so that we bring back a permanent co-existence to the fellow Ugandans. Mr Chairman, I would like to thank you, very much, and the hon. Members.

MRS NKWASIBWE (Women Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Chairman, for giving me this opportunity to support the Motion.  As we make our observations on the First Financial Year, and the coming Financial Year Budget, I would like first to remind the House of the recent concluded exercise, where children of this nation were involved in the making of the new Constitution.  The achievements made showed that children were guided very well and recommendations and their report to the CA indicated that when children are properly guided, they could perform very well like us adults.  But on the whole, because they are children they are still learning, and where learning is concerned I know the Government has plans and more programs to involve the children in other sectors of development not only political.  We are considering the Budget.  

It has been said that the economy has grown. I do not doubt that but what have our children got to benefit from this growing economy. First of all, health of our children is pathetic in the rural especially.  And only because there is general poverty, the wealth or the richness, is recognised in the Government sector. But I think Government renders services for the development of everybody in the nation.  Now, our children either rural or urban where you hear of deaths as the hon. Minister of Agriculture said yesterday - more deaths are more of children than adults.  So, what has Government put in place or what has it go to make sure that it protects our children.  

On the health issue, where the economy is hitting hard I would request the Government to offer free medical services to our children.  They should not be children to be used to give proposals to make the new Constitution when there is a whole CA. They should be looked after - their interests should be looked after first.  I tend to believe that children who were involved were those of the well to do.  But we have potential leaders in the rural areas, and they are very poor.  

The other day some members expressed concern over milk, which gets wasted because it is not collected.  It gave an impression that the country produces too much milk.  But the question is it evenly distributed all over the country. Our children enjoying the milk - what has Government in place to subsidise basic requirements for the well being of our children.  Milk may be split in Ntungamo because the dairy corporation did not collect it.  But I can assure you many children have no access to milk which some times gets wasted, because their parents are too poor.

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information. Thank you.  I wish to inform the hon. speaker, and the whole House that what the hon. member is quite correct.  There is plenty of milk in the Western Region, which the other Corporation, because of privatisation, cannot absorb.  So, what the other Corporation has put in place is to collect that milk, which can be ably marketed because of the process of privatisation. However, the other Corporation has licensed certain people who are willing to enter the milk Industry and they have got licenses to trade alongside with Dairy Corporation.  

In the meantime, Dairy Corporation has pressed orders for vehicles to transport some of this milk and coolers of course, to transport some of this milk to other areas.  As I speak the milk from Western Region goes as far as Mbale and Sebei and even Soroti.  The only problem is, it is very expensive because of the law purchasing power. And this is because of high taxation. Taxation has affected the Dairy Industry - the farmer is paid only 180 and yet the in puts are very expensive.  So, maybe Government will have to revise the taxes products, especially, the essential ones for our babies of Uganda.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE (Mr A. Kafumbe Mukasa): Point of information. I would like to inform the hon. Members that there are no taxes on agricultural inputs, and those people who want to escape tax are advised to go into the agricultural sector.

MR WANENDEYA: Point of information. Thank you Mr Chairman. I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that this talk of the economy improving is not possibly true because the world -wide fund for nature and Christian aid produced a Report where they found, and this is contained in the New Vision of Wednesday, 29th June, 1994, it was by a writer, and it criticises so widely the structural adjustments as not having contributed totally to the economies of the developing countries and we can see this and the whole world goes including Christian Children’s Fund when they came here. So, this business of talking that the economy is improving, if anybody wants to know, let him go to Budadiri, and Ntungamo to get those things reported right.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

CAPT. GASATURA: Point of information. Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I wish to give the information to hon. Member on the Floor and indeed to the whole House, that the issue of the Western Region has been a point to many farmers, in that we have encouraged many to produce more and they have produced substantial quantities, but in other areas of the country, it is in shortage.  So, if what the Chairman of the Dairy Corporation is claiming to be transporting all, actually they do transport once or twice a week.  

Secondly, with the opportunity that the hon. Prime Minister is here, this links in with Yesterday’s issue of Government Food Policy, which is non-existent altogether. Yesterday the hon. Minister for Agriculture told us that she only responsible for production and we gave her marks, and immediately next to her, the hon. Minister for Trade and Industry, sells everything that he can only to find Ugandans going across Kenya to buy their own posho and Kenyans are saying; ‘lakini waganda hawa niwajinga kweli,’ meaning these Ugandans are stupid really.  They sell us the food at price X and buy it back at X plus X.  I just wanted to bring this up; that there is a need for a coherent Agricultural and Food Policy, a marketing policy; and the need to protect our people. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR FINANCE (Mr A. Kafumbe Mukasa): Mr Chairman, this day I do not know what has happened to my Friend hon. Gasatura.  This food for example, I want to put in a record, while there was shortage of food in some areas, this country never imported food.  The money Prime Minister issued Shs1.7 billion bought food from Uganda.  It is not true that we first exported all the food then we got the money to import the food from Kenya and bring it to Uganda.  The money was spent and the food was bought from Uganda for re-distribution in areas, which were affected.  That is a fact, which you must put on the record.  

Secondly, as far as milk is concerned, hon. Members let us follow our statistics.  Three years ago, this country was being fed on imported milk, powdered milk, which was being managed through Dairy Corporation and distributed.  Today, I am glad to report that, all the milk we drink is processed by Dairy Corporation and is produced from Uganda.  Therefore, although the situation is not yet adequate satisfactorily, we must take note of the progress we are making in this country.  Otherwise we shall chase a red herring, and we shall feel as if we are doing nothing and at the end of the day, we shall be drained. I want you to note this progress we are making over time so that together we bid on them and achieve higher horizons.  I thank you.

MRS MUGARURA:  Point of information. I would like to inform the hon. Minister, that two years ago, we had a heap of maize; today we have famine.  Two years ago Bushenyi and Ntungamo and Mbarara were crying for milk.  2000 litres were installed.  It became too little.  We brought 3000 as I talk, even 300 litres is too little. Most farmers are frustrated and they can easily - I beg your indulgence, Mr Chairman. 

In Bushenyi and Ntungamo the farmers had abandoned coffee in preference for dairy.  They uprooted their coffee and planted pasture.  Now, the milk is useless.  If we do not - honesty this, these farmers will go back to grow coffee and we shall have no shortage.  Thank you.

MRS NKWASIBWE:  Mr Chairman, I thank the hon. Members for their information to the House.  Especially the Deputy Minister for Finance regarding the situation that we are actually we are consuming fresh milk mainly produced in Uganda.  But I still repeat that not the hon. Members of our society are really having the milk and to the children who need it.  In the rural, it never reaches. I come from the district of Kabale it is just next to the door to Ntungamo.  There is even a dairy corporation there. But the price is prohibiting.  

So, I would propose, to the Government, to afford these milk processors - the Dairy Corporation with spinning machines; with ability to process the milk, so that it can last a few weeks, and to make sure that basic requirements for children are subsidised and made affordable to our young ones.  

Secondly, when we are comfortable, the mothers are also comfortable.  When mothers are suffering the children are also suffering.  We know that the economy of this country is growing. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

ADJOURNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now adjourn the House to tomorrow at 2.30 p.m. 

(The Assembly rose at 5.30 p.m. and adjourned till Tuesday, 26 July 1994, at 2.30 p.m.)


