Tuesday 20th July, 1999

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Ssekandi Edward, in the Chair)

The 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you might have read in Papers yesterday that our Member, hon. Omara Atubo, had been arrested and detained but the good news which the Office of the Speaker has received is to the effect that our Member, hon. Omara Atubo, is a free man and we expect to see him very soon.  

Secondly, hon. Winnie Babihuga has been in hospital since last week. I visited her yesterday and she reported that she is responding to treatment - in fact she should be discharged today.  So, continue to pray for her.

I have just received news that our hon. Member, Kasole Bwerere, for Buwekula was admitted to Mengo hospital on 15th July, he was suffering from hypertension, but he is responding to treatment.  So, it may be a good idea if you can go and see him at Mengo. These are the announcements which I wanted to make.  Thank you.

MAJ. KAZOORA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you for informing us about the surroundings of some of our Colleagues.  However, Mr. Speaker, I am concerned over the manner in which hon. Omara Atubo was arrested or picked up or invited to visit the Army Commander in the barracks.  Also, the officer who is alleged to have arrested him, the comments he made that we Members of Parliament make noise because of the immunity we have here, and that they will wait for us in the constituencies and be arrested there, to me, Mr. Speaker, is a very dangerous trend because we cannot come here as a Movement and criticize backward regimes of the past and then create anarchy.  

Hon. Omara Atubo could have been arrested any time in a more civilised manner if he had broken the law but when he is taken in that manner, and an officer at the rank of a major  makes such statements, I think there is need for an explanation from the authorities concerned.  I hope the Prime Minister or the Minister in charge of Defence will give us an explanation on this matter.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

MR. NDEEZI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also have a similar concern and I sincerely hope that the Prime Minister will be able to give us a detailed explanation because what we are now witnessing is a disgrace to this Parliament, and also a disgrace to the democracy in this Country.  I do not understand why the Government should be attempting to arrest opposition politicians on unclear premises.

Some time back, we did complain that it was wrong for the Movement or for our Government to arrest opposition politicians on unclear premises because this simply helps to promote the opponents of the Government.  If you just arrest me on unclear grounds, you are just making a hero out of me.  If you say you want to promote the image of the Movement, it is bad for you to be seen harassing people.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

DR. MALLINGA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I think we are all concerned about what is going on in the Country.  If hon. Atubo had broken the law, he should have been arrested by the Police.  I do not know whether this Country is in a state of emergency where military people can go out and arrest people.  I do not know when this was declared. His vehicle was rammed! If the Army Commander wanted to meet him, he should have written a letter to him to see if he had time to go and have a discussion with him, and it would have been up to hon. Omara Atubo to go and tell the Army Commander when it was convenient for him to go to Gulu to meet him.  But here was an order issued to bring hon. Omara Atubo to Gulu.  That is absolutely unacceptable and soldiers who arrested him were carrying out orders which were, unfortunately, wrongly issued.  If the explanation we read in the papers is correct that they wanted to have a discussion with him, there is no more respect for Members of Parliament, we are an endangered species.

We have been threatened to be arrested at any time and we all, as representatives of the people, have to be concerned at this moment about what is happening in the Country.  I hope we shall have an explanation from a Spokesman of the Government  but where things are going, things are getting out of hand.  It is chilling to imagine what the future in the Country is going to be.  I am one of those who was excited about the Movement, but I think we are getting out of hand if people can be arbitrarily arrested  without being charged, by the military whose function is not to arrest people, but to defend people in this Country.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR. ETIANG: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, in sharing the sentiments expressed by my Colleagues on the Floor on this matter, I would like, first of all, to recall a famous saying  uttered by, I think, a British Prime Minister, after Second World War relating to the execution of the war that: "Careless talk costs lives".  If indeed the Army Officer uttered  what he is reported to have uttered, if it is true, that sort of talk costs lives because it may not end up in he himself carrying out those threats.  He may not even have uttered what he is reported to have uttered, but in so far as he has been quoted to have uttered it, to that extent it costs, Mr. Speaker, and here is where I support the sentiments expressed by my Colleagues that maybe an appropriate statement from the Minister in charge of the Soldiers should come to this House on the basis of which we shall have an authoritative source to debate the matter.

I have also read in the press that a senior Minister in Government, hon. Kisamba Mugerwa, was a subject of attack over the weekend.  Could I perhaps join the call made by my Colleagues with regard to Omara Atubo that we also get an appropriate statement as to how a Senior Minister in Government came to be attacked?  Was the normal protection not extended to the Ministers available that night?  The press report on the incident does not cover it; it does not even indicate that the Minister had any security.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. KYEMBA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to join those who have thanked you, Mr. Speaker, for informing us about the whereabouts of our Colleagues and I would like to pray that you continue to monitor the Members, in view of the prevailing circumstances.

Sadly, it is a cause of worry for Members of Parliament to start weighing their words just in case something is taken against them.  I think this kind of loose talk which has been referred to by hon. Etiang and other previous Members, must be condemned with the full force of the Ministers, and I am glad the Prime Minister is here that he will take due notice and concern of Members of Parliament that we cannot expect any officer to go on talking loosely in the manner referred to in the press, and I hope it is not correct.  I sincerely hope that the words quoted there of the military officer who commented on it are not correct.

I would also like to join the other Colleagues who have asked about the events that are taking place.  I, for one, was under the impression that Lango, or Apac and Lira were among the peaceful areas in the Country now but we have read in the papers that the former Chief of Staff in the Obote regime was shot and killed.  No mention or explanation has been given to this House.  I hope the circumstances will also be given so that the people who are responsible for the legislature know the situation that is prevailing. We all condemn, in no uncertain terms, insurgency and acts of lawlessness but we as legislators must be taken as partners; not as passengers.  Thank you very much.

MR. NYAI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mine is just additional to all the sentiments my Colleagues have made.

I was greatly gratified when you did start your remarks by talking about hon. Omara Atubo.  Mr. Speaker, in any country where Parliament is respected, where Parliament is known to be acting as the Legislative army of civilised society, where Parliamentarians enjoy privileges, Mr. Speaker, I would have thought the Leader of Government Business would have put an item on our Order Paper to explain about the arrest of hon. Omara Atubo.  

The fact that it is not on the Order Paper reflects very badly on Government.  It reflects at what they take us to be.  Mr. Speaker, what I am now beginning to get worried about is, can I stand in this House in front of you and articulate matters which pain Ugandans freely without intimidation, without somebody - because he has a gun - telling me that you can make noises in Parliament, but when you come out here we will arrest you?  

I believe it is incumbent on the Leader of Government Business to come out to this House - in fact they should have written to you, Mr. Speaker, explaining what has happened and issued a full report here but, Mr. Speaker, going by the Press reports, the Minister in charge of the Presidency tells one story, the Army Commander tells a different story, the Army Officer who escorted Omara Atubo from Gulu to Lira tells a different story. There are about four different stories coming out! Mr. Speaker, in my interpretation, it means there is substantial attempt to cover up but because it is being very badly done, nobody exactly knows what happened at any one time.  

It is on this ground, Mr. Speaker, that I was going to beg you, and I hope my Colleagues here will support me, that the Speaker's Office sends a special - because under your Office, Mr. Speaker, we have trained Policemen who can do investigations - let the Speaker's Office send somebody to the area, to where Omara Atubo ran into trouble, Mr. Speaker, so that we get an independent report because, as of now, Mr. Speaker, I must be very honest with you, I know any Government statement coming will be an attempt to appear good.  I think it is in the interest of this House that we get the truth and I believe the Parliamentary Commission will not be very angry with you, Mr. Speaker.  Make some funds available, send the Policemen to Lira, let us find out exactly what happened because I would not like to discuss this issue on Press reports which are unconfirmed or otherwise undenied.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We have noted with concern the issues raised in Parliament and I want to assure Members of Parliament that you will get an appropriate response  on this matter.  I want also to take this opportunity to assure Members of Parliament that they should not feel insecure and that appropriate steps will be taken to ensure that this matter is handled appropriately.  

MR. AWORI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to confirm to this House that among other things he has to bring to this House is the retraction of a statement by one outrageous - not outrageous, not cantankerous either - over zealous Fourth Division Intelligence Officer called Maj. Mwesigwa, a retraction that under no circumstances will he ever and he has never threatened this house, especially Members who are exercising their rights to speak on behalf of their constituencies.  I want an assurance or a clarification that such a statement shall be forthcoming, either from the Right hon. Prime Minister, Minister of State for Defence, or this House should be empowered to discipline, in accordance with the Rules of this House or the Constitution, this errant officer.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think you wanted to contribute.  Why do you not wait for the statement and see the contents of the statement and then raise whatever you want?  But anyway you have said it, and I think it has been noted  -(Interruption).

MR.OKELLO-OKELLO: Further clarification, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  On what?

MR. OKELLO-OKELLO:  Mr. Speaker, can the Right hon. Prime Minister give us a definite date when that appropriate answer will be given?  Mr. Speaker, I am saying this because some of us are scared of going to our constituencies now since we are only safe in here.  Thank you.

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  You see, if you are probing a matter of that gravity, it is sometimes imprudent to give a definite date because the point is not to rush the matter, but to handle it appropriately so that you do not have a recurrence of that problem. That is the first point I would make.
 
MR.WAMBUZI: Is the Prime Minister of the Government of Uganda in order to say that he is not in a position to tell the nation what is happening in a situation which could decay?  Is he is in order, really, to start saying that we should just wait and go on tuning to the radios and reading newspapers on such a situation really?  Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I can not make that conclusion which you are making from what he has stated. You see, hon. Okello-Okello wanted the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister to tell us when the statement is going to be made;is it tomorrow, is it wednesday, when?  I think that is the issue, and his reply was that, well, he can not say tomorrow because he wants to investigate the matter before he makes the statement.  It may take a day, it may take two days.  He only declined to give us the date  but definitely, he is going to make an appropriate statement.  So we expect him to make it as  soon as possible.

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  Mr. Speaker, I thank you for that intervention, and I wanted also to add that when you are handling a matter of that nature, you must be aware that sometimes you might get a report from the mass media that requires correction.  So, it is always important not take anything for granted but to handle it carefully.  But as you must all know, whatever I have pledged, I have fulfilled, and whenever I have given directives here, including weather forecasts, the following day the information is circulated. I do not see why you should have any cause for alarm. I practice ROM - Results Oriented Management, and I want us to realize that we are very serious on fulfilling our pledges and the chairperson of the committee which deals with Government Assurances is already aware that we are tackling many outstanding assurances, and that you should trust us.  I think it is better to trust us and see what happens.  I thank you.

MOTION 
DEBATE IN REPLY TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT'S ADDRESS TO PARLIAMENT ON THE STATE OF THE NATION.

(Debate  Continued)

MR. BAGUNYWA(Mityana South, Mityana):  Mr. Speaker, I stand to support the Motion with some reservations.  I agree that the President gave a clear and precise address, but I thought it was a bit concise and not comprehensive.  What was left out, in my opinion, was of such significance that I would wish it had also been included in his address.  

His Excellency the President went to great length to explain the growth rates in the economy and how we have succeeded in getting where we are.  However, I thought we had been told so much about the supply side, but we do not know enough about the expenditure side. This is probably what economists call the supply side of economics.  We did not hear anything about the domestic arrears or the domestic debt.  I thought this warranted inclusion in the Presidential Address.  

We have a problem in Uganda, and I believe government can taken the initiative to overcome the problem which I describe as the problem of "living beyond our means".  Government has fallen prey or victim to this problem.  I thought it had been limited to individuals but now it looks like government is spearheading this "living beyond our means".  It is reflected in government's inability to pay adequate salaries or pay pensioners or senior citizens what they ought to be paid -(Interruption)-

AN HON. MEMBER: Mr. Speaker, is it in order for a hon. Minister to read newspapers in the chambers?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is out of order for any person to read a newspaper during the proceedings.

MR. BAGUNYWA: Continuing with my misgivings about the supply side OF economics, I thought there was a tendency to make money instead of creating wealth.  Now, I am saying, there ought to be some concern in the way we accumulate domestic arrears by our inability to pay water bills for the Ministries, telephone charges or bills, electricity, the pensioners who are senior citizens who ought to have been considered and probably given priority in contrast with other personnel who are included in all this. I think, if we go on accumulating debts of this kind to the tune of 260 billion, that ought to be of concern to the President, apart from giving us the growth rates.

Along with that, I am getting a bit concerned, Mr. Speaker, about the way the country as a whole, we Ugandans tend to think there is a Ugandan way of doing things and that we can Ugandanise international standards, in banking for instance; that we can Ugandanise international standards by, say, banking with some small bank like the ICB, and risking government money where we may not even be sure of its insurance.  This attitude seems to be catching on, and yet government ought to be looked at as what sociologists would call "the reference group", to lead the way, but not to get people to copy the wrong  things.  We are getting it all wrong if we think everything can be Ugandanised, including  even what can not be Ugandanised.  

Individuals have now come to seek to solve their problems by sending us lists with the invitations to graduation parties, to weddings, to funeral rites, to baptism or confirmation services and all manner of celebrations. They think this is something that can probably solve our problem of poverty and insolvency but it is not solving the problem at all! I think we should try to get it from government itself, spearheading a rural fundamental change in the way we spend and the way we look at the international practice rather than Ugandanise it in a form that does not solve our problems.

Going to the expenditure on social services, it is true perhaps one of the best things that has happened to this country was the declaration of UPE or its introduction. It is not really the provision of Universal Primary Education, it is only an introduction.  But what seems to be the concern of people these days is not so much schooling, call it what it is. If it is education, let it be education and not schooling because there is a difference between the two.  We should now be concerned about the relevance, the quality of what we give in UPE.  

I am aware - and I have been involved in the reform of the curriculum, for instance - that you now find in the curriculum  so much pre-occupation with academic knowledge to the total exclusion of practical skills and moral values. All you see is a distribution of text books but no hoes. When are we going to have hoes?  It is a simple application of the knowledge that we have acquired in the balancing of the curriculum. Going by the developments in what is now called intensive, integrated organic farming, boys and girls at primary level can certainly engage in some very meaningful and very gainful employment after primary school, yet we have thrown all that away and we see our children doing nothing but homework in the form of school work.  

There is hardly any time for children who are in primary seven even to wash up! They can not wash plates, they can only do school work! They are at it morning, afternoon night, Saturdays, Sundays, during the holidays. I think the Ministry of Education  should really go out of its way to stop this kind of thing. It is not education, it is just drilling and coaching and schooling. It is not giving education which should be the case.  I do not think I should over do this by going on, but all I am calling for is, let us try and balance and let us call for a more comprehensive Speech which highlights problems and constraints as well as achievements and not necessarily only achievements when we get the Presidential Address.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MRS. JAMWA(West Budama North, Tororo): Mr. Speaker, I rise to support the Motion.  I want to thank the President and the Ministry of Health for at least reducing the infant mortality rate in this country.  Although the Policy Statement of the Ministry of Health says infant mortality in Uganda is still one of the highest in sub-Saharan Africa, I want to thank His Excellency the President and the Ministry of Health for combating polio and other related diseases through the Universal Immunisation Programme being conducted in this country every year.  Although the rate of death through the six killer diseases has come down, Mr. Speaker, the rate of malaria among children and pregnant women in west Budama North is rising very steadily.  I was happy to note from the policy statement of the Ministry of Health that something is being done to combat malaria throughout the country.  

We the womenfolk in this country are happy to note that, at long last, the Government of Uganda has remembered the Women and Youth Councils through the Entandikwa Credit Scheme.  When the Entandikwa Credit Scheme was first introduced in this country, the women and the youth were supposed to get 30 per cent of the money in each county but unfortunately, because of lack of transparency among leaders, especially the LCs and the chiefs, this never materialized.  I hope this time a proper mechanism will be put in place to ensure that women and the youth get what is theirs, since this category of people have been oppressed for such a long time. Mr. Speaker, let the percentage of the money they are supposed to get be raised from 30 per cent to 50 per cent at least.  

At this juncture, Mr. Speaker, I want to remind the government to remember the rural youth.  The government should devise a way of reducing unemployment among the youth in rural areas.  The Entandikwa scheme only caters for the youth council.  What shall we do with the youth?  My people wonder. We know very well that there are three critical elements of sustainable human development, and that is; elimination of poverty which the government is trying very hard to achieve, creating jobs and sustaining the livelihood of the people. The government should come to the rescue of the rural youth quickly, otherwise they are soon becoming a big problem for this country. 

As I conclude my contribution on this very important motion, I want to request the government to make the Ministry of Defence gender sensitive.  Since the President in his address to the nation assured us that the nation's defence posture is good, the Ministry of Defence should be made gender sensitive by reducing the number of bullets imported in this country every year. Other sophisticated military hardware should also be reduced to ensure a peaceful Uganda.  

Conflict is depressing and in this kind of situation, it is the women and the children who are the victims and suffer more. The women lose their husbands, sons and daughters.  Mr. Speaker, if the Ministry of Defence is made gender sensitive, this will reduce the unbelievable cruelty meted against women and the children in war areas. It is good the President has accepted to extend to war mongers a general amnesty. Let peace-making strategies be intensified through mediation and dialogue and let the women be given a chance to participate at the negotiation table.  I am saying this because normally when these negotiations are taking place, women are always left out in the cold. It is high time they participated in big decisions, especially if these decisions affect their lives. Mr. Speaker, can I be protected from hon. Guma?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  You are protected.

MRS JAMWA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, when women participate in these decisions, this will guarantee protection from the gender specific brutalities of war which affect women in ways men will never understand nor experience. My appeal to the government is that the women who have experienced the horrors of war must be appropriately compensated and sensitively rehabilitated.  Ugandan women who have been afflicted in the war want investment in peace processes and justice for all. They have suffered.  Mr. Speaker, the women want security of their livelihood.  The women must feel free from threats of the violence and humiliation they go through when they are in war situations. Mr. Speaker, because of the problems the women and their children face in war situations, surely the Ministry of Defence must be made gender sensitive so that the women and the children can lead a normal, happy life in this country.  

Why am I dwelling so much on this subject, Mr. Speaker?  I want to inform this House that when sons and husbands who are soldiers die in action, their wives and mothers are normally bundled on lorries and taken back to their villages without any form of assistance or compensation. This is inhuman and it is a violation of human rights.  Let the Ministry of Defence be made gender sensitive in order to reduce violation of human rights against women and their children.  

Finally, Mr. Speaker, recently when the Minister of State for Primary Health visited my district of Tororo, Mr. Eric Nabbala Mudanye the LC 5 chairperson and Mr. Owino Owora Yosiya who is the LC 5 councillor for Paya sub-county complained very bitterly to the Minister about the manner in which the rehabilitation contract of health units in the district was awarded.  Mr. Nabbala and Mr. Owino Owora complained further and said that the contract was not awarded in a transparent manner because for them, they do not know who were the contractors and they even allege that the people who are behind these contracts are big people here in Kampala.  They did not specify who these people are.  The two gentlemen stated that they do not know who the contractors are and they continued to say that they did not even know who is supposed to supervise the so called rehabilitation work now taking place in the district. They only hear that the people who are funding these projects are World Bank and the Government of Uganda. So, they want to know and they want to have a say in this work that is taking place in the district.  

As I conclude, I want to thank the President again for all that he has done for this country throughout last year. Mr. Speaker, Sir, I support the motion.  Thank you very much.

MR. OSIRE (Bukedea County, Kumi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I want just to make a few comments on some of the aspects raised by the President during his address to us on the 2nd of June this year.  

It was very gratifying to note that the President recognises that there are areas in this country which do not even have the minimum conditions for socio-economic recovery. He mentioned them; north, north west, north east, Luwero and I think he added Bundibugyo, Kasese and Kabarole. This reflects his concern for this country but I feel that it should not end in just recognising the fact.  There should be a deliberate effort to ensure that these areas which have suffered so much because of the conflicts are attended to, otherwise, this will remain theoretical. 

He made mention of measures to be taken in order to bring these areas into minimum conditions that will bring them to socio-economic recovery, and one of them which interested me most was restocking Teso region which he considered as a model which has had impact in this restocking programme.  Mr. Speaker, I am very pessimistic about this one.  

There has been an effort to restock this area through the churches, the PAGs and so on but the government input is so negligible; it is a drop in the ocean and most of the stock that is there now is a result of individual efforts.  So, when you single out Teso region as a model for restocking, I have serious doubts about it. Moreover, Mr. Speaker, to talk about restocking when cattle rustling has not been eliminated is a little bit too much.  These two must be considered alongside each other.  There is no point in restocking when the next day you are going to lose.  I do not see the purpose and I am sure the Teso region and all the neighbouring districts would have preferred cattle rustling to be stopped first before restocking.  Otherwise, we shall continue to have a vicious circle of poverty which is already experienced in that area. 

The Teso people are very hard working. I am not ashamed about that one.  I should tell you that all that the Teso people need is peace and number seven.  You may not know what number seven is.  Those who are numerically sensitive know the numeral seven, what it looks like.  It looks like a hoe.  This is what we need in Teso and we shall do the restocking ourselves but eliminate the cattle rustling.  This is what we need.  

My Colleagues the Karimojong have always talked here that we seem to see cattle rustling and insecurity as Karimojong versus other areas. We do not see it in the light and  I support them  on this issue but Government should make every  effort to ensure that the Karimojong people are given due attention.  I am not able to understand why the Karimojong cannot be resettled.  There are areas neighbouring my district of Kumi where there is a lot of fertile land and it is lying fallow.  It is the animals moving up and down. Which is now our priority, the wild animals or the Karimojong people? I think it should be the Karimojong people. So, they should be given opportunity to settle in these areas which are fertile because it will save the rest of us the problem of poverty.  

Karamoja needs projects: There should be a concerted effort  to have projects in Karamoja. I would not be worried if government diverted all the resources from one department in this country for some time and placed all the effort on Karamoja.  Mr. Speaker, it is difficult to have people understand each other if they do not trade their ideas. The Karimojong are cut off from my district; there is no road link between  Kumi and Moroto.

MR. ILUKORI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the hon. Member for giving way. I have stood to give this information, Mr. Speaker, aware that from here to Karamoja, you have to take two days to get there and you get there with difficulty arising from the big pot holes on that road. And, Mr. Speaker, aware that we have had pledges to tarmac the road from Mbale up to Kidepo, and aware that in the President's Address, Karamoja is not an area to be covered by the strategic national road programme, it is actually cut off.

MR. OSIRE: I thank you for that information. Mr. Speaker, I was trying to mention a road link between Kumi District and Moroto. The only way you can get to Moroto through Kumi is to pass through Soroti, Katakwi and then to Moroto. The other way is to go round back to Mbale through Sironko, to Namalu and then Moroto. This is too long for us. 

There used to be a road linking Kumi and Moroto through a swamp called Amoru which the raiders have always used to come and take our cows. This road would link us to Namalu and if the President's view of having 4,000 soldiers there with motorised vehicles came to pass, then it would be easier for us to follow them but as of now, you cannot follow them through that road. You have to make a way through Mbale, a way through Soroti and in most cases, we have not been able to get our cows. So, Mr. Speaker, although the President mentioned these as measures to create conditions for minimum social economic recovery, it is not possible in the areas I have talked about in the near future. 

I think you should give me just two minutes to make a point on social services. Mr. Speaker, it is true that we have done our best in the areas of health and education, but I want to make a point about education. Education in this country has suffered since the time of Idi Amin. It was in the time of Idi Amin when the planning system in this country, including the Planning Unit of the Ministry of Education collapsed and it has never been reactivated up to date.

DR. OKULO EPAK: I thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the hon. Member holding the Floor for giving way. I would like to inform him that the last National Five-Year Development Plan was the third one which should have expired during Amin's rule but Amin, in 1976, instituted a long-term development plan called "The Reconstruction and Development Plan" which was prepared very elaborately and it exists up to now but it was not fully implemented. 

A national team actually went and camped in Mweya Safari lodge in Kasese under the chairmanship of the Minister, some soldier from Busoga, Maj. Lukakamwa. They prepared a very good plan and I am glad to announce that I was one of those who initiated the recovery plan. When we were attempting to prepare the fourth Five-Year Development Plan, we found that the economy had collapsed so seriously that the first stage would be to prepare a recovery and development plan. So, even Amin made a Five-Year Development Plan which, if I had known, I would have brought here to show you. I thank you.

MR. OSIRE: Mr. Speaker, I thank the Member for giving me the information but he did not give me time to develop my point. I was emphasizing that planning had started collapsing during the time of Idi Amin. This is when the "Economic War" was declared and when it was declared, what happened to the teaching profession? All the qualified teachers preferred to do some other thing other than teaching. So, we had a situation where you had P.7 children teaching P.3, teaching P.5; senior two drop-outs teaching P.7 and standards collapsed. 

I happen to have been in that Ministry for 28 years. So I think I know what I am talking about.  Ever since then, we have continued to suffer in the Ministry. So next time I want to contribute on the budget, I want to talk about these teachers' colleges. Let us not be driven by programmes which are donor propelled because we run the risk of getting this country stuck in our education. Education is the only torch for this country and we should not mess it up.  I thank you Mr. Speaker.

MR. GOBBA (Erute north, Lira): Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I rise to support the Motion, and I would like to begin by commenting on a few aspects of the President's Speech, starting with bank closures. 

Two banks have been closed of late; the Greenland Bank and the Co-operative Bank. Their closure has had a very big effect on the general population. The business people, just like parents, were affected.  Many children who go to school fell out of school because their parents could not access their monies locked up in these banks.  The business community also fell prey to this;  their businesses closed because all their monies were locked in these banks.  I would like to attribute the closure of these banks to one factor - there are many other factors, of course, but this factor is the lack of or no supervision at all by the Bank of Uganda.  

In Bank of Uganda, there is supposed to be a department known as Bank Supervision Department, and it is the duty of this department to monitor and supervise all these commercial banks.  It is the duty of this department to supervise the operations of all these commercial banks in this country.  They have a way out if a bank is not operating -(Interruptions)- Mr. Speaker, can you protect me from these two people?  If a bank is not operating according to the way it is supposed to, bank supervision has punitive measures to take, and these measures include even disqualifying a commercial bank from withdrawing cash from the Central Bank.  It also includes stopping a commercial bank from extending credit to the customers. These are punitive measures.  Mr. Speaker, closing these banks should come as a last resort because Bank of Uganda should have done its work effectively. 

What happened recently is that, the President made a statement, it was a Presidential statement, on the closure of these bank.  That statement has had a very bad impact in that the population  - especially the population I normally interact with - thinks that Government has a hidden agenda.  Some people are saying that Government has decided to close these banks with a hidden agenda.  They are saying that the hidden agenda is to take the money from these banks to Congo.  Others are saying that this is another monetary reform like the 1987 monetary reform, when government took 30 per cent and also reduced the monies by two zeros.  So, people are complaining.  

I would rather, Mr. Speaker, the Governor of Bank of Uganda or the Minister of Finance, for that matter, made that statement.  Anything to do with banking is technical, and when a bank is being closed, it is a technical issue.  The President should not have made a political statement out of this. It is true - you must also have heard that there is bad feeling about the closure of these banks.  

We have gone a very difficult way to educate the masses of Uganda about banking.  You remember that the habit of banking  stopped way back, many years ago but then we have been trying ourselves to bring Ugandans to the habit of banking.  Now, when you close a bank like that and a political statement is made, it makes it difficult for us to maintain the banking habit which took us years to bring forth.  Mr. Speaker, in order to restore that confidence that people had in banking, I would rather the Minister of Finance makes this technical statement to the public so that they do not rely on the political statement because it is creating some problem in the country.  

The next aspect I would like to comment on is restocking. Mr. Speaker, in his manifesto during the campaigns for the last Presidential elections, the President promised so much that he was going to restock areas that were devastated by cattle rustling.  I would like now to talk about one of such areas which was devastated by cattle rustling; that is Lango.  Since that time, despite the continuous song, year in year out that the Lango cattle will be restocked, nothing has happened; and this has had a very bad effect on the lifestyle of the Langi.  I would like, therefore, to urge Government this time to restock Lango immediately otherwise, I do not see how the forthcoming referendum can succeed properly in Lango if their cattle are not restocked.  

The cattle rustling in Lango has had a negative impact on the lifestyle of the Langi.  Mr. Speaker, you know the Langi used to sell their animals and get money for sending their children to school, and if not that, they would use their oxen for ploughing and then they would get money from the crops, and then they would send their children to school.  The Langi also used the same animals for paying dowry.  You saw what happened there recently in "the wedding of the year."  Cattle is required for dowry.  Now, for us we are left without animals and we are now beginning to pay dowry with pigs and goats.  So, I would like to urge Government this time to restock Lango immediately.  

I know I am time barred but I would like to talk about corruption.  The President himself said the problem of corruption in Uganda is in the investigation. He says it is in the investigation because those who are supposed to investigate corruption in Uganda are themselves corrupt.  Mr. Speaker, I do not agree with this statement because of what happened in UEB and National Water and Sewerage.  

If the problem of corruption was in the investigation and if  the reason why the corrupt people are left and they are not arrested or reprimanded is in investigation, corruption in UEB and in National Water and Sewerage Corporation would not have been investigated fully, and within weeks.  That shows that the problem of corruption is elsewhere, it is not in investigation as the President puts it because, after a few weeks, these investigation men and women worked so hard to prove to the President that the problem is not with them.  They investigated the alleged corruption in UEB and Water within weeks, and you all know the results!  The Managing Director of UEB, D'ujanga was dismissed - (Interruption).

MR. DOMBO:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I am going to give this information to this House at the risk of being misunderstood, but nevertheless I feel the House should know it.  Mr. Speaker, it has been the concern of this House quite often, when we are talking about the issue of corruption, and we always appreciate the President's resolve when he is dealing with the issue of corruption, especially, when he set up the commission  but one of the greatest concerns has been that the proximity of the people being investigated with State House has been of concern to everybody.  

Just last week, I was in Tororo but we read in the papers and I saw the President in a social event when the First Family was attending the wedding of their child. At one of the functions, the President was going to attend okuhingira in the home a censured minister. The President had been accompanied by a censured minister.  The master of ceremony was Enos Tumusiime, and when people are so - their closeness with the State House becomes difficult for the people who would otherwise do effective investigation.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

MR. GOBBA:  Mr. Speaker, I thank hon. Dombo for that information, but Mr. Speaker, there is now a new -(Interruption).

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  Mr. Speaker, I wanted to inform hon. Dombo that the issue of corruption is so intricate that we have to ask the question;  can anybody throw a stone at another?  In other words, do we not have relatives who are corrupt? - (Interruption)

MR. LWANGA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I seek clarification, Mr. Speaker.  We have one Member on the Floor contributing, the Member is given information by another hon. Member, and the hon. Prime Minister stands up to given information to the Member that was giving information to the Member that was contributing.  Mr. Speaker, can you please clarify whether that is how things should be?

THE SPEAKER:  I thought he was giving additional information to the original Member on the Floor. 

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The point which I want to make is very clear, that we all have relatives who sin and we are also in some form or another sinners.  So, you must be very careful not to assume that even a President will not have people with blemishes.  We all have people or relatives who have blemishes.  So, let us accept that human reality, and as we condemn other people, we should remember that we are also sinners.  I thank you. 

MR. GOBBA:  So, Mr. Speaker, I am just trying to say that the problem of corruption is not in the investigation, it is somewhere else. That is why the Managing Director of UEB was dismissed even before the investigation department came with their results, and the National Water and Sewage Corporation Managing Director was also dismissed.  

Mr. Speaker, these days we measure corruption this way;   corruption started like a small tree, now it has grown to a very big tree.  It started with Pajeros only, then it went on to Nissan Patrols, then jumped from those to Bungalows and Flats.  We now know that the more Pajeros and Nissan Patrols on a route  - in other words the fewer the number, the less corrupt those are; the more bungalows and flatlets people own shows that those people are corrupt.  That is corruption we are talking about.  We measure by flatlets, bungalows, Nissan Patrols that ply a route.  

Mr. Speaker, today, somebody leaves University, picks a job and works for two years and because he is from some place,  within these two years this person has acquired a car, has built a house or he has bought a plot whereas during our time, we would work for ten years but could not even think of buying a plot!  We did not jump into cars in those days after working for ten years, but these days, only two years!  That is the measure of corruption.  

Right now because of this serious  corruption in the National Water and Sewage Corporation, one senior officer has had to tender in his letter of resignation and any time now he is going to resign - maybe by now he has already resigned - because of corruption.  Mr. Speaker, I think, let me leave this matter of corruption and I conclude with security.  I would like to thank the President, Mr. Speaker, so much -(Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  You see, hon. Member, you have really run out of time, and as for security, we shall have more debate on it during the Budget; but anyway, I give you two minutes. 

MR. GOBBA:  Thank you.  Finally, I would like to commend Government so much for the wonderful thing they did on security, especially in the North although of late there have been some disturbing events. For about six to seven months now, we in the North have been having some relative peace, and my people in the North have been having a very serious period of adaptation from sleeping in the bush to sleeping in houses.  Mr. Speaker, seven months ago, we were all sleeping in the bush  but now because of the relative peace that Government has brought in, we have started sleeping in our houses and we are now going about with our daily chores without any hindrance.  For that I would like to thank  Government very much for having given us that conducive atmosphere.  I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

MRS. KABAKUMBA MASIKO(Women Representative, Masindi):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this Motion.  I would like to support the Motion with a few comments.  I will start with the banking system in Uganda.  

The President put it that the worst culprits are the banks managed by Ugandans. I want to take a different opinion. I believe it is not the Ugandan managers who are, maybe, incompetent, but it is because of our weak laws and, as a Colleague has said, lack of supervision.  I will substantiate this by taking the example of Greenland Bank. Greenland Bank started as a bank but failed to concentrate and focus on rendering profitable banking services and instead, it entered into other businesses like education and other commercial enterprises. Eventually, they failed to differentiate between their own money and the customers' deposits which led to the collapse of Greenland Bank.  

What is more disappointing in this saga is that Government has failed to explain clearly and convincingly its role and how it comes in to salvage the tax payers and, of course, the depositors.  Government thinks by committing itself to pay all the depositors in full that it will save its face, but I would like to put it to this House and this nation that people are saying instead that if Government was not guilty about its involvement in this Greenland Bank, why is it committing itself to pay the depositors yet people know that the monies which are insured are up to Shs. 3 million?  I have heard that from various circles  - (Interruption).

MR. OKUMU- RINGA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to thank the hon. Member for giving way.  The information I would like to give is with regard to the issues raised by the hon. Member on the closure of the banks. When you look at page 3 of His Excellency's speech, paragraph 2, the first sentence reads: "The closure of the insolvent banks should not scare us".  Here, the information I would like to give is with regard to the definition of insolvency and bankruptcy.  If a bank is insolvent, in accounting terms insolvency means inability of -(Interruption)

MR. AGGREY AWORI:  Mr. Speaker, is it in order for the Minister of Ethics and Integrity to receive a gift in this Chamber from a dubious source? (Laughter)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  In the first place, what rule should I apply in this case?  What gift - I do not know whether she has received a gift from a dubious source but what rule has she contravened?

MR. AGGREY AWORI:  Mr. Speaker, through your good offices, maybe the hon. Minister could declare the gift and place it on the table - (Laughter).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, I would think that your attention should be on what is going on in the House rather than looking at the hon. Minister in her private seat.  Please continue.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Speaker, is it in order for an hon. Member to stand up here and allege quite categorically that the hon. Minister in charge of Integrity has received a gift from a dubious source without the hon. Member substantiating what a dubious source that is, because it imputes corruption on the hon. Minister of Integrity -(Laughter)- and it does not, therefore, sound to be an honourable language to use in the House?  Is it really in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Well, in the first place, I have not accepted his point of order, therefore, the point does not arise.

MR. OKUMU RINGA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker the point of information I am giving is with regard to the issue of insolvency that when you look at line number one of the second paragraph, in accounting terms insolvency does not necessarily mean bankruptcy.  It simply means that a firm is not able to meet its day-to-day cash flow requirements as and when they fall due. And in this case, if these banks - be it Greenland Bank, the Cooperative Bank or ICB - have had difficulties in meeting their day-to-day cash flow requirements, particularly being demand deposits, then that would have necessitated such a closure, but this has not been clearly defined.  So, the information I am giving is that insolvency does not necessarily mean bankruptcy  - (Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, you will have your opportunity to make your contribution. We thought it was information but now you are going on making conclusions, please take your seat.

MRS. MASIKO:  Thank you very much for that long information. I was about to add that much as the President told us all the depositors will get paid fully, I want to inform this House that the practice is actually different.  People who had an average of Shs. 45,000 on their accounts are receiving only about shs. 15,000, and of course there is also delayed payments and you know what it means with the shilling depreciating everyday. You cannot compare that with what one actually deposited.  

Somewhere, the President mentions - in fact from what hon. Okumu Ringa was saying - that the closing of insolvent banks should not scare us; that first of all, depositors will get all their money back which is not true, secondly, that healthier banks will come up and thirdly that since Government revenue collection is improving, we can always put in place special funds for targeted interest groups.  Before I go off this, I want to comment on the Co-operative Bank.  

Before the Co-operative Bank was closed, the Managing Director was not a Ugandan, he was a Muzungu, but of course he was smarter than many Africans. He chose to resign just a few weeks before the bank was closed, and I do not see how the President could say that it is only Ugandans who are poor managers.  

Now coming to putting in place special funds, I think somewhere somehow we are not being sincere but if we are, then there is some weakness in the operation of Government.  The President somewhere mentioned that we voted 0.5 of a billion to the YES scheme - Youth Enterprise Scheme, but up to now it has never been operationalised and him being the head of the Executive, he has not taken any measure to discipline the Minister concerned or to bring him or her to order so that we can give this money to the impoverished unemployed youth. Of course we have done our part as Parliament but -(Interruption) -

MS. KIRASO:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, thank you hon. Member for allowing this very small information.  The Shs. 500 million which was budgeted for and passed last financial year for the Youth Enterprise Credit Scheme was put in Co-operative Bank and for the reasons that are very clear, it cannot be accessed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  You mean the information which she has given is not correct?

MR. KIKULUKUNYU:  I am informing the whole House for her benefit, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it is unfortunate I have not got the chance to talk about these aspects but I am coming.  Mr. Speaker, the 500 million being talked about is money that was passed in the Financial Year 97/98.  Last year there was no money passed in the interest of the Youth Enterprise Scheme and as such, it is total confusion to begin telling us that last year money was allocated.  The Minister put it very clearly here before the House that there was no money for us and, therefore, that is the confusion to us as the youth.  Thank you.

MRS. MASIKO:  Thank you very much for that information.  That one even makes it clear that for the last two years we gave Government 0.5 of a billion to help the youth but up to now, nothing has been done; and the whole of the Executive, including the Leader of Government Business in this House, are all comfortably seated in their seats.  

The Leader of Government Business has said he practices ROM, and of course according to you are paid for what you have worked for, that is, for the results or services which are provided efficiently and effectively.We are yet to see this in the whole of Government.  

I would like to end by commenting on the President's statement about the Ministerial appointments.  I am on record in this House as having complained that most of the time Bunyoro is not represented.  I am happy to report that in the recent reshuffle, Bunyoro Kitara Kingdom was represented by hon. Benigna Mukiibi, I am very grateful to the appointing authority for having remembered Bunyoro, and I would like to add that nobody has said that -(Interruption)-    

MS. KIRASO:  Mr. Speaker, as far as I am concerned, Bunyoro Kitara already had three Ministers in the names of hon. Philip Byaruhanga, hon. Kajura Henry Muganwa and hon. Baguma Isoke.  The clarification I am seeking is, when the hon. Member says that at last Bunyoro Kitara has got representation on Cabinet, is she trying to say that the three Members of Cabinet from Bunyoro Kitara who were already there were actually non performing?  

MRS. MASIKO:  Thank you very much, but I gave a background to my statement that at some point, I complained that the West is given a lions share but when you open it up, you do not find Bunyoro Kitara Kingdom anywhere but this time, Bunyoro Kitara Kingdom was represented.  

I want to wind up by saying that the President is on record for saying that people are asking for Ministerial appointments as a way of sharing the national cake, that we do not consider things like road equipment to be a share of the national cake.  I would like to put it on record that there are short term strategies and long term strategies. The short term strategy is to have Ministers from our areas and I will tell you, Ministers come with privileges and services to the people. I will prove this when we come to the budget debate but, we have not refuted that road equipment and other services are a share of the national cake.  Allow me, Mr. Speaker, to comment on the Karamojong issue of cattle rustling.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, no! You have now gone beyond 15 minutes.

MRS. MASIKO:  Just two minutes, Sir. This issue of allowing the Karamojong to be armed yet the rest of Uganda is not, some of us see it as having double standards and I think now that the Karamojong have turned their wrath on the UPDF, maybe Government will be more sober in dealing with the issue of the Karamojong and them being armed.  An hon. Member of this House one time suggested that there should be a Berlin Wall to separate Karamoja from the rest of Uganda. At that time I thought it was very funny but anyhow, I do not know. It seems like there seems to be lack of  a comprehensive plan and programme to tackle cattle rustling and the Karamojong warriors.  Finally, on corruption -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, no.  

MRS. MASIKO:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Member for the Youth in the Northern Region.

MR. OBEDMOTH (Youth Representative, Northern Region):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this debate, but before I contribute to the debate -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Excuse me, you will excuse me please, please stick on the address because I have got so many people on the list and they all wish to contribute; ten minutes each one.

MR. OBEDMOTH:  Mr. Speaker, I talk with a lot of concern, especially on the point the President raised concerning poverty eradication and the national cake.  

I come from Northern Uganda and I represent an area that has been socially, economically and politically disadvantaged ever since this Government came into power.  I have got a lot of problems believing what the President stated when it came to the people of Northern Uganda. The President told us our national cake was for us to go and grow mangoes and not to ask for Ministerial positions.  Mr. Speaker, I sat and looked at what the President was saying, undermining the people of Northern Uganda!  

You take for example a district like Mbarara, it has got four full Cabinet Ministers: Defence is there, Ethics and Integrity is there, Works is there, Foreign Affairs is there and when it comes to Northern Uganda, what is given to the majority of them are Ministers in the office of somebody, not a full Minister - (Laughter).  It is a problem. I thought that this Government had come to eliminate sectarianism but to us, we are feeling  neglected. If one district can be entitled to four Ministers, Northern Uganda deserves better. 

Mr. Speaker, when the President keeps encouraging people of Northern Uganda to grow mangoes, I feel it is not going to solve the economic problem of the people of Northern Uganda because mangoes are like any other agricultural commodity.  When you plant more mangoes, they are going to suffer from the same calamity that cotton, tobacco and coffee have been suffering.  I would have considered and I would have been happy to hear the President say that next time they are now going to bring a Coca Cola factory in Northern Uganda and that is what the people of Northern Uganda will be interested in.  

Mr. Speaker, I would like to touch on the issue of corruption.  The President in his State of the Nation Address clearly called for the formation of new structures and training of the new cadres.  We have formed enough structures, there are enough organisations already existing on the ground to fight corruption:  We have got the office of the IGG, we have got the Police, we have got all these offices.  Formation of a new structure is not going to solve the issue of corruption.  

He went ahead and talked at length that there is a lot of corruption in the Uganda Revenue Authority.  You will never eliminate corruption in Uganda Revenue Authority when the methods of employing personnel in the Revenue Authority itself is corrupt.  The top official in Uganda Revenue Authority, his position was not advertised, he was appointed! Also, all the Revenue Protection Police who were recently recruited  were hand-picked; that they were looking for people with integrity and one of the ways that you would have integrity was for you to be a "born-again" christian. 

The majority of these people who have come out, most of them come from one region of this country.  I have only got four people from Northern Uganda whom I know who have been released among these Revenue Police who are there.  Now, if we are using corrupt methods to recruit people who are supposed to fight corruption, do we expect to end corruption in Uganda Revenue Authority?

There is a saying that if you are carrying an egg, you do not hit a ball.  Mr. Speaker, this country has a problem.  The President in his State of the Nation Address never touched on any single thing to do with our foreign policy.  I have tried to ask my Colleagues, I have tried to ask myself, what is Uganda's foreign policy?  What is our foreign policy?  In blue print when I am asked to tell the people of Uganda what is our foreign policy, I even do not have an answer.  

To me, Uganda has become more involved in exporting war and conflict.  Today we hear Uganda is involved in Congo, then next, without even the consultation of the civil society or Parliament, our President is there committing the whole nation to a peace accord!  You cannot understand, as a nation, why in the first place we go to war, and no explanation is given to us why we should go for a peaceful settlement of that conflict.  I think this country deserves to be informed of what we are interested in with our neighbours and the international community. Even in your own individual home, you need to have very good public relations with your neighbour so that when you are attacked, your neighbours can come to your rescue.   

I would like to touch on the issue of the East African Community.  The President did not address this issue in his State of the Nation Address and yet we read in the press that another country that was not traditionally belonging to East Africa, Rwanda, was admitted into the East African Community.  What if the people of Uganda do not want to be associated with Rwanda in the East African Community?  The President unilaterally went and committed us to Rwanda and - (Interruption) -

MR. LWANGA:  Thank you very much, for giving way.  Mr. Speaker, I want to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that one of the reasons why we are having the East African Co-operation is markets, because with markets, we can produce more and build wealth.  So really, admitting countries on to the Co-operation should be in our interest.

MR. ETIANG: Mr. Speaker, may I inform the Member holding the Floor that before the Amin coup of 1971, Rwanda and Ethiopia had been admitted into the East African Community but the political events that followed that coup prevented the Rwandese from taking their place in Arusha.

MR. OBEDMOTH OFUNGI:  Mr. Speaker, I am not taking any further information.  Mr. Speaker, my main complaint was that the President has not informed Ugandans about the admission of Rwanda but we read it through the Press and I was talking about the traditional East Africa, not the recent East Africa.  Mr. Speaker, if our interest is trade, the civil society, Parliament and the population of Uganda should have been informed so that we know what we are going to benefit in our co-operation with Rwanda.  Otherwise, this organisation will remain a co-operation of Heads of State of East Africa.

MR. NASASIRA:  Thank you very much, hon. Obedmoth, for giving way.  I just wanted to give one information in respect to the East African Cooperation that we may recall that a workshop to discuss the East African Co-operation Treaty was called three times so that Members of Parliament can discuss these things but all the three times it flopped because there was no meaningful quorum.  

MR. OBEDMOTH OFUNGI:  Mr. Speaker, I take that information but the organisation was not proper.  That is why Members of Parliament were not involved.  

Mr. Speaker, still on our foreign policy, the mission of our embassies abroad is to promote investment, trade and tourism.  Mr. Speaker, recently, I had the opportunity of going outside the country and I visited our Embassies, both in Canada and the U.S.A and most of the properties that we inherited from the illiterate and backward Government of Amin, this informed Government is failing to even take care of. 

Our Ambassadors cannot afford telephones, they do not have faxes, they use telephone booths and yet they are supposed to promote investment, trade and tourism.  An ambassador going to a telephone booth to ring; can you promote investment When you have no communication?  Can you promote trade and tourism in this kind of atmosphere?  Mr. Speaker, our Ambassadors and dignitaries abroad live in very dilapidated houses, and that is the image a very well informed Government is selling abroad!  Is that the image, if we cannot afford, as a country, to maintain these embassies, let us close them and have no foreign missions at all!  

As I draw towards my conclusion, I would like to thank the President for having made a statement that is going to fund the Youth and Women Councils.  For that, I am very grateful but, Mr. Speaker, on a sad note, this country is going to go through a referendum and through a general election without us knowing how many Ugandans we have.  

The national population census has been postponed indefinitely, the issuing of national identity cards is not talked of and yet this country has suffered and it is going to continue to suffer because of people who cannot identify five grades of their grand parents in this country. I thought the issuing of these national identity cards was going to solve the problem of immigrants in this country and it was going to solve the problem of voters registers!  You are going to have a situation where, in certain constituencies, you will get voters increasing by about 100 per cent and you cannot contend where the people are coming from because we have never been counted.  I have recently been upcountry in the North, and somebody was trying to tell me that there is a fear that a certain group of people are now less than what they were in 1990. On this I am not willing to comment.  

In conclusion, I think I am a little bit dismayed, but I am increasingly beginning to believe, because one time I had a discussion with a very senior Colleague in Parliament who told me that for us who are dismayed with a certain Government policy, we are outsiders and we are up-starters in politics.  He told me that politics was organised in circles: That there were the original people and then the conc ones around the original people and then outside the conc ones, there are the dilute and the periphery.  But for us who keep heating and trying to correct the Government, we are outsiders and up-starters.  Mr. Speaker, I believe that this Government will continue tolerating the views of the outsiders and the up-starters in correcting it where it goes wrong.  Thank you.

MS. KABASHARIRA (Women Representative, Ntungamo):   Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also thank the President for his good speech and for the projections that he has made. I hope they will all be fulfilled.  

Before I begin, hon. Dombo said that he may not get a chance to stand up and thank the President for his speech.  He says I should thank the President for fulfilling his pledge on constructing the Budumba bridge - (Laughter and Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  How does he think that I am not going to - okay proceed.

MS. KABASHARIRA:  Mr. Speaker, in the President's speech, he talks of eliminating poverty and on page 8, in the second paragraph, he talks of some of the measures. The second measure is the provision of agricultural implements, and he proposes that we use oxen in areas where they are appropriate and couple them with agricultural implements and machinery, for example ox-ploughs.  Mr. Speaker, the people of Ntungamo protect and accept the government policies.  

Mr. Speaker, some time back we were told that we should go to our people and tell them how they can improve their agriculture and Mr. Speaker, in Ntungamo, they are agriculturalists, they grow crops and they look after animals.  Mr. Speaker, we told them that in order to have good animals, they should follow the Government policy by changing their animals for the hybrids which can produce and give good products but, Mr. Speaker, I am surprised that in his speech he mentions the implements but he does not mention where the end products of agriculture will be marketed or will go.  I will give an example: 

In Ntungamo, people rear cattle so they have a lot of milk; moreover a good type of milk from which they can extract any type of products like cheese and other products. During the time  hon. Kagonyera was a Minister - his first regime as a Minister - of Agriculture in charge of Livestock, he gave so many cooling plants, so people followed the guidance of Government and changed their animals and they produced a lot of milk.  But to my surprise, the Dairy Corporation which the Government wanted to privatise, which stopped them from putting in more investment - for I think about three years now - decided to stop collecting milk from those Dairy cooling plants.  

They just decided one time that if you have 100 litres, they would collect only 20 litres and that they would go to every centre three times a week. They did not consult the farmers, they did not consult anybody in the leadership, they just went and informed the farmers of this new development. In this circumstance where Government is saying that try and fight poverty, do this, do that and people do it and then in the end they are frustrated, where do we go?  They are lamenting there, we are lamenting here!  

I went to Moyo one time with hon. Baku and in the morning when we asked for tea, he told us that the only tea you can get in Moyo is just water and tea leaves; that they do not get milk.  In Ntungamo, people are pouring milk!  In fact, I was there in May, I saw people pouring milk down when people in Moyo - even down here, I am sure the nearby areas around Kampala, they have no milk.  So, Mr. Speaker, what do we do? 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about corruption. The President talked about corruption in the last page of his speech and there is somewhere where he says: "In respect of corruption, therefore, instead of mourning corruption or launching unguided missiles at each other in the form of inclusive censure Motions, you should, if you are able, identify people of integrity so that we train them in investigative skills to conclusively assist us in this battle."  Mr. Speaker, the other day hon. Otafiire told us here that we are ignorant about military affairs or that we have limited knowledge on military affairs. Mr. Speaker, I agree with him, we have no knowledge but there are some people who have knowledge here about military affairs, we have the Major Generals, we have Aggrey Awori, we have the Majors, we have the Brigadiers.  Mr. Speaker, you allow me to ask them; if I sent a misguided missile and it hits a target which I want, what is the effect?  I want an answer.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank you, hon. Member holding the Floor.  I think if it hits the target you want, it is not misguided.  It is guided because it has hit what you wanted.

MS. KABASHARIRA:  Therefore, Mr. Speaker, what should I call this one?  Do we launch unguided missiles at each other just for nothing, for conclusive censures or are they guided missiles?  Anyway, thank you for the answer.  

I want to quote a certain admirer of the NRM, a certain "Old Man About Town."  Unfortunately, what I want to quote is under a very bad headline for this Parliament, but do not mind about that.  The "Old man" called  F. D. R. Gureme said: "If ever, God forbid, this great vessel of NRM as we knew it in the bush were to sink, it will have, in addition, founded on the treacherous rocks of incontinence, self interest, greed, heartless pretensions, privileged and compartmentalised corruption, glorified blunders, vanity-fare, clinging advice, misguided complacency and burgeonacious arrogance. Watch out so that history does not spitefully repeat itself."  Those who do not read Mr. Gureme's articles should look for this in last Sunday's paper and read it because there are so many things there I have not read.  It will guide you on what corruption is, and these misguided missiles.  Mr. Speaker. I thank you very much.

MR. LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga South Division, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I happen to be a student of the Presidency -(Laughter)- therefore, Mr. Speaker, I have very special interest in this communication from the Chair. 

In the speech of the President, when he was talking about corruption he said as follows: "Lack of political will means that there are some people you fear to tackle because they are too strong for you. I do not see anyone whom we fear."  Mr. Speaker, I want to submit that this is a contradiction.  What about one person by the name of General Salim Saleh who is said to be a brother of the President?  He has been cited in various privatisation scandals:  The Uganda Grain Millers is one, then ENHAS. What about the purchase of sub-standard military helicopters? All this is evidence that there are question marks about such a person.  Why does the President, being aware of that, instead of appointing Justice Sebutinde to only look into the Police, not look into that character who is associated to so many scandals? Is it not because he is a brother of the President?  Mr. Speaker I will require your protection because I have brought you a message and a noble message from the people of Lubaga. 

We are now in the Congo, sometimes we go to the Sudan but how secure are the people of Uganda inside Uganda?  Mr. Speaker, I come from Lubaga south and I have brought evidence here to prove to you that two of my people have been arrested unconstitutionally. One of such people is Abdallah Ssenabulya, Secretary for Defence and resident in Kironde zone.  He was arrested on the 30th of July this year.  I have made all arrangements to assist my resident but up to now, he is nowhere to be seen. I have reported the matter to all the high authorities.  

As if that was not enough, there is one Abdallah Alaman of Sudanese origin.  He is a man who is in charge of developing Islamic schools.  The man has been kept in one "safe-house" on Kitante Road.  The President sometime back said that after proving that there are some "safe-houses" being maintained, those "safe-houses", in compliance with article 23 sub-section (2) should be gazetted so that they are known in law.  Mr. Speaker, it is most unfortunate that "safe-houses" are still being maintained as I speak now.  Many of my people in Lubaga before they reach Luzira go through those painful "safe-houses".  They are being tortured as if they are not Ugandans. Anyway I am making noise of concern before hon. Members.

MR. ADOME LOKWII: Thank you, hon. Lukyamuzi, for giving way.   Mr. Speaker, the hon. Member started by saying two people from his constituency, but as he went to the second name, I remember him saying "of Sudanese origin", and you very well know how Sudan is aggressive to Uganda; how it has been giving sanctuary to the rebels who are fighting the people of Uganda. These Sudanese have also been know to have brought some of these bombs through the ADF activities in the west and in the Congo.  Now the clarification I am seeking from him is; how does this Sudanese become one of his constituents? 

Secondly, if this Sudanese has been implicated in one of the bomb attacks that maimed some of the Ugandans in the bars when they were enjoying their life and the fruits of their labour, would he actually have advised him to be at large or would he have confined him in the most safe place that he would think of for his life?

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, not all people of Sudanese origin are necessarily bad.  If we were making assessments using that analogy, we would be misinterpreting every connection because many people, including honourable Members have certain ethnic connections and I do not have to discuss that. 

In the Constitution of Uganda, article 23 sub-section (2) says: "A person arrested, restricted or detained shall be kept in a place authorised by law."  Many of my people for whom I am speaking this afternoon, before they get to Luzira, they go through torture "safe-houses" and I have named one such place on Kitante Road.  It is unconstitutional for such houses to be in existence.

MAJ. KATIRIMA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from hon. Ken Lukyamuzi about the "safe-houses" he is talking about, and particularly the one on Kitante Road, if he could help us with the plot number so that we zero on it.  He has also made accusations against a distinguished citizen of this country in the names of Maj. Gen. Saleh.  Would it not be clearer if he could table some of the evidence he has against this distinguished citizen since he cannot come here to defend himself? Hon. Ken Lukyamuzi has also talked about the presence of the UPDF in Sudan and this House knows very well that the UPDF is not in Sudan.  If he has any evidence to the contrary, I would be very happy if he could Table it before the Members for purposes of following it up.  Thank you.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Thank you very much for your clarification point. It is evident, and as a serious Parliamentarian, an hon. Member should know that even one of the committees here has information related to the connection, in terms of reporting of the tragedy of ENHAS, Uganda Grain Millers, sub-standard military helicopters, with that particular person.  I was saying that, after getting such information, is it not prudent for someone to form a committee of inquiry so that the truth is discovered?  As people of this Parliament who are representatives of the people, we should not fear to inquire or to seek to know the final truth so that our people understand - (interjection).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, there is point of information. 

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Because of time, Mr. Speaker, because you are not going to compensate me for the time, if it is not a point of order, I beg you to let me proceed. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He has declined.

MRS MATEMBE: Mr. Speaker, the issue of the helicopter is known here in this House  and you know that investigations were ordered and they were conducted and eventually, this matter was finally handed over to the Attorney General to sue the company  which submitted these helicopters and the case will be instituted by the Attorney General.  That much I know.  Secondly, the Commercial Bank investigations were carried out here.  Even CID carried investigations and there are reports and the case of UCB is in court.  

Is it, therefore, in order for the hon. Member to say that reports are revealed here and nothing in form of inquiries is carried out when, in fact, inquiries have been carried out and some of the cases are in court?  In fact, if I may add, the President in his speech said we need effective investigation, prosecution and adjudication. These investigations, for your information, do not reveal general Salim Saleh as a thief, for instance in that Commercial Bank matter.  If you want to read the report, he said that they should buy the bank but he is nowhere implicated in the deep involvement of stealing money. 

Is he, therefore, in order to stand up and say that President Museveni, because Salim Saleh is his brother, he is not touching him?  Did he not dismiss this man, as an administrative action, from the role he was playing?  Is the President a court? Is he the one to investigate and prosecute?  Is he in order, Mr. Speaker, to continue arguing like that?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As I see it the hon. Minister stood to give information but when the hon. Member who was holding the Floor refused to get the information, this was turned into a point of order.  It has been coached in such a way that I should rule the Member out of order but it would depend on whether the Member was informed that there are cases pending in court in respect of the matters he was talking about. That is when I would then rule him out of order.  But it seems he did not have that information, that is why you wanted to inform him.  Now that you have informed him that the matter is pending in court, then I think the matter should be put to rest for the time being.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for your wise ruling.  Mr. Speaker, the President's speech releases one other important tone and this is the tone which has been commonplace  before many institutions here that power belongs to the people.  I would like to argue on behalf of the people I represent that, for the people to be seen to be the owners of power, they should have teeth to bite.  For as along as people are distanced from power and freedoms, they cease to constitute what would be referred to as the sovereignty of a nation. They should have their human rights fully realised so that they have the capacity to check government excesses.  But, talking about power belonging to the people, to what extent does it belong to us if we cannot bite, if we cannot take action, if we cannot change government, if we cannot reform institutions?  For this matter, Mr. Speaker,  I am looking at power as money. 

It is unfortunate that the Presidential pledges now go beyond seven billion shillings.  Why is the President making pledges?  We elected him overwhelmingly and he came to power.  Why does he not visit places freely so that the people of Uganda welcome him circumstantially? But whenever he makes visits, he has to donate;  what is he searching for?  (Laughter) What does he want to buy?  Mr. Speaker, I have got an impression and for many Ugandans who did not know, we have a very terrible system: The system in front of us is such that you must be near the President for you to reap gains and development.  This is why I will soon Table a motion demanding that we revisit the federal phenomenon -  (Laughter) -because, if regions have got power under a federal arrangement, power is constitutionally shared. If it is constitutionally shared between the centre and the regions, then it is no longer necessary for the President to give donations whenever he goes to Kapchorwa. In fact, it is very bad for us to expect donations from the President if we have a working system.  I want to argue that under a federal arrangement, you do not need the President to give you that donation and you do not need the favours of the central government Ministers because power is money.  

So, I want to end by saying that I am one of the most disappointed people with reference to what hon. Manzi, a  Minister of State for Finance, released to us recently in regard to the privatisation of companies in Uganda which are run under a joint venture arrangement.  I would like to be educated.  If Uganda is serious, companies like Total, Standard Chartered, Shell are internationally accountable and they have audited accounts; why should we sell those companies where government needs to inject in very minimal management?  Why do you not leave the government to people who have capacity to retain those interests untouched? If I ever become President -(Laughter)- and I am likely to become President, the first thing I will begin with is to make sure that all those taxpayer companies which were arbitrarily sold are immediately regained.  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker.

MR. KIYONGA FRANCIS.(Upe county, Moroto):  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker.  I am opposing the motion Mr. Speaker. The honourable Members should not wonder why I am opposing because many times we have found that our President is not informed over certain matters, despite all institutions and structures of government.  

Let me begin with the issue of roads: The President has talked of re-opening the old roads.  I do not know whether these old roads were the roads made after 1986 or roads which were made before by the previous governments.  There is a lot of evidence to show that there are many places which have never realised the so-called old roads and even the new ones.  So, because of these queries, I do not know which roads the President was saying he is wanting to re-open.

There are many areas which have waited for so long for general development. We talk of electric power, we talk of telephones, name them!  For how long shall we wait for these things? A time should come when government stops pledging until they are ready to do these things instead of just playing with our people's minds. Is it politics, is it panicking to lose power? Why promise people something you cannot give? 

I would like to beg the honourable Members, including those from Kotido and Moroto, to have a different strategy of how we can demand for this development services because, Mr. Speaker, we are entitled to these services as citizens of this country yet we appear as if we are begging for it from government. I think we are entitled. Let us find a different strategy of how to demand for these services.

There is the issue of security which has been talked of a lot in Karamoja. Hon. Members, I think we should not blame those people in Karamoja. Let us blame government because, for some time now, the President, His Excellency Museveni, the Ministers and all those in government  have taken this problem of Karamoja as a small problem. Government has never taken it as a priority to get solutions. So, it is wrong to blame those people that they are rustling cows, they are doing this and that because, even inside Karamoja, people are suffering among the Karimojong themselves. I took some survey between December last year and last month and I found out that an average of two people have been dying per day inside Karamoja. This is excluding the dying outside Karamoja in the neighbouring areas caused by the Karimojong.  

The President has also talked of deploying four thousand soldiers alongside a certain battalion they call the motorised battalion. These statements are not new.  In 1994, we thought a solution for the security of Karamoja had been got.  The neighbours were told that those people there in Karamoja will no longer move with their guns outside Karamoja. Everybody was happy; the Bagisu and the people of Teso were happy  but it was a temporary measure. Now the President has come with another strategy. Everybody is happy that a solution has been got but the way it is, the President has made his statement in an un-serious manner. I have seen it as being unfair to the neighbours of Karamoja, and even to those of us who come from inside Karamoja. That is why I am opposing the Motion, Mr. Speaker.  We should not allow the President to continue to be misinformed.  I think the only way he can get to know that he is being misinformed is by opposing directly whatever he says, if it is wrong.  

In Karamoja, on this issue of insecurity, the RDC's office is working for another government; the ISO is working for the Director of Internal Security. It appears also to be a different government; the Police is working for a different government, so is the UPDF.  All those structures are uncoordinated.  They are powers in their own making but there are so many centres of these powers. Recently I was in the region. Even when the other soldiers were killed by the Jie warriors in July, I was there.  These structures of Government are never co-ordinated  -(Interjection) ! 

I was in the region, in Moroto District and I found out that these people write reports which are not co-ordinated from the centre.  They write reports which are just forgotten in the files. They are not analyzed so they can never act correctly.  How do we make government in Karamoja appear as a government?  How do we make all these structures, all these people  employed there to work? They are getting their salaries for nothing!  In fact, many of them do not mind because they can pay school fees for their children, they eat, they drink beer every evening;  they do not mind whatever results they produce but this government also seems not to bother about the way these agents or employees are cheating the Government who pays their salaries! (Interruption)           

MR. ILUKORI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker and I thank the hon. Member for giving way.  Mr. Speaker, the information I want to give is, in spite of the continuous and consistent information to the powers that be that all is not well in respect of the several administrations in Karamoja, which information is given in good faith for purposes of correcting the administration down there so that good governance is attained, we have never been heard or been taken seriously. This has continued like a dream!  This is very bad, Mr. Speaker.

MR. WAMBUZI GAGAAWALA: I am not from Karamoja, Mr. Speaker, but I cannot stand sitting here and listening to a Karimojong claiming that he is poor.  Karamoja is the richest district in Uganda in terms of minerals. I cannot tolerate this! At least for us in Busoga, we have been marginalized to such a level that even the town of Jinja has been taken away.  I think it is important, Mr. Speaker, and I must inform this hon. Member from Karamoja that in the midst of the richest district, do not curse God, do not mock God and start saying this is the poorest place on earth! Thank you. 

MR. KIYONGA F.: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I thank the first informer, hon. Ilukori but on the last information, I do not think I deserved to be given that kind of information because we are not discussing a particular group, we are discussing government, we are discussing the presidency.  So I think the last information was misleading and merely defensive of the facts and realities on the ground on that side of the country -(Interruption).

MR. ADOME LOKWII: I thank the hon. Member for giving way. The piece of information I wanted to give the hon. Member to help him help the Engineer is that, actually, the marble got from Moroto comes to Busoga, in Jinja.  Thank you.

MR. KIYONGA F: Mr. Speaker, if we had all these things which are being pledged by government, if we had power as the rest of the region, that marble from Moroto would not be taken to Jinja in Busoga.   
I was trying to say that the way government has been handling this issue of insecurity in Karamoja has not been  serious and unless they are consistent with the right methods, we shall not succeed. The neighbours will continue crying.  Those members from Kumi said that even if they restock their cattle, it will be taken.  It is true. Unless we get a solution for the insecurity -(Interjection)- the cattle will go as they have always been taken. I am not justifying cattle rustling but how many cows have been taken so far, not only outside Karamoja but within the region?  So, Mr. Speaker, the President should take the issue of insecurity seriously.  

Government should handle the situation just as seriously as it is tackling the northern conflict or the western rebellion .  In fact, many people have even said about the recent killing of UPDF soldiers that it was good so that government can act.  They have said that maybe this is now the time  government will get to know that those guns are not only harmful to civilians but also even to soldiers, the keepers of people's security.  Thank you very much.

MRS. BALEMEZI (Women Representative, Mukono District) I thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me this opportunity.  I stand to support the Motion.  I would like to thank the President for his address to the nation but before I support this Motion in full, I would like to add some points.  Let me start off by conveying the gratitude of the people of Mukono District for the good governance they have enjoyed from this government, and for the good services they have received from the government.

After the President's address to the nation, I visited a number of places in Mukono, and I gathered a number of points from the people which they requested me to come and highlight upon.  From the President's address, he talked about the improvement of primary education through UPE.  The people of Mukono are very grateful that now about 6 million children are benefiting from UPE the people of Mukono say that this UPE will be short‑lived, that the advantages that we are getting from UPE are rather short-lived in that, much as the children are going for UPE, the examinations sort of disfavour Mukono children.  

This is because the distribution of teaching materials is not done broadly, and as a result, the pupils of Mukono cannot make it to good secondary schools and as a result, in Mukono, in our ten-year plan, we feel that there should be improvement in university entrance from the children who are benefiting from UPE.  There is a suggestion that government should consider introducing regional examinations because a child from Buvuma Islands or Galilaaya or Baale, let alone Koome Islands, cannot compete with a child from Kitante, Buganda Road or Kampala Parents and go to the same school.  These children are marked at par and they are awarded marks as if they were taught by the same teacher.  This is where the members of Mukono District request  -(Interruption)   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you want the information from the Minister of Education?

MRS. BALEMEZI: Yes, please.

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Prof. Khiddu Makubuya) Thank you very much Mr. Speaker, and i also thank the hon. Member holding the Floor.  Certainly many people would be very envious of Namilyango and Namagunga being in Mukono but that is not the point of information I am giving. The point of information is that, in the Ministry we, especially using our arm of UNEB, have changed the setting and marking of exams.  You may wish to know, hon. Members, that we have introduced continuous assessment for certain subjects starting from P.1 to P.7, and this is intended to contribute a certain percentage of the final assessment.  So, this is done in each school.

the second point is that, if we went for regional examinations, the comparison and maintenance of standards for the whole nation would be very difficult to do but maybe what you should be looking for and which we are considering and we are asking hon. Members to contribute to is whether this sponsorship should be  pro rata to the population sizes of district, given the fact that to go to the university you require only 2 principles.  Thank you very much.

MRS. BALEMEZI: Thank you very much Mr. Minister for that information.  I think it will be of a great advantage to all of us and to the nation at large if that is carried out; but since you are still in that process of assessing, then I wish to recommend or to request that you apply affirmative action to   schools classified as second grade like the schools in Mukono District.  Such schools could also get something like the 1.5 points given to girls for entrance into university.  For example, as you do your assessment of the performance and intake of the children, where you take 4 points for Namilyango, Namagunga, Gayaza and Buddo, you could consider that schools of second grade classification be considered, maybe, at 8.9 as affirmative action.  

Now, as we go on with this UPE, we are grateful for the improvement in immunisation and the decline in infant mortality. But much as there is a decline in infant mortality, many other districts are coming up or catching up with Mukono as far as child sacrifice is concerned.  Mr. Speaker, we people of Mukono are very surprised to see that up to now, government has not come up with any statement about this. Although very many children are being sacrificed, government has kept mum about it and we are really disappointed.  Much as Mukono District has tried to address this issue, it has been realised that most of these local medicine‑men come to Mukono from other districts because Mukono has thick forests, deserted bushes and swamps. So, herbalists come from Kiboga, Mpigi, Iganga and Jinja. Some of these have been identified and been beaten up.  Much as it is regarded that it is people from Mukono  who sacrifice these children, there are people who come from other districts into our district because of the conducive atmosphere in our place.

Now, looking at violation of children's rights, we are again disappointed in that many people are being arrested for violating children's rights like by beating the children, burning them up and defiling them but the sentences given to such criminals by the Government organs are rather disappointing.  For example, when a man burns up his child and he is taken to court, he is only sentenced to a term of two months, much as the child has been burnt and turned into a disabled person.  So, we feel that the sentences given to violators of children's rights are rather too lenient.  

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the President for having considered the women and the youth councils by considering awarding them bicycles and motorcycles.  Mr. Speaker, this is a national President's Speech to the nation but, if the President considers giving bicycles and motorcycles to the women and the youth councils to facilitate their work, it should be the responsibility of the sub-counties to maintain these facilities  but most of the sub-counties in Mukono in particular have been very constrained financially and we feel that it would be an additional constraint to ask them to maintain these assets.   

I would like to request for another consideration from central government to give a conditional grant for these facilities to be run in the districts because the women and the youth councils have been forgotten for a long time.  The little service that is now being extended to them should not be an expense of maintaining these facilities which is being thrown back to the sub-counties, which sub-counties have not yet come to realise that they have to maintain and allocate a fund for these councils.

I beg your indulgence to just mention something  little on the revenue that is collected.  His Excellency the President talked of improvement in tax collection but I was rather disappointed to see that the tax collectors are not appreciated much as these people do this work under a lot of hardships. The Internal Revenue Department Staff really undergo a lot of suffering while collecting these taxes but when we look into the threshold allowed for the salary earners, it is on the higher side.  

I would like to request that the threshold be reconsidered to be moved from 130,000 to 150,000.  This is because the taxes are mainly collected from people who are  under-assessed and at the same time, they are the people who pay the graduated tax at source, much as so many people who are liable to paying tax never pay the taxes.  So, you look at the people who are targeted, they are just the civil servants.  These are the people we are collecting taxes from.  

I would like to request, Mr. Speaker, that the tax collection be looked into a little bit more so that whereas people of the business community - those who have files and are approved to have paid their taxes - are exempted from the Graduated Tax.  It is very embarrassing to look at someone who pays millions of shillings in form of assessed taxes to be arrested just because he forgot to go to the sub-county to pay  graduated tax of 20,000 shillings, much as he is paying millions, if not billions. If only we could reconsider assessed taxes and  Pay-as-You Earn, I would request that people who are suffering to pay this tax be exempted from general Graduated Tax.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker and I wish to support the Motion.  

DR. OKULO EPAK (Oyam, County, South): I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, regrettably, the manner in which the President presents his State of Nation Address makes it very difficult for some of us to appreciate and commend it.  Mr. Speaker, I read these statements critically and I cannot fail to raise questions literally on every page of the President's State of Nation Address.  

A President or a Leader in this Country who has enjoyed uninterrupted governance of this Country for 13 years; a Presidency that has enjoyed unprecedented goodwill of internal and international scale should, at this juncture, 13 years down the road when making a State of the Nation Address, have no pretences.  There are very many pretences in this President's State of the Nation Address.  

Obote's name is mentioned in this State of the Nation Address four times; Amin's name is mentioned three times.  I assume a State of the Nation Address is virtually an annual review of what happened in the previous year and the way forward for the following year; to what extent do Amin and Obote continually constitute the state of the nation of this Country?  Mr. Speaker, it would seem to some of us that President Museveni uses Obote as a life-jacket, as his survival kit so that when he is having problems, he must refer to Obote to evoke the scare-crow!

I have been involved in development planning of this Country and I find it hard to believe statements made by the President on the first page of his State of the Nation Address.  Mr. Speaker, GDP is a very good economic indicator but it is my view and submission, Sir, that when the President is talking about the state of the economy of this Country, he should stop addressing the World Bank and IMF; he should address the people with keen interest in and who are the beneficiaries of this economy. Mr. Speaker, the President should stop indulging himself in copious statistical data which serve no useful purpose and information to the ordinary tax payer.  

The GDP is a very elusive figure and it is not necessary to include the CPI - Consumer Price Indices, for instance, whose measures will vary from year to year or from Government to Government.  So, it is irrelevant to be trying to compare what GDP was in 1998 or 1999 as compared to that of somebody's government in the 1960s -(Interruptions).

MR. TOSKIN: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I also thank the hon. Member on the Floor for giving way.  Mr. Speaker, I did not want to interrupt the hon. Member, but he has referred to issues which seem to intrigue me.  First of all, I would like to inform the Member that as a planner, to plan for the future, history is very important - history is very very important.  Again the Speaker on the Floor goes on to say that the President uses so much statistical information in addressing the population but much as the President was addressing the population, I thought the President was briefing the Members of Parliament who really understand the importance of some of this statistical information.  So, it is not fair really to say that the President should not address some of this statistical information in trying to analyze the state of the nation.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

DR. OKULO EPAK: That was a point of argument contrary to what I said, not information - unless it constitutes information by the hon. Member.

I want to submit that the only person or people who should be proud and to whom credit should be given for GDP are the tax payers and the voters from whose sweat you have the product in the GDP.  If you know that 40 per cent of our GDP is constituted by Agriculture, and a good percentage of it is constituted by Commerce, then you know that it is the ordinary tax payer who, through his own hard work, contributes to the GDP growth rate. 

The President's obligations to the tax payer and accountability to the tax payer should be in the delivery of services.  We would like to know how many hospitals or health facilities have been provided for the people.  We would like to know how many new  roads have been built and how many old roads have been repaired.  We would like to know what is happening in the educational sector! The President collects our taxes and he is supposed to use it for the deliverance of services to the people. Therefore, the credit fort the GDP growth rate should be given to the people whose sweat produces the GDP -(Interruption).

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank you Dr. Okulo-Epak for giving way.  First of all, Mr. Speaker, the growth rate is different from the development rate and indeed you cannot estimate development unless you know the growth rate.  Dr. Okulo Epak being a planner knows that if you are going to have a five- year development plan, the first year's output must give you the second year's projections and, therefore, you must engage in statistics.  There is no way you can plan without statistics unless you are not planning.

Secondly, I think the President must have thanked the tax payers because he said that taxation revenues have been increasing and who was paying?  Somebody was paying, that is a fact.  However, in the State of the Nation Address, you cannot also give all the statistics that you need.  I would want to refer hon. Okulo Epak to the Background of the Budget and you will find all the information that you are looking for, including the number of metres that were made in terms of roads.  Thank you.

DR. OKULO-EPAK: I thank my hon. Friend, Manzi.  I do not think he was disagreeing with me.  I have the Background to the Budget with me here, and I am capable of reading and appreciating it but I think that the President, when addressing the population came, without recourse to statistics, to tell them exactly to what measure they have benefited from their taxes.  The GDP growth rate is, for me, for my information and I assume that the State of The Nation Address is not only directed at Members of Parliament, it is directed at the entire nation and the people of this Country. This is why I say the President should start communicating with the people he leads, with people whose votes he enjoys and not the World Bank.  

On page (1), former governments were blamed for the current shortage of electricity, and we were told they did absolutely nothing.  This is really preposterous! All of us who are here know that Obote One wanted to put up a hydro-electric power station at Murchison Falls. It was opposed by the entire world on environmental basis.  The same fate Bujagali is facing now.  Then it was shifted to Ayago and before that project was implemented, when all the preparations had been made including the positioning of the hospital for that purpose, the Government was overthrown.  

Now obviously, Obote's Government had the initiative to expand power supply.  For your information, between 1962 and 1971, that government had received foreign in-flows - both grants and loans - to the tune of 52.9 million dollars.  Between 1980 and 1985, that Government had received foreign grants and loans amounting to 331.3 million dollars only. Comparing the five-year period, the Movement administration between 1986 and 1990 had received both grants and loans amounting to 2.759 million dollars, 880,000 per cent of what Obote Two borrowed for the same period and nothing to show for it.  Mr. Speaker, by 1986, the accumulated debt of Uganda was 1.2 billion dollars.  Today it is more than 3 billion dollars yet, Mr. Speaker, I heard the Vice President say that they cannot perform because they have been paying Obote's debts.  Surely, there can be nothing far from the truth. 

I want to add one or two things, with your permission, on both the so-called Poverty Eradication Programme and the Youth and  Women councils.  Mr. Speaker, I wish to submit categorically that these are not sustainable  programmes. They are not sustainable, they are mere measures of political patronage and coercion. I would also like to submit on Defence and say that last year - and probably now - regarding my area of Lango, maybe we have enjoyed a reasonable degree of security.  

I would also like to commend the security agencies which have been behaving a little more reasonably than we have had before, but I would like to say this to this august House that all this we are enjoying at a very, very high cost of over 50 per cent of our national revenue, and we could enjoy them without such expense if we resolved to use other least cost and cost effective methods, that is reconciliation and peaceful resolutions of political differences and then we would put all the money in better use.

Our President spends a lot of money travelling all over the World to bring about peaceful negotiation of conflicts.  He signs agreements with all sorts of things, he encourages nations who are experiencing civil war situations to resolve them peacefully but he does nothing near that effort as far as Uganda is concerned.  Mr. Speaker, if I were to borrow from the Americans who said that America is governed through divine providence, with this increasing state of insecurity one would be tempted to say, if I was not a Christian, that we are governed through demonic providence.  I thank you.

PROF. MWAKA(Woman Representative, Luwero):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I stand to support the Motion, but with a few comments and suggestions.  I congratulate the President and government for the recovery of the economy, and the improvement in the socio-economic indicators at the macro level although at the micro level, Mr. Speaker, the situation is still pathetic.  

The President noted that during the 1970s and 80s, there were acute shortages of sugar, soap, paraffin, transport, textiles and that people were putting on mivumba. However, the President also rightly observed and confessed on page (7) of his report that there are parts of the country, including Luwero and Nakasongola, the districts I represent, where government has been unable to create conditions for the very minimal socio-economic recovery even after the thirteen years since the war ended.  People are still very poor. 

Perhaps this business of putting on mivumba is more apparent today than before because people can not afford new clothes.  People go without sugar - UPE, we welcome it but you find that some parents do not just refuse to pay for school uniforms, they do not have the money!  Mr. Speaker, why is this happening?  And I want to submit it was because of the very poor and archaic methods of distributing the rehabilitation and recovery packages.

MS. KABASHARIRA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the hon. Member for giving way.  I am seeking clarification from her. She said that even after thirteen years, Luwero is still having some social problems. Mr. Speaker, since this government came in 1986, there has been a full Ministry for Luwero Triangle unlike other areas of this country. Can I be clarified on what that ministry has been doing and, what of the funds that were given first to the then Vice President, the after him to some other minister who also comes from Luwero, then again to another one from Luwero, and now another one from Kiboga?  May I be clarified as to what that money has been doing which has not been given to other areas of this country?  Thank you.

PROF. MWAKA:  Thank you very much for that question. That is exactly what I was moving to. It is because of the poor way these funds were managed that we have that problem. Now, I am just ringing a warning bell that even this so-called redress package the President is proposing, if it is managed the way the Luwero Triangle package was managed, no impact will be felt and we will go back to square one. So, that is exactly what I am saying.  

Things are put in place, they are not followed! Money is voted, for example, like for the Youth, it is not used for years but then they do not show anywhere that this money is on any account. Instead, we have domestic arrears and what have you. Your question has really assisted me to drive home the point I exactly wanted to make.

The honourable member from Karamoja warned that even if you restock and the restocking is done poorly - I remember one time here in this House, we were supposed to have 7,000 heads of cattle and only 700 were given out. Definitely, that shows that  sometimes the impact of these hand-outs may not be felt if implemented badly. 

Another thing, people who have just experienced war do have a problem of apathy: They resign, they are physiologically destroyed and they are traumatized. Even if they are given something to help them out, they have no way of helping themselves out.  So, the problem is that the physiological problems of these war torn areas are not addressed. Do you give people hard meat which is not cooked when they have no teeth?  Give them what they can chew - (Interruption)!

CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA:  Mr. Speaker, I have heard the President saying that money was spent in Luwero but the problem is that the resources were misdirected to instead build recreational centres.  Recreational centres do not affect the level of incomes in homes!  So, perhaps this is a reflection of the people who have been in charge of resources for Luwero.

PROF. MWAKA:  You very well know, hon. Guma, that initially the local person did not have a say in the distribution of programmes. It was a top to bottom programme, not a bottom-up programme.  It is after decentralization which has not taken a very long time. So, you could still see the problem. The money ended up in the pockets of those people to whom it did not belong.  So I am saying, Mr. Speaker, that let us learn from the previous mistakes but the problem is that we Ugandans, if we were school children in school, we would be very poor performers because we do not learn.  Even if one pumps and pumps, we do not learn. I wish Ugandans would learn to listen, and learn from our previous mistakes.

On the closure of the banks, I agree that the directors of those banks committed some crimes but the problem is the way the issue was handled.  Mr. Speaker, when these banks were closed, I have a good example of some students in Makerere who failed to sit their final examinations because their parents could not pay and the University was demanding money and the banks were closed.  These boys and girls may even fail to sit what we call the special exam which means they will have to repeat the year.  

Some of these students are private students and they pay 1.8 of a million.  You are forced to pay 1.8 of a million again just because the banks were closed!  They are victims of circumstances but, Mr. Speaker, I feel if Bank of Uganda had done it's job, we would not have run into this chaos and I hope the hon. Minister for Higher Education will look into the problems of those students so that even if they are told to repeat, they do not pay or they are given an exam because if the time of the special exam expires, what do we do?  We tell them to repeat the year!  

MISS. TIPERU:  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that there is no student at Makerere who has been made to pay twice just because the banks have been closed.  I have colleagues there, I am currently pursuing my Masters Degree there, and I had actually paid in Greenland Bank but there is no way I was told to repay due to the closure of the bank.  Thank you.

MR. RWENDEIRE:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you hon. Member holding the Floor, for giving me this opportunity to give you additional information. We certainly got concerned about this issue, and I was in touch with the administration of Makerere. We had received some information that we should have a blanket exemption for some of those who would claim that they had funds in the Co-operative Bank but we found that some people who came up actually did not have money in the Co-operative Bank.  So, it became administratively a nightmare to go on investigating every case to find out who had money in the Co-operative bank and who had not.  Not only that, we had also problems with secondary schools.  What we advised the headmasters was to be a little lenient to these people and give them a bit of time but not a blanket cover.  It was very, very difficult to identify who was who.  Thank you.

MR.NYANZI:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you hon. Member for giving way.  I want to inform the House and the hon. Member on the Floor that this afternoon, I have delayed to come to Parliament only because a parent from my constituency and his son who has been a third year student in Makerere University were in my office. The son failed to sit for his exams because he was refused to sit for the papers and the father was saying his money was locked up in Greenland Bank.  What I did as a Member of Parliament, I rung the Ministry of Education to find out the truth. I was advised to ring hon. Rwendeire's office but he was not in office.  So what I did, I rung to the Permanent Secretary who said that Ministry of Education is not concerned as far as anything to do with Makerere is concerned.  

So, as a responsible person, what I did, I rung Bank of Uganda and I contacted a lady called Mrs. Matovu who is in charge. She is responsible for paying depositors of Greenland Bank.  This lady told me that the only thing I could do is to find out whether the father of this son had money on the account in Greenland bank and they gave me the company which is concerned.  So I rung that company.  They told me to send this gentleman there, and I left my office after finding out that the man had money on the account but they said they do not know whether they will help this gentleman to sit for his papers.  So, hon. Rwendeire, it is true that many students have failed to sit for their papers because their money has been locked up in these banks.

PROF. MWAKA:  Thank you very much honourable Member for that very good information.  I just want to answer hon. Tiperu that for you, you are on a Masters programme but I am referring to those students who are in their third year but have to wait for a full year. You see, Makerere moved from a whole year to a semester.  The semester may be okay, it is six months but those who were completing this programme of three years, those are the ones who have problems, who will have to wait for a whole year.  Anyway that point has been taken. 

Again on the banks, we heard on radio that Standard Bank and Centenary bank bought these branches but we know that for Standard Bank you need 500,000 shillings to open up a Current Account; for Co-operative Bank you needed only 10,000 shillings, sometimes 20,000 shillings and I am praying to the Minister concerned to make sure that these banks do not charge what they charge in Kampala.  If they take over a bank where the minimum was 10,000 shillings, let it be like that but otherwise, because people come in to make money, their interest rates are so high. Co-operative Bank was a peoples' bank. Let those banks which come also be peoples' banks.  

Education:  There is a contradiction that there is no manpower when actually teachers are floating, and the problem can be solved when the equalization fund is put in place so that Karamoja which is unattractive, Luwero down there in Ngoma which is unattractive, that equalization grant could be used to make the whole thing attractive and people will go there.  I have an example of Lacor hospital. They have a lot of doctors there because instead of giving their doctors 250,000 shillings a whole doctor per month, they give them 800,000 shillings per month and you find boys and girls opting to go to Lacor rather than going to Nakaseke just near here.  So, if the equalization grant is implemented, perhaps that can bail us out.  

Also on the education programme, we have a teacher pupil ratio of 1 to 110. Now, if you have a school with 400 children in a sparsely populated area, that is a good number but because they are following this ratio, we found in Luwero some schools have only three teachers and they have seven classes; others have four teachers. This means that some pupils end up not actually studying, they just go there to play because to expect one teacher to teach three classes is unworkable. 

I therefore plead with the Minister for Education, perhaps, to say that any school with more than 400 pupils should have a minimum of seven teachers, and perhaps have that one as a ceiling so that each class has a teacher.  Otherwise, we are sacrificing quantity for quality. We are very happy we have the quantity but also we have to care for the quality. I cannot expect one teacher to teach three classes four subjects. Definitely, you can not expect them to make miracles. 

Lastly, Mr. Speaker, I greatly appreciate the President for the improvement in the road system. As for me in Luwero, our feeder roads are passable. Even in my small ramshackle car, I can go as far as 70 kilometres up to Ngoma without getting stuck. I congratulate him for that.  

The very last one; I want to appreciate the President for having echoed that the Women Councils and the Youth Councils should be funded. I am a Member of the Social Services Committee, we have seen in the report that Women Councils have been voted some money but my reservation is, I hope this money will not end up like the dams issue, or that it will not end up in a few favoured districts like Mukono, Mpigi, Mubende where all the projects have gone. We hope even other districts will share this money to put in place the Women councils. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. TOSKIN (Kongasis County, Kapchorwa): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I just want to touch on two or three issues while thanking the President for his State of the Nation Address.  One is the economy. Mr. Speaker we are happy and I am indeed proud of this country because despite the fact that most of the countries in the world are now facing a lot of economic crises, Uganda has continued to perform quite progressively. 

I know some Members have come here to challenge why we talk of the economy doing well when the people are poor but, Mr. Speaker, we must understand that our situation was much worse. Our economy had completely gone to the dogs so, any sign of any progressive movement must be appreciated. My only concern, Mr. Speaker, is the balancing of the economic growth of the country. We want the country to balance the economic planning. I do not know whether it is the lack of a National Planning Authority that is causing this unbalanced development of the nation. 

Some of us who come from marginalised districts continue to complain and we shall continue to demand that services should also be moved to all corners of the country. Places like Kongasis cannot claim to have benefitted much. When you talk of Kapchorwa having got electricity, you are talking of Kapchorwa town, Kongasis is about 80 kilometres away! We have not known what electricity is. When you talk of telephones having gone to Kapchorwa, you are talking of Kapchorwa town, Kongasis does not even have a radio call. How can I be proud that we are also receiving the services? So, it is really important, Mr. Speaker, that this country begins to address development quite equitably. 

Now, one other matter: Over the weekend, on Saturday the 17th, Mr. Speaker, there was a very big function in the Eastern region. The Catholic church was enthroning the very first Archbishop. We  really expected the Eastern region to get the support that it deserves from the rest of the country but it was a surprise. Looking around for the Members of Parliament, we found only the local Members of Parliament from the region, nobody from out and yet I remember letters were circulated to almost all Members and all organs of government! Mr. Speaker, on the representation of government, it was so surprising that for such an occasion, the highest official government could have sent was a Minister of State!

MAJ. KAZOORA: Mr. Speaker, I sympathise with the hon. Member from Kongasis. I was recently there but I will have something to say during the Budget Speech about Kongasis. However, Mr. Speaker, two weeks ago, in the Western region we were installing the first Archbishop of Western Uganda, His Grace Paul Bakyenga. I did not see my good Friend whom I visited in Kongasis and hon. Baguma who went there does not come from the Eastern region. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. TOSKIN: Mr. Speaker, I thank the Member for that information. What I was only trying to point out is that we really expected somebody - a high ranking government official. I knew there was a very important function taking place in the west but sincerely, we have the President, the Vice-President, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister; could we not have had even just one of them to grace this occasion?  Mr. Speaker, I am speaking from the mind of the people who were in this function.

MR. BABU:  Mr.Speaker, I just want to inform the hon. Member that once a President is represented by any member of government, the President is present, and I think we should stop grading. I went to the North to represent the President when they were installing the Archbishop of Gulu and my Colleague hon. Kajura, I think, is the one who went to Mbarara. So really, at the end of the day, Sir, it does not matter who represents the President. The important thing is that government is represented and I think instead of down-grading some of us, we do not feel very good when we sit on the Front Bench here but when we represent the Prime Minister or the President, you do not see us. We would like to request the hon. Members to recognise us also.  Thank you.

MR. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker and I thank also the hon. Member for giving way. It has been established that normally there are many functions taking place in Uganda and yet there are also many critical problems to address; take, say, the current problems of drought, take the blockage of River Nile which is affecting many people, take the problems of hunger which have affected Karamoja and we have had to send there food and so on and so forth.  So, there is now an agreement that in general, some of us will play a lesser role in attending functions and that we shall be more technocratic. This means sitting at our desks and addressing the problems afflicting this country so that we get a solution to them. That must be remembered. 

The second point I would like to make is the question of even rationalising the gifts which the President gives. They are now being rationalised so that he does not give a cow to one function and he gives say a Pajero to another function because also this creates disparity of treatment. So, we are now rationalising many issues in order to have adequate resources and the time to address the many issues you are raising. You are raising the question of telephones, you are raising the question of electricity and I want to ask you to apologise in advance. Many of you have been asking me to attend functions but I now try to avoid functions as much as possible so that we may address and you will see the results. Give us a little time. I thank you.

MR.OKUMU RINGA: I thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me opportunity to give this information. The information I am giving is with regard to protocol which I am sure the Rt. hon. Prime Minister is more aware of than some of us. If, for example, for a function such as installing an Archbishop of a given ecclesiastical province you designate a Minister of State, technically it means no substantive Minister will go to that function; that all those who will go will only be people from the Minister of State level and below. That is what the protocol actually dictates. So, what hon. Toskin maybe is saying is - and I would say the same - that when considering such functions, upgrade it so that as many of the other Members of the Cabinet may attend. This is really the protocol. If we do not know it, we can learn and practice it. Thank you.

MISS KABASHARIRA: Mr. Speaker, thank you so much and I thank the hon. Member. I am sorry for what I am going to say if I may hurt someone.  A while ago, my neighbour here, hon. Obedmoth Ofungi made a statement on Ministerial posts, now someone from Kapchorwa is also making almost the same statement or a related statement. Another Member from the North, hon. Okumu Ringa, is almost talking about the same. 

I at times ask myself whether what we talk here we talk as national leaders or for our constituencies or we talk just for the sake of talking because, several times people have said Ministerial posts are in the west and they mention the big Ministries. Mr. Speaker I want to inform this august House that hon. Kategaya's Ministry, hon. Nasasira's Ministry - the posts have nothing to do with Ntungamo as a district. Hon. Kweronda's post has nothing to do for Ntungamo. Ntungamo people do their things and if they get anything from the government, well and good. 

When we talk here, it reflects on  our constituencies. Here, this is something which was a function, in Ankole we had the same function and the President was represented by hon. Kajura. Hon. Kajura is a Minister, he is not a President but he went in the name of the President and we appreciated it. So, Mr. Speaker, I am getting concerned and I think we should behave. We should talk as national leaders and not divide the people by following posts. They have nothing to do for us. Thank you.

MR. TOSKIN: Mr. Speaker, I want to thank all the Members who have given information on this matter, but I want to emphasize however, Mr. Speaker that we should not wish away some of these feelings of the people. When you are talking of the national cake, you are talking of sharing the national cake. When you are talking of equitable distribution of services, we are talking exactly that. You cannot tell me that whether all leaders have come from one region, I should be comfortable where I am because I have been represented from the other side. I am sure if we had a powerful Cabinet Minister from the East, he would have attended that very important function but as it is now, almost everybody is a Minister of State in the whole region -(Laughter)- Mr. Speaker, I think let us be very, very honest when we are talking of some of these things.  

Now, on the issue of security, I want definitely to thank the UPDF for the effort it has put in enabling the country to enjoy some relative peace, both in the North and in the West. I know it has cost us quite a lot to do this but then, we must appreciate what has taken place.  I want to applaud the President also on the amnesty; his acceptance of the pressure of the people to give amnesty to all the people who have been fighting the country. 

Personally, I have reservations on this because, first of all, Kony has not asked for amnesty, the ADF have not asked for amnesty but it is people who are talking for them. It is not easy, hon. Members, for a person who has decided to go and fight for his own reasons to simply accept  the wishes of other people! It will still take us quite some time before we realise why Kony  went to the bush in the first place. Kony went to the bush and he has not given us his programme. Even his style of war has not indicated to us whom he is actually fighting.  Most of the people who have suffered because of the northern war are the people in the north themselves.  Now, if Kony was really looking for power or a Ministerial position, I do not think he would have fought in that style. Nevertheless, we thank the President because he has accepted and already there are indications that there is some movement towards that end, that there is some talk going on.  

I want also to appreciate the efforts of the East African leaders who have recently come up and signed a peace protocol for the Congo because here in this country, we know very well that we did not go to the Congo because we are just adventuring into war and exporting war as some people have said. I know very well that we went there for our own interests but the fact that this peace has now been signed and some issues that had been raised by the countries which had been affected by this war have been settled, is an appreciation. Now linked to this is the issue of Karamoja. 

This matter is also another very serious matter. It is no longer a good argument to say that the Karamojong should be allowed to carry their guns for their self protection. Mr. Speaker, some of us who are affected by the Karamojong are very, very bitter with this type of statements because for the last almost ten years, we have not had any serious incursion from outside Uganda attacking Karamoja. We have known only Karamoja moving out and attacking the neighbours. Of course we also know that there is internal conflict in Karamoja itself but government must specifically come out with a very objective way of bringing peace between Karamoja and her neighbours. 

I am involved in a regional peace initiative which involves Uganda and Kenya but what is hampering this peace initiative is that we do not know how to penalise those who break the peace pacts we have made. We have people who are marauding with guns; they are few, not all Karamojong are involved in this conflict!  Even the people in Karamoja are suffering from it, Members from Karamoja have said this, but these few individuals, these criminals cannot be policed and be punished by the State which has the power to do that.  Now, the recent report that 15 gallant soldiers of UPDF also died in this type of skirmish should be of concern to Government, and we are waiting to see what Government is now going to do.  We hope that will make Government now listen to those who are calling for some serious action in bringing peace in Karamoja.  

My final point is about the political stability of this country. I get concerned by the way people are talking.  People, Mr. Speaker, must understand that we can differ in any  way but Uganda should remain Uganda, and at last we are all Ugandans. No difference should cause us to forget our national identity as Ugandans.  When I was a young boy in 1979, I used to sit in this gallery here and listen to people really struggling to tear Uganda into pieces and to tear Uganda apart and indeed, they tore Uganda apart. We have had to fight for so many years in order to even enjoy the relative peace we have had and the stability we have had bur I continue to hear the same voices that they are coming!  

We have got political differences but  when we are talking about the referendum, are some people in order really to call for war for a political matter which can be discussed?  This Parliament has discussed it and has put up a law for it so why should people call for war?  

We are so disappointed that just two days ago, one gallant, very well trained Ugandan got killed in a war;  a Ugandan who had recently been acquitted from the courts of law saying that he was not involved in war and now he has died right inside the struggle!  It is very disappointing, Mr. Speaker.  Mine is to call upon Ugandans that Ugandans, let us uphold our national stability, the political stability must be maintained.  It is not so long ago when we came out of bloodshed because of our political differences.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

MR. OKUMU RINGA (Padyere County, Nebbi):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would like to join other Colleagues to thank the President for his State of the Nation Address because this is provided for in the Constitution under Article 101, that the President who is the Head of State will give a State of the Nation Address to Parliament upon the opening of each session of Parliament. I would like to thank him, however, Mr. Speaker, I would like to express concern about the Presidential Advisors and all those who have the duty to work and prepare the speech for the President to deliver.  

In my view, the State of the Nation Address is taking stock of all that has taken place in the country during the given period, in this case, from the last State of the Nation Address to the new State of the Nation Address so that the address will contain issues which should relate to successes and failures in governance of this country.  I would like to emphasise that the Presidential Advisors should do much more so that the next State of the Nation Address should contain elements and issues which should reflect globally and not only concentrate on some areas.

DR. RWENDEIRE:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and also hon. Member for giving way.  I am seeking clarification on two requirements:  One is that the President shall give a State of the Nation Address, and the second one is the Budget.  Now, the clarification that I am seeking is; if the two are going to be given, and we know that the Budget accompanied with the documents gives exactly the stock that the Member requires, why should it be duplicated in the Address?  This is the clarification I would like.

MAJ. J.B. KAZOORA:  Mr. Speaker, you will realise that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister is lonely, he has been abandoned. You can see he is seated alone and considering that loneliness, Mr. Speaker, are we in order to continue debating when we do not have the quorum?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  It seems people are becoming tired - even the Front Bench, that is why they are abandoning the Prime Minister.  I think this being the case, what we can do is that hon. Okumu will continue tomorrow,  immediately followed by the Member from Bufumbira North. I will be able to give all these members a chance. I have got their names here.  So, you will be able to contribute because today I have been able to take fourteen so, I think tomorrow we shall be able to finish this list and, therefore, I think let us at this juncture adjourn the House until tomorrow 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose and adjourned until Wednesday 21st July, 1999 at 2.00 p.m.)
