Tuesday, 20 July 2010

Parliament met at 3.03 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you back from the weekend. I would like to just make some observations about the programme of handling business during this week.

As you are already aware, Uganda is hosting the 15th African Union Summit and the delegates to the various meetings have either arrived or continue to arrive for that function, which you remember we approved here. It is also important to know that this summit is going to adversely affect the operations of this Parliament. This arises because ministers of the Government of the Republic of Uganda are deployed either as courtesy ministers to the heads of state or are attached to certain delegations or are carrying out other activities related to the African Union Summit.

So, because of the absence of the ministers we will not be in position to transact much of the business as we had wanted to. For instance, we will have to adjust the Order Paper just to do one Bill relating to pensions. The other matters, which we had postponed from the ICT Committee, will not be handled because the Minister of Information and Communication Technology, hon. Awori has been deployed as a courtesy minister for the Chairman of the African Union Commission, His Excellency Dr Jean Ping. And since the conference is due to end next week, it means ministers will not really be available for parliamentary business.

I also have been checking – despite our request to the Government to have all the policy statements sent in by the end of June, so far only 21 statements from different bodies have been handed in. I note that there are a number of ministries, which have not submitted their policy statements. Therefore, these have not been submitted to the Members. I would like to call upon the Leader of Government Business to remind the concerned ministers, departments and agencies to oblige by urgently providing the policy statements.

I have also heard that we are having some problems with the committees but I am sure those will be handled.

So, since we have so many issues diverting our attention, I want to propose as follows: that as much as possible, we should allow the sessional committees either to read and prepare during this week and as soon as the summit ends we give them three days to finish by calling the ministers who will then be free after the 27 July 2010 so that we finish with that.

Therefore, I would like to inform you that from tomorrow there will be no plenary. I implore all the chairpersons and members of the sessional committees – those which have been received and those which I hope will be received by end of today – to study the policy statements until end of this week. We hope that after the summit they will conclude with the ministers in the shortest time possible so that on the 3rd day of August we can start handling the State of the Nation Address for two days, that is on the 3rd and 4th – we will start the debate on the Budget from the 5th day of August – we will do it for only five days so that we are able to get through by the 12th of August. Maybe if we do that we shall be able to accomplish what we had planned.

I would like to appeal to Members that despite all those other issues, which we know about, please accomplish your duties because we undertook to do them. 

With that I would like to inform you that after today’s sitting, plenary will resume on Tuesday, 03 August 2010 at 10.00 a.m. We shall be sitting both in the morning and afternoon every day so that we can handle the State of the Nation Address for those days and same will apply to the debate on the Budget – we shall be handling three policy statements in a day –(Interjections)– yes, three so that we can conclude by 12th.

So, Leader of the Opposition, you now have time to prepare your lengthy responses to the State of the Nation Address. I also ask you to nominate the Members who will be speaking on this subject, including on the Budget.

3.10
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for that guidance. As a matter of fact this morning we had discussions with the Leader of Government Business on the urgent business that we are supposed to handle as Parliament before we get fully taken up with preparations for elections at different levels.

The communication you have delivered gives us very good guidance - we had written to the ministers to remind them about the need to hand in their policy statements. We also wrote to remind them about the need to prepare for the motion on the State of the Nation Address. We have already agreed on who will be tabling that motion – we have hon. Hamson Obua, the MP for Youth, Northern Uganda and it will be seconded by hon. Rose Namayanja and hon. Pherry Kabanda.

From that angle, we seem to be set and the team of those to table the motion seems to be prepared to carry out this business. I believe the ministers are also doing what it takes to ensure during the time, that is, from the 3rd August to 4th August they are here for the State of the Nation Address. We have also requested them to prepare so that we can be in a position to guide the House in regard to the debate on the Budget. On our side, we seem to be fairly set and I believe Members will turn up in good numbers to ensure we perform the duty of handling the State of the Nation Address and the Budget in good time so that the country can run in normal manner. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, maybe just to remind the chairpersons of the sessional committees – when they are presenting the budget reports, they should have executive summaries although the full text of each of the reports will be reflected in the Hansard. Yes, Leader of the Opposition.

3.13
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Thank you, Madam Speaker for that communication. We will be ready to give our response to the President’s State of the Nation Address on the 3rd. Our Members will be available for the subsequent debates; the postponement of the sittings of Parliament on account of the African Union Summit is an understandable matter which we must support. We hope the ministers will not be too exhausted after the Summit and that they are available so that we transact all business as proposed.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, this is an insinuation, which requires a reply. The fact is that the Leader of opposition knows the inexhaustible energies of the NRM side. We are used to handling multiple assignments, so we will live up to your expectations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, join me in welcoming a delegation of members of staff from the National Assembly of Lesotho. Also, join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of Mirembe Primary School, there are also teachers and pupils of Kireka SDA Primary School.

3.16
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): I rise on the issue of seeking guidance and clarification from the Leader of Government Business. You are all aware that we are hosting the AU Summit; one of the issues that it will address is maternal mortality and health. This is a Millennium Development Goal No. 5, and we rarely get information of on our performance on the MDGs.

I have been privileged to attend some of the workshops where I have received data about the MDGs and how we are performing; unfortunately we are not in a good position. I have statistics from Africa Public Health Information. We are No. 28 on the continent on the health financing scorecard.

On the maternal health scored card, we are at on No. 26; we still have mothers dying so we need to act now. As a Parliament I think we should act, I am challenging the Leader of Government Business to come out and tell us about our performance. We are remaining with five years only but the performance is poor.

We had a function where a ball was used to signify kicking poverty out of Africa but it appears by 2015 there will be more excuses than solutions. These are some of the pledges that our leaders made, can the Government account to the people of Uganda how far we have reached? We should come out with strategies to achieve this.

Uganda is host country of this AU summit, can the Attorney-General tell us which AU protocols we have ratified and those we haven’t? 

The other day we had hosted a Pan African Parliament in Munyonyo to discuss the issue of good governance and democracy but we are told that we are not among those countries that have ratified the relevant protocol.

When a representative from the Prime Minister’s Office was asked about this anomaly, he said that he did not know about it.

3.21
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman representative, Bukedea): In line with what hon. Banyenzaki has said about MDG 5, we are hosting the AU and there is need know whether there is any representation of Parliament in that event because I have attended various forums and normally there is a side event for Members of Parliament. In this case it would have been this Parliament hosting a few other representatives from other countries and we make a statement on MDG 5. I want to know whether we will be doing that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In addition to that, a few weeks ago this House adopted a resolution on FGM requiring the African Union heads of state to adopt it and take it to the United Nations. I am not sure who is going to follow up our issue now that our members are not there? Which minister is going to champion this issue? We want to know who we can ask before the end of this summit.

MR MIGEREKO: It is true that the theme of this year’s African Union Summit is to on maternal and child health. I know as a country we have been addressing these matters very seriously and I will ask the Minister of Health to say something about this. I know that in order for a government or a country to be in a position to meet the Millennium Development Goals, there are certain prerequisites that must be dealt with. Members are aware that we have been addressing these pre-requisites particularly those which can help in generation of revenue, which is vital in ensuring that we have resources to address the social needs of this country. But I am going to request the Minister of Health to say something about this. 

Before I sit down, there is also the issue of the protocol that came up during the Pan African Parliamentary session, which you addressed and I represented the Leader of Government Business at that conference. It is not true, as hon. Banyenzaki has asserted, that when this matter was raised before me, I expressed ignorance in this regard. I clearly pointed out that the ratification process was being dealt with by the Attorney-General’s chambers and the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, and that we were at a fairly advanced stage in handling it. We need the opinion of the Attorney-General before this can be brought to Cabinet. The Attorney-General is here, he can also bail me out.

What I am saying is also contained in the speech, which I delivered at that conference. So for the record, maybe hon. Banyenzaki had another person he meant but not me. I think I was fairly clear and audible when addressing that conference. 

Madam Speaker, regarding the resolution of Parliament in regard to FMGs –(Interjections)– sorry, Female Genital Mutilation (FGM) I find it easier to use the abbreviation. This matter is being handled by the Minister of Foreign Affairs - the needful will be done. 

I would like to request the Minister of Health and the Attorney-General to help me throw more light on the issues raised by hon. Banyenzaki. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.26
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before the minister comes in, one of the concerns of hon. Banyenzaki was that we have Millennium Development Goals – eight of them. And he says we are off target. This country is supposed to measure its performance against those targets. 

Therefore, the Leader of Government Business should come to Parliament and tell us how we are performing on the eight MDGs and the 18 plus targets, which we have. You did not tell us clearly when that will happen. 

Secondly, as the Minister of Health comes on the Floor, we know that Government has been processing a loan facility from the World Bank to address health system strengthening, including maternal health. But we are told that the World Bank has done its part, but Cabinet is delaying to take decision of that loan facility. So we would want to be updated since a big chunk of money that is going to address maternal health is involved. We want to know how far Government has gone in concluding that process. 

3.27
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like also to add on by citing the UN Security resolution 1325, about women participation in all decision-making bodies, and their protection during war or even after war - even in the coming elections; it is of paramount importance. It seems like this UN resolution is not widely known by the population. It is also important for the Attorney-General and maybe later, the Leader of Government Business to brief us on how far we have gone with that UN Resolution. Through it we can address maternal health and infant mortality – if women participation is addressed. I do not know whether it is domestication which has a problem, or something else. We need to be briefed so that we can see how to help our population better. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.29
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am wondering whether it is not important for Government to come here for such an important gathering so that we pick on a few views that would help the Executive to inform their position. We are stakeholders in this country and we think we need to take such opportunities to inform positions that our Government takes. Nevertheless, we do not want to grab the Executive function. 

Let me address the issue of the MDGs, four and five. Madam Speaker, it is now generally understood that in Africa, most of the countries have modified the word millennium to make it “Maximum” Development Goals and yet the MDGs were supposed to give us minimum benchmarks on which a country would commit itself. 

Reflecting on the African Union summit that is taking place in Kampala, you cannot help but think about the commitments in the Abuja Declaration, think about the Maputo Plan of Action, then you begin to think, unfortunately that if the leaders of government do not take the maternal and infant health very seriously, it could even turn out to be business as usual after the conference in Munyonyo. 

I keep wishing we had an opportunity, even in this House to tell Government what we the women of Uganda think this afternoon. My voice would be that we want the heads of government to give free accessible maternal and infant health services. Just make them free because our countries can afford to give these services to all expectant mothers, they can also afford to give treatment to all infants and to make these services accessible. 

Madam Speaker, it is documented that a country like Ghana has gone for this and it has tremendously improved the life of newborns and that of mothers. Other countries are doing equally well. So we think that governments should commit themselves to give us these free and accessible services. 

I do not want to go into matters of security, but Madam Speaker, you recall that only last week we were here urging the African Union to give a unified stand on matters of Somalia and to send troops to Somalia. It is no longer sustainable for the governments of Uganda and Burundi to stay alone in Somalia. Maybe it will take longer than what we anticipated, maybe we will be isolated, but since it was an African Union matter, why don’t governments sitting in Munyonyo do the honourable thing and honour their obligations? Otherwise, this whole thing has been reduced to a Ugandan mission and it is quite uncomfortable. We hope it is not just paper work in Munyonyo because we have enough resolutions on the African continent, but what lacks is commitment and delivery of services to our people. Thank you. 

3.33
MR ANGIRO GUTOMOI (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I am rising on a matter of national importance regarding health service delivery in Lira District.

Recently, I was in Lira and I came across one dispensary, which had been closed. When I enquired, I found out that there were no drugs, but the staff had been paid. When I went further for an explanation from the Lira district health officer - I met his assistant and he gave me a list of not only one health centre, but seven of them. 

They were written in the following letter: 

“Lira District Local Government 
Directorate of Health Services, 
P.O. BOX 49, Lira 

To: The General Manager, National Medical Stores, 
P.O. BOX 16, Entebbe. 

Dear Sir,
RE: NON-SUPPLY OF EMHS TO SEVEN HEALTH CENTRES
This is to remind you that the following seven health centres did not get medicines and supplies for all four quarters of the financial year 2009/2010. These include: 
1. 	Alik Health Centre II, Erute South
2. 	Anyangatir Health Centre II, Erute South
3. 	Ongica Health Centre III, Erute South
4. 	Abunga Health Centre II, Erute South
5. 	Obim Health Centre II, Moroto Health Centre D
6. 	Ayago Health Centre III, Lira Municipality
7. Ober Health Centre III, Lira Municipality

Signed by: Dr Kusolo P.M., 
District Health Officer 

c.c. The Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Health
	The Director-General of Health Services, Ministry of Health
	The Director Health Services, Clinical and Community
	Commissioner Health Services, Clinical 
	Assistant Commissioner Health Services, Pharmacy
	The Resident District Commissioner, Lira
	The Chief Administrative Officer, Lira.”

When I enquired for further explanation, I did not get any satisfactory explanation until they told me the ministry should explain because the reasons for not supplying drugs when we are paying for them were not clear. 

May I, therefore, find out from the minister concerned why Lira has missed this very important service; causing death and illness that could have been avoided; and why the district kept this information up to 29 June 2010 for the whole of this financial year ending. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

I beg to lay this document on Table, Madam Speaker.

3.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Banyenzaki happened to have had lunch with me today - (Interjections)- and showed me some of the documents he is referring to. These documents have got conflicting information and I brought this to his attention. In one of the documents, the maternal mortality ratio for Uganda is quoted at 550; in another document, it is 352. I want to explain as follows.

Government carries out a demographic health survey every five years the last one having been carried out in 2006, which put our maternal mortality ratio at 435 for every 100,000 live births.

We have discovered in one of the very important magazines called the Lancet that the estimation for the maternal mortality ratio for Uganda is 352 for every 100,000 live births. Since we are going to carry out a survey next year, we will come up with a figure we can rely on. For the meantime -(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, for the meantime, I beg that I lay these statistics on Table since the Minister is referring to them and they are coming from Africa Public Health Information. This is an institution that has a network of parliamentarians to which Baryomunsi is a member, so that if you want to refute them, you refute them, but they are from an informed source. Madam Speaker, I beg to lay these statistics on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let him give his answer then you can lay.
 
MR BANYENZAKI: Most obliged, Madam Speaker.

MR NDUHUURA: Madam Speaker, what I pointed out was that there are two documents in his possession. One of the documents gives a figure of 550 for every 100,000 while another gives 352 for every 100,000 live births. 

I am not disputing; it is not just a matter of disputing these figures, but what I am bringing out is that we rely on figures that are produced through a survey called the Uganda Demographic Health Survey, which is carried out every five years. The last one was carried out in 2006. We expect the next one in 2011. I thought I was very clear on that.

On a statement from Government about AU and the theme; I am sorry I was not here the whole of last week, but I think the responsibility falls with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. If the line minister did not do that, then I think it is up to the Leader of Government Business to make sure the Minister of Foreign Affairs does the needful. 

About the loan that was approved by the World Bank, I wish to inform colleagues that about three weeks ago, Cabinet approved the request and I would like to believe that the Minister of Finance should already be in the process of preparing to come to Parliament to bring a request for the approval of the said loan. 

About Lira, I am very disappointed to hear that there are seven health centres which were not served with medicines and other health supplies for a whole financial year. Since hon. Gutomoi has laid on Table a letter containing this very sad information, I can only pledge to take this matter up very fast to find out what exactly happened. But I wish to inform hon. Gutomoi and other colleagues that we have a number of health centre IIs, which have not been captured in the data at the National Medical Stores simply because when the local governments construct health centre IIs, they do not quickly inform the ministry nor do they inform the National Medical Stores.

Our policy has been to discourage construction of health centre IIs. Currently, our policy is that we consolidate health centre IIIs and health centre IVs because in a number of districts, even the health centre IIIs and IVs are lacking in many things. That is why we went that way to discourage as far as possible except where you have under-served areas. 

When local governments get money for health service infrastructure development, they are in the practice of putting up as many health centre IIs as possible, maybe for political accountability. But if these health centre IIs are not captured in our data and the data at the National Medical Stores, it is very difficult to serve them. So, most likely, these health centre IIs have not been captured at the National Medical Stores. I will definitely take it up and make sure these health centre IIs are captured and can, therefore, be served. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Banyenzaki, please lay those papers on Table. You can go to the dispatch box. (Laughter)

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, I am laying on Table statistics made by Africa Public’s Parliamentary Network on the 2010 Maternal Health scorecard, MDG No.5; again, the same statistics made by Africa Public’s Parliamentary Network on the 2010 scorecard of  Africa health financing, for the minister to compare and tell us whether they are true or not.

Finally, the Leader of Government Business did not specifically tell us when the Prime Minister will be here to brief us on how we are scoring with the eight MDG goals. The question was very specific, but it has not been answered, and as Parliament we must look at this issue, pronounce ourselves, and devise strategies on how to achieve these MDG goals. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

3.45
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Madam Speaker, it is about the loan, and as you may be aware, this House has been on this loan issue for a long time and you like to feel good that there is a promise, but if the promise is taking centuries, then you really feel uncomfortable. At one point in this House, we said that we would not pass any other loan request unless Government comes here with a loan to finance the maternal health road map and, of course, we negated on our own promise, and I would like to urge Government to ensure that this issue is speedily done. This is an emergency; this is a disaster on its own. This number of women dying per year is really horrible. This number of children – 435 per 100,000 - is a problem, but the pace at which Government is moving with this promise is something that is not reassuring and I hope this House will be able to urge the minister and Cabinet to do something faster than the traditional pace. Otherwise, we think that they are not committed to this matter. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Unfortunately, my colleague from the Ministry of Finance is not here; I can only undertake to urgently find out the progress of the processing of the loan request, but I can say for a fact that Cabinet has already pronounced itself and we are only waiting for the Minister of Finance, and after here, I will definitely get in touch with her to find out how far they have gone. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, considering that this has really taken long and it has finally reached Cabinet; and you say it is true that the issue was considered, can we urge you that when we resume plenary on 3 August, we want that loan here. If Cabinet has approved, what else are they waiting for?

DR NDUHUURA: Madam Speaker, I cannot answer for the Minister of Finance. I can only relay the concerns of Members of this House, and also the concerns of the Ministry of Health. I undertake to do the needful. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Attorney-General, I think you were supposed to say something about the AU Summit - the Charter on Governance, Democracy and Elections. 

3.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, the issue of the convention on democracy and good governance came up this morning when we were before the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. We assured them that we are fast-tracking this matter and we shall be reporting at an appropriate time or immediately hereafter, and that is the position. However, a word of caution; more often than not, when Government officials are out of the country, they are confronted with many demands which sometimes require them in one way or another to sign some conventions - some instruments, and when these instruments are later transmitted to the Office of the Attorney-General, we find that there are a few things to be harmonised in one way or another. I would urge Government officials, while out of the country or herein, to ensure that Article 119 of the Constitution is adhered to, and that is, “On all conventions, contracts, treaties, agreements to which this country should be a party or is a party, the advice of the Attorney-General is mandatory.” Thank you. 

3.50
MR JACK WAMAI-WAMANGA (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am surprised that the Attorney-General can come here and say that whenever people travel outside – I want to inform this House that whenever a delegation travels outside to sign any document or protocol or treaty, there is always an official from the Ministry of Justice, and this is not the first time that this Government does not ratify treaties or protocols; and when delegations go outside to attend meetings, they are embarrassed because most of the treaties have not been ratified or signed. 

So, this is just an excuse, but I am surprised that even on a simple protocol of good governance, the government did not sign that protocol. It is very surprising. This shows that the government is not committed to good governance at all, which we have been fighting for, and that is why we are in this House; because we want good governance. I thank you. 

3.52
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua Country, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There are some phrases and words that we use in this House, which if you carefully examined, you find that they do not mean much. What does the Attorney-General mean by “fast-tracking”? How do you fast- track the signing of a treaty or the ratification of a treaty? (Laughter) What is there to fast-track? Can the hon. Attorney-General tell us specifically what the ministry is doing or when it will ratify those treaties? I thank you. 

3.53
MR JOHNSON BARTILLE (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Madam Speaker, following the statement by the minister on this Charter on Governance, Elections and Democracy, I hope the minister is aware that there is a timeframe. By the summit of January next year, if 15 countries of Africa will not have ratified that charter, it will be nullified. So, I hope that as the minister said that they are fast-tracking, he should actually be able to tell us when. Can we have it before January so that we are one of the countries to save this charter? I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PARLIAMENTARY PENSIONS (AMENDMENT) (NO.2) BILL, 2010

3.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca Mbaguta Sezi): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, when we presented this Bill for the second reading, we were required to go and make consultations on two issues. The first issue was why the amendment was not put to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. Madam Speaker, after going through the Hansard of that day, we established that the Speaker ruled that the Committee on Presidential Affairs deals with this Bill. 

The second issue was, why amend the Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment) Bill. The background to this Bill was that when we presented the Presidential Emoluments and Retirement Benefits, Parliament directed that we combine the benefits of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker under the same Bill. I requested to go and consult further and after consultation, my ministry was advised that we should look into the Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment) Bill and the reason that we were given was that we needed to go back to other laws and we need to amend a number of laws. That was the advice from the Attorney-General’s office; that the Bill from its inception provided for the executive members of Government and, therefore, we should separate the benefits of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker. 

The first Parliamentary Council, in preparing the Bill after that advice, that we should make amendments to the Parliamentary and Pensions Act, made the necessary amendments and we brought the Bill for the first reading, and it was referred to the committee, and we presented the second reading last week.

Madam Speaker, after some lengthy consultation, we have been advised that the retirement benefits of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker be considered under the Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment No.2) Bill or refer it back for a lengthy process to prepare another Bill.

Madam Speaker, I would like to request my colleague to make his contribution -(Interjections)- the Deputy Attorney-General.

3.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, sometimes it is pretty difficult because I have got to be very careful with my words, otherwise, hon. Okello-Okello will come in handy once again. I was going to say that I am between a rock and a hard place, but I will not say that because he will jump up. 

Madam Speaker, when we considered this matter a few days ago, we withdrew to further consult because different positions kept emerging on the best mode of handling this matter. I must say that technically in  my mind, I really do not think I have any big problem in proceeding with this Bill, of course with the amendments that may be proposed, because ideally, what is being done is within the same Bill or the same Act that is being amended providing for a chapter - I think it is Chapter 5 - providing for implied amendments to the Act itself, particularly to Section 5; disallowing the application of the scheme to the Speaker and Deputy Speaker and in the same Bill, putting a Schedule on the benefits of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker. Because there is an amendment and even if you were to amend another Act, you would still referentially amend that particular Act that we are amending. 

Technically, we could go ahead with it. But when I was consulting, because we actually went out to consult and I know, of course, that no sooner will I have sat down than Members will stand up and say, “Let us proceed like this and this,” and I know, Madam Speaker, you in the Chair are in a difficult position to make a ruling on a matter on which you are a beneficiary. 

The matter which has been coming up in my consultations has been that the Commission has its own Bill. The Parliamentary Commission has a Bill amending the same Act. What I have been gathering is that you do not need to go back to Cabinet because that one has also been a problem; that if we withdrew the Bill, we would have to look for another appropriate law, for instance, the Parliament Remuneration of Members Act Cap. 259, then develop the principles, go to Cabinet, clear the principles, go to draft the Bill, unless we get a waiver and then come here. 

There has been some thinking that we could come with these same proposals to the Parliamentary Commission Bill amending the same Act presented by the Parliamentary Commission, and move in a harmonised manner because we are amending the same subject matter. Of course, one would actually say that the responsible agencies are different; that this is Parliament which is actually coming up with the Parliamentary Amendment Act on the one hand and there is also the Government arm coming up with that same amendment. But as far as Government is concerned, that has already been cleared. So, the idea could be that we could jointly work together; maybe we give ourselves a timeframe say, two weeks’ time, and we need assurance from the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee on where they have actually reached with the amendments; the Parliamentary Commission on how far they have gone with their Bill, so that we can harmonise our positions. I say this with a lot of constraint because, from this part of Parliament, I am also constrained. They actually seem to feel we should move, but I know at the end of the day, we are going to reach a deadlock and in my opinion, it will not be a comfortable situation.

Madam Speaker, I, therefore, also seek for your guidance. (Laughter) My view and proposal would be that this matter be deferred for further consultations. We sit with Members of the Parliamentary Commission, Ministry of Public Service, and Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, and harmonise our positions on this matter, which opportunity has not yet been availed.

4.05
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to agree with the Attorney-General. First of all, when this matter was deferred last week, my understanding was that both the Board of Trustees and Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee were going to be consulted. But just before we came, I tried to reach hon. Tashobya and he was not in the know of the debate. I am at pain because the Speaker and Deputy Speaker’s privileges are long overdue and it should have been passed yesterday. As Parliamentary Pensions Board, we communicated. Even when the Bill was brought for the first reading, we were told there was a certificate that is why we cannot stop it; but it was our thinking that it is either the Administration of Parliaments Act or the Parliamentary Remunerations Act which had to be amended. However, because of expediency, we had conceded to proceed initially and we knew from when the Attorney-General was consulted that this privilege has to be housed in the Commission. So, I would like to request that such an important matter should not be continued on a wrong route. It is a good intention but not well placed.

Why don’t we once and for all take the right channel? I know there was pressure at that time to pass the Presidential Emoluments Act, which we passed. We would even be happier now as the Board of the Parliamentary Pension Scheme if the two amendments move together instead of moving amendment 1 and 2 or 6 and 9 as they are now gazetted.

The Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee already has our substantive amendment, but I want to pray that now that the certificate is there and money is going to be provided from the Consolidated Fund, we should put it under the Commission. I think the two laws to amend rightly are either the Parliamentary Remunerations Act or the Administration of Parliament Act so that we do not misplace a well intended scheme and try to put it in the Parliamentary Pension Scheme where it actually does not fit. What we only had to do in the Parliamentary Pensions Act is to stop the contribution of a Speaker and a Deputy Speaker. That is the only thing which is required. The rest really, we were only being accommodative out of expediency. I thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think there is no harm in deferring for consultations to reach something acceptable to the House. So, I am directing the Committee on Presidential Affairs to meet with the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, seek advice from the Attorney-General and the Ministry of Public Service so that they give us the way forward when plenary resumes. 

Hon. Members, I had informed you earlier that the Minister for ICT is not available so we cannot proceed on the other matter. I had also indicated that owing to the ongoing AU Summit, our work has been disrupted, but since the Prime Minister is here, just to remind you that some ministries have still not sent their policy statements. Can they do that before 3 August when we resume at 10 O’clock in the morning?

So, House is adjourned to 3 August, at 10 o’clock.

(The House rose at 4.09 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 3 August 2010 at 10.00 a.m.)
