Tuesday, 26 July 1994

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Vice-Chairman, Mr Ekemu, in the Chair.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE CHAIRMAN: The General Debate on the Budget will continue but we intend to have it round up tomorrow when the Minister will be called upon to reply the Debate.  And thereafter we shall defer further Debate on the Budget for two weeks, during which time I will request the hon. Ministers to submit their relevant ministerial statements.  Then we shall start further consideration those after two weeks.  In the mean time, we shall continue with some other business involving other Bills.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWERS

Q.22/94

MR BONGONYINGE:  Mr Chairman, I would like to ask the Minister of State for Internal Affairs that, is he aware that there is general non-availability of animation in Kampala and upcountry areas for the holders of licensed guns to buy and use?  If he is aware, what steps does he intend to take to make the ammunition available.

Two; is the Minister aware that there is shortage of supply of licences in the offices of the District Police Commanders, which makes it difficult for licensed gun owners to renew their licences?  If he is aware, can he inform the House what steps he intends to take to rectify the situation?

Three; is the Minister aware that guns belonging to licensed owners which were confiscated during the Amin Regime with the promise that they would be returned to them, have never been given back to-date?

If he is aware, can he inform the House when such gun owners would get their guns back?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Tom Butime): Mr Chairman, the question concerns lack of firearms, lack of ammunition in Kampala and upcountry areas for the holders of licensed guns to buy. The answer is that, there may well be a shortage of ammunition for licensed private firearms. This is not the responsibility of the Ministry of Internal Affairs.  Each licensed firearm holder is authorised to purchase a stated number of ammunition for his guns.  The shortage of none or non-availability of ammunition to purchase is a reflection of financial difficulties faced by private importers.  

The Minister of Internal Affairs does not import ammunition for private firearms holders, but this is done by private businessmen who are licensed, by the Ministry of Internal Affairs and by the Police.  And they go on and carry out their business without any hindrance.  Private licensed fire arms holders are free to approach any private fire arms licensed dealer and place orders for the required ammunition. The Ministry of Internal Affairs does not operate a shop for say ammunition, and neither does the Uganda Police operate any shop anywhere in Kampala or Kitgum where you can go and freely enter and buy ammunition.  But there are shops in Kampala where people are licensed and you can go there and bargain and buy.

MR TURYASHEMERERWA: Supplementary Question: I wanted to know whether the Ministry of Internal Affairs is not supposed to advise those people who may not know the licensed dealers instead of keeping us in air telling us that there - they do not operate shops.  I think it is a responsibility of the relevant institution of Government to advise the citizens where they can get the services.  Now can the Minister tell us who are licensed dealers so that we can purchase from them? (Applause)

MR BUTIME:  Mr Chairman, I am not going to take over the role of an advertiser for businessmen. (Laughter) If our businessmen are not matched enough to advertise, that is, then they do not do good business.  And, therefore, I advise them to advertise and any of us who wants to start a business can approach us, it is our duty to license you, and the rest really is your part.  If you do poor business, you do not make money, if you advertise, you get more buyers.

MR MAYENGO:  Mr Chairman, there is so much gun fire heard all over this city at night, I would wish to find out whether the Minister may have some ideas where to these ammunition come from.

MR BUTIME:  Some of those ammunition come from pilots, who stay on lakes, and Islands, while others come from thugs in town, others come from misguided security officers and it is really very hard to say where these gunshots or firearms come from, it is really quite an intricate question, but I have given the hon. Member an idea that some of them may be coming from people who hide on Islands and it is very difficult to get them from there.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Can the Minister answer the second part of the question and the third?

MR BUTIME: Mr Chairman, the second part of the question is shortage of supply of licences in the offices of the district commander and the answer is that, the firearm licences are printed and supplied to the Police by the Ministry of Finance.  The Police Headquarters has not experienced any shortage of licences so we are not complaining to the Ministry of Finance.  

But administratively the DPC of your area or your district is supposed to come to Police Headquarters and collect those licences, and take them to districts to those and distribute them or sell them to those who are applying for them.  We shall therefore take the purely administrative responsibility of reminding our DPC to come and collect these licences take them to the districts and the people can find them there.  

The question number three (3) is that, guns belonging to licensed owners which were confiscated during the Amin Regime with the promise that they will be returned to them have never been given back to date. First of all I am not responsible to the Amin Regime and I was not a Minister then. I am reminding the Members.  But most of the guns, which were confiscated during the Amin’s Regime, are nowhere to be seen today.  

During the period of instability many police stations were over run by various forces routing and even destroying a lot of property including government records, everybody is aware of this.  Guns, which were taken and kept from the police stations by any NRA that is the period 1981, 1986, 1987.  These guns have been sorted out and have been returned from the army to the police, all of them.  Many of them have been returned to the rightful claimants by the Police. Others that had no claimants have been leased out to approve private security organizations to bolster the Uganda Police Force in guard and ascot issues. Anybody is free to present his claim for his firearms by submitting all necessary information to the Inspect General of Police to enable a search to be conducted at to the relevant police station.  As long as such a person is legally licensed, I mean licensed to holder, of a private firearms his gun should be able to be found. 

So, in other words, we are not able to tress the guns which were taken by the regime of Amin but we have traced and found the guns which have been confiscated by the NRA from the Police, and they were at the army, they were recovered and handed over to the Inspector General of Police and those who have claimed them have got them, and those who have not come we are waiting for them, and those who have bothered to start security organizations have taken advantage.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR OKURUT: Supplementary Question; is the Minister of State for Internal Affairs aware that some of the fire arms which had been put - taken into custody to the police were actually sold?

MR BUTIME:  They were sold by the Police.

HON. MEMBERS:  They were sold by Internal Affairs.

MR BUTIME:  Mr Chairman, I am not aware of that particular information.  If hon. Okurut bought -(Laughter)- I am only advising him that he actually did not buy but he must have applied.  He must have had a license that gun which he claims to have bought must not have had anybody claiming it, and it was only leased to him and when time at a fit and when time comes it will be recovered from you, if you do not if you keep in good - if you continue being a good disciplined Ugandan, you will keep it.  If you move away from discipline, it will be recovered from you.

MR NTIMBA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman. Could the hon. Minister of State for Internal Affairs inform the House as to whether adequate steps are taken to ensure that those who applied for licences to operate firearms are properly vetted and, especially to ensure that they will not have criminal records?

MR BUTIME:  Mr Chairman, when you apply for a license to be a dealer in firearms, first of all, that application is put before the National Security Committee and the National Security Committee scrutinizes that application and you as a citizen, and a businessman. The National Security Committee, therefore, recommends and forwards your application to the Ministry of Internal Affairs who endorses it and hands it over to the Police.  And you receive an answer authorizing you to start dealing, and the rest of the formalities concerning your company and the rest of all those are done in the Ministry of Justice.  There is thorough and proper scrutiny of that particular applicant before he is licensed to become an arms dealer.

MOTION

(Debate Continued.)

MR WANENDEYA (Budadiri County, Mbale): Thank you very much, hon. Chairman, for giving me the opportunity to contribute to the Budget Debate.  Mr Chairman, it is my first time since you were elevated to the high office and I congratulated you at that time but I hope that you will give me more opportunity to contribute to the Debate in addition to the information and points of order.  So, I would request that you do that in future.  

Before I go into details about the Budget, permit me just to say something about an article, which appeared in the New Vision, last Thursday, which said to the effect that a vote of no confidence was passed.  I can assure hon. Members that there is nothing of that kind and those who would have wished are the people that I defeated heavily and, therefore, one of them was an Assistant Central Government Representative in Kisoro, then from there he was transferred to Kasese and then he fiddled around and took some 34 million shillings and he is now on suspension.  His name clearly is Wanyoto.  This collaboration of doing things the wrong way is also assisted by none other person than a Mr James of the New Vision, James Tumusime, who has benefited a lot from New Vision and has established a company called -(Interruption)

REV. ONGORA TWAI: Point of order.  While Mr Chairman, hon. Wanendeya is allowed to deviate from the Motion on the ground, is it in order to bring in the names of those people who are not Members of this august House and, therefore, cannot defend themselves here?

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Wanendeya you are not in order.  But I would also like to warn you that you are spending a lot of your time, which you may not benefit from.  You have exactly ten minutes.

MR WANENDEYA:  Thank you very much but I thought I better mention that as a way of getting this, national things in proper perspective. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: I have already ruled on that.

MR WANENDEYA:  Mr Chairman, I will go to the Debate but I thought that I better mentioned that.  (Interruption)   Mr Chairman, the hon. Members can shout but this is democracy, I do not shout when Members are contributing.

May I go to the Budget Speech.  The Budget Speech was unnecessarily long in the history of Uganda and I hope that the Minister will note this and that Budget Speech did not give comparative record of what things were to be increased.  I therefore, request the Minister to make sure that next time the Budget Speech is made a bit shorter, precise and to the point and comparative figures should be given in the Budget Speech.

Permit me also to mention that whilst I agree with hon. Kasajja who contributed very ably on the Budget Speech, I agree with the figure but the only thing is that he made a remark to the effect that we have been doing nothing in this House.  I can tell you that we, at one time, recommended that Shs 800 million should not be given for Central Purchasing Corporation. But the Rt. hon. the Prime Minister came here with his team -(Interruption)

THE RT. HON. PRIME MINISTER (Mr Comas Adyebo):  Point of information.  Mr Chairman and hon. House, I thanked all the hon. Members last year for having agreed to my request to capitalise the Central Purchasing Corporation.  At that time they were unwilling at the beginning but when I pleaded with them they accepted on the basis that I had to do something, it was conditional.  That thing I had to do was none other than to overhaul that Corporation.  I am glad to report to you that I did sit down with my Colleagues in the Ministry of Finance and did a thorough overhauling of the Corporation.  (Applause) 

I did also direct that new appointments had to be occupied following advertisement at thorough interview.  All these were done.  As I speak to you now, the Central Purchasing Corporation is having a new team of capable, dedicated Ugandans.  For example, the person who is heading that Corporation now took office as with effect from 18th April this year and to-date the Central Purchasing, for the first has already shown that they have started making profits. 

At a later time I am coming to give you a detailed submission of what has transpired, what is happening there and I intend also to direct that now that we are having a new list in the Central Purchasing Corporation, I will order that the Government will be forced to buy certain consumable from the Central Purchasing since there is no more overcharging, air supply and so on.  Things like, maybe tyres, and so on will have to be bought directly from the Central Purchasing.  I am coming with a detailed list hon. Ministers.  Take it from me I have done just that.  Hon. Wanendeya I am not like the person you are talking about.  Please rest assured.  Thank you.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Further information. Mr Chairman, I would like to give the hon. Member further information regarding the absence of comparative figures in the Minister’s Speech.  Last year we did decide and directed the Minister of Finance that in presenting the Draft Estimates of the Revenue and Expenditure in the House, we directed that comparative figures should be indicated, that we should show the figures for the previous year and then another column to show the figures for this year.  I would like to inform the hon. Member that the Minister did not follow our directive.

MR WANENDEYA:  Thank you very much. First, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for the information given but all I was saying is that possibly he should listen to what some of us are talking about because we know finance quite well.  The only thing also we should add here is that we want those accounts quickly rather than talking. The Government has been talking too often but when it comes to action, especially with money nothing is ever on the ground.

I would like also to thank hon. Tiberondwa that indeed what he said is quite correct and on y I can add that the Minister of Finance for some very well reasons best known to them, they never follow guidelines even recommendations passed by this august House.  As an example, you find that we said our negotiating machinery with the World Bank, with the International Organizations, we should have some people to accompany them and those should be people who are knowledgeable about finances and negotiations and if possible properly trained in job.  If you look on page 40 of the Background to the Budget you find that the debt is Shs2.6 billion and the words on that page say that, ‘the account is unaudited.’ 

This is a government responsible to the people and there are accountants in Uganda and outside Uganda who can audit but for the government and the Minister of Finance to say that it is unaudited account, where are we going?  Is it any wonder that when we claim that the economy is growing and doing very well, go to Butambala where my Friend, the Deputy Minister of Finance comes from and then you will see the amount of poverty not only in Butambala but in Budadiri and around the country-side.  And, you find that these figures, which are given to us as statistics, I wish they could be properly compiled and given up because in my opinion the economy is not growing and I can prove that to anybody who is interested in getting that information.  Some of these things we do as an example, PERD. PERD’s Shs 500 million was banked in the Nile Bank but later on they fired Mr Wakhweya and now if they have started banking money on that account - I mean in private banks, why did they fire Mr Wakhweya? Is that really the best way as nationalists; as Ugandans we could do our work? (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Please, wind up.

MR WANENDEYA: Mr Chairman, I am willing to wind up but I was going to say something about roads. The Badadiri and indeed the whole of Mbale have been paying quite a bit of money in the way of taxes from the famous Arabic coffee but if you go to Budadiri and the whole of Mbale, the roads, especially the one on Budadiri, I am sorry we can say the infrastructure is in place and perhaps this is where the Rt. hon. Prime Minister will come to my assistance and get some of the bridges done.  The roads are in terrible condition.  I know my friend, the Deputy Minister of Finance is looking at me.  

I want also briefly to mention that the boundaries of Uganda are very well know and demarcated.  If Uganda Revenue Authority cannot control them and those smugglers at the border, it is morally wrong to come inside the territory of Uganda and then you confiscate things from citizens.  

The Deputy Minister can laugh, but I want to tell you that people in the east are suffering quite a lot and some of the things like the one who was the head of the Anti Smuggling Unit, this Unit is mainly for the benefit of the workers.  The man has now been replaced but they have things, which they have taken, and if there were investigations it is those people, the Anti Smuggling Unit, who are benefiting at the expense of people in Mbale and indeed some people in the East. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Your time is up hon. Member.

MR WANENDEYA:  Well, Mr Chairman, I thank you but I am sorry about the time being against me.

MR SSEKINDI (Buikwe County, Mukono): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for giving me the chance to contribute on this important Motion.  I would like to thank the Minister of Finance for the preparation of the Budget Statement 1994/95 and also wish to commend the government for the effort to rehabilitate the infrastructure throughout the country, especially on roads.  At the same time, allow me to register the disappointment of the people I represent for government’s failure or refusal to allocate the Road Construction Unit to Mukono District, as was the policy.  As a result of that, the county I represent has lagged behind development wise because of poor roads.  

Last year His Excellency the President visited Mukono District, of course, Buikwe. In his address he assured the people of Mukono District that by April this year the District should have received these construction units.  April passed, nothing happened.  Then we thought during the Budget Speech something will be revealed.  To my surprise, nothing for Mukono about the road construction unit was included in the Budget.  Our people are very disappointed when they travel in other parts of the country and find good roads there.  That is why they come and say some of us do not represent them effectively.  

I am appealing to the Minister of Finance to look into all what is being said by the Head of the State because for the hon. Head of State to address people and promise something and it is not fulfilled, Mr Chairman, it reflects very bad. (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE (Mr Kafumbe Mukasa): Point information. I would like to apologise to the hon. Member holding the Floor but to inform him that when government was acquiring road construction units for districts, different sources of funding were used.  Some of the funding matured quicker than others. For example, those districts which benefited from the Japanese Grants (Jeep Gaica), their machinery arrived earlier and since this had been the arrangement, machinery were sent, for example, in Kamuli, Iganga and other districts.  Unfortunately, a few districts, including not only Mukono, but also Mpigi District and Bundibugyo, the share of our districts was to come from funding from BADEA, there was a delay and so the President was right to have given this promise hoping that the machine would have arrived in time.  So, I want to assure him, Sir, that it is not only Buikwe, not only Mukono but other districts including Mpigi and Bundibugyo where were supposed to get from BADEA line of credit.  The machinery is just arriving in the country now and before this Financial Year ends, these districts will receive these equipments.  We apologise for the delay. 

MR SSEKINDI:  I thank the Minister of Finance for the good apology I am also trying to appeal to him that let the country be informed of whatever development or shortcomings because we should know what is happening in the government and plead for the government because we are for the people and the people for ourselves.

Once again, three years ago, through the Budget Statement of 1991/1992 the Minister had promised to rehabilitate the road from Jinja to Nyenga which portion is under the Minister of Works.  I have tried to approach the Ministry up to today there is nothing being done. I wonder whether in the reply the Minister of Finance will stand for the Minister of Finance will stand for the Minister of Works to tell me what is happening. It is now more than five years, the promise has reached people but they do not see any development.

I have yet another quarrel with the Minister of Works for failure to properly advise the road constructors in urban areas to economise the wealth of this country.  The constructors - you find them constructing a road and after a few days you find them constructing a road and after a few days you find them digging trenches where the pipes pass, the water pipes and electrical wired as if the road is not properly done, why to construct a road, put it ready and then you come after two days you try to undo everything? That is according to the economy, is very poor.

MR NASASIRA:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I want to inform the hon. Member that the work of installing water pipes or electric cables does not fall under the Ministry of Works.  It is unfortunate that sometimes our construction programmes is not tied, in other words, you find that you have to do the road this year and after six months or one year that is when the National Water and Sewerage Corporation or the Ministry of Water has money to do their pipe network.  However, the bye-laws and laws is that when that road is dug, the authority putting in the installation should repair the road to its condition in which it found it in.  So that is not our responsibility to dig water pipes. So that is, really not our responsibility to dig water pipes.  

MR KALULE SSENGO:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I think what my Colleague is trying to say is that, these departments should simplify their programmes.  Because I am always disturbed by the water along Entebbe Road.  Now, in so many places, you find that it is very hard for a poor child to cross the road and I have always been wondering why can’t these people agree - to be removed from one side of the road to the other one, we get one main pipe to cross the road once then the distribution is done from the main tap.  But you find there is a crossing here a few years later on they have again cut the road - next few meters, the road is cut and what is worse, these bye-laws, I think are not proper because when a man cuts a road the kind of repair he gives to it are not as good as the original texture of the road.  So, you can really see there is some loss involved much as we have the by-laws but the other man just does half job and after a few days the road is spoilt.  So, I think there is a need to review all these issues.  Thank you very much.

CAPT. BABU:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, thank you very much.  I am sorry to have interrupted but I stood up because there is a utility committee in every district and the utility committee is supposed to have all these departments sitting and deciding on how they are going to plan their works in town.  What has been happening is that, now they have not been meeting and they do not sit down and decide how to plan out their work; somebody stands up and decides that today it is Marubeni, and he digs the whole down. After that he has to be forced to cover up what he has done.  I would like to propose that the ministries concerned should try and get the utility committees to sit down and work out a programme, which can help out every body. Thank you very much.

MR SSEKINDI: I want to thank the hon. Members who have given me the information, for the Minister for the Works to note. Jinja/Kampala road, some two years back we had a debate in this House about the poor construction of Jinja/Kampala road the Minister stood up here and promised that there investigation team had been set to find out what cause the poor construction.  The Minister up to now has never come here to tell us exactly what happened.  It is good to note that as we debate now, the road is being reconstructed but the question is, on whose expense -(Applause)- is it the tax payer’s or these people who have been proved to have done something irresponsible?  -(Interruption)

MR NASASIRA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I want to answer the hon. Member holding the Floor in two phases.  First of all there was no need for the Minister to come back and tell the House because there was no question raised by anybody in this House.  The question was as the investigations were going on to find out what caused the failure.  The second answer is in respect of repairs, investigations were carried out and there were a number of reasons that caused the failure and it was agreed that the repairs will require a cost of 2.45 million dollars of which the contractor paid 2 million dollars the consultant I think 150 and the Government 300,000 dollars.  

I once again I want to tell the Minister, Back Benchers in a good discipline we do not want to say, a Minister is deceiving, it should be on a record that I pushed in a question to the Minister for Works asking him - asking the Ministry about the same issue, no reply was brought here, but when the Minister stands up and say, no one puts here a question.  I wanted to call him a liar whereas it is very indiscipline.

CAPT GASATURA:  Point of information.  These questions were specifically put to the Minister for Works Transport and Communication in the Sectoral Committee in handing that Ministry and the answer was give and put on the record.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR SSEKINDI:  Mr Chairman, thank you very much.  I want to comment about humps in the roads, sometime last week my neighbour here advocated for humps in the roads.  I was to say this, Uganda is advancing, it is the high time we stop building these humps in our Uganda roads, especially on high ways -(Applause)- they are very dangerous not only to drivers alone but to the vehicles also. When you come from Buikwe you pass through Mabira, today the constructors of the road have put temporary humps there.  

I want to report to this House that what is happening in Mabira today, the thieves go by where the humps are, when the driver slows down they tend to point at him a gun and then snatch vehicles.  This is a result of having humps, not only that there are many disadvantages of humps. What I am saying, as I already conclude that Uganda is advancing, let us resort to tunnels these underground crossings.  The Minister can design in the middle of the town where people can cross from and then build there a tunnel that can save other than building so many humps in the roads as if we are not advancing.

The talk of creating thieves, in developed countries -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.

MR SSEKINDI: In the developed countries where tunnels are there even shops which means if a tunnel is properly made we can find even businessmen operating from there, we are looking of tunnel like this one opposite this Radio Uganda which was poorly constructed but I am talking of the - about the advanced countries.  

I want to talk about the high charge of electricity.  We all know that Government is traveling to promote the economy of this country, and it is clear that people themselves have got to participate in the proving the economy for their country. I want to say this, whatever would involve - whatever would be helping the economy to grow, will involve electricity. When you talk of small-scale industries today they require electricity, whatever you want to put up today it will require electricity; but the cost for electricity is very high.  I am applying to the Minister to revisit the costs to enable the people to use electricity because as we talk now many small-scale industries have closed down it cannot perform what economy are we expecting to go on in this country.

Coffee industry; this industry is like a body beginning to walk after many difficult years it has gone through.  Peasants just trying to rehabilitate their sambas and stores the heavy tax called stabilization tax which was announced in the Budget Speech on the 16th June, 1994 of 20 per cent on coffee export should not have come now Government Policy of - of coffee industry should be given time to take a firm ground.  (Interjection) Mr Chairman, give me one second to wind up.  

In many of the speeches delivered by His Excellency the President, he keeps on educating people of what happened in African countries.  The white call this country found it possible to penetrate through and weakened it, these countries of Africa economically, politically and militarily.  From that statement Mr Chairman, you find that introducing a decentralisation government based on district to me I say it is not good; I am applying to our friends in the CA to advocate for a federal type of Government -(Laughter and Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order hon. Members.  Please take your Seat.

MR ARUNA ADAMU (Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I rise to support the Motion. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, hon. Members, please.

MR ARUNA ADAMU:  Mr Chairman, before I give my contribution allow me on behalf of the entire people of Arua and on my own behalf to convey our heartfelt condolences through you the grieved family of the late Eliyabu Muzira who died about two months ago. Hon. Dr Makumbi and the late Eliyabu Muzira played a big role in the successful construction of the Arua Hospital starting from 150 beds to 330 beds and lifting this hospital to a regional hospital.  We in Arua, really lost a sympathizer as our region is, still the cost of living is high.  

Now, allow me also to thank the ministers and officials from their respective ministries for some successful projects they undertook in that region. Namely, the Minister for Health as I have mentioned, the Minister for Transport Works and Communication for the construction of a new Post Office in Arua. I also take this opportunity to thank the Minister for Agriculture for the rehabilitation in the expansion of Abisamu College.  Today we are talking of a university for the North. I want to assure the House that Abisamu College and Arua Hospital can hold two important faculties like Agriculture and Medical.  Because of the time limit, I cannot mention all the ministers -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.

MRARUNA ADAMU:  I want to remind the people at the Ministry of Internal Affairs about the Arua Police Station.  This Police Station burned down about - just in 1979 this is after war, up to now nothing has been done to this Police Station.  Most of the officers just sit in small uniports, under trees, so Arua been a regional headquarters for the West Nile Region I think the Minister should try to do something about this Police Station.  

I would like us to see page 23; section 59.  The Minister is saying that the Government should put an insurance account of 2 billion shillings to compensate small depositors. Personally, I believe this is really abetting corruption.  Because according to my understanding, the hon. Minister is saying that a small depositor like all of us who are depositors when we put our money in the bank and when the corrupt officer of the bank or - the people who are always the depositors.  Then on the other side the Government should pay 2 billion to compensate us as depositors; that means we are compensating ourselves.  

So, if an insurance is to be put in place for the benefit of depositors it should be the banks to raise this money.  I think one of the conditions to open the bank is to have a proper insurance cover.  So, I think this 2 billion to - said, it is to compensate depositors I cannot accept this is just for the benefit of the embezzlers in the bank and the depositor. (Interruption)

MR MWANDHA:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, the hon. Member is starting on a point which is a matter of great concern to banks.  There are many people, employees of the banks sometimes collaborating with outsiders who are committing very serious fronts and get away with money in millions and millions of shillings. 

The most hurting thing is that when these people are apprehended and taken to the Police, because they have taken so much money, they pay their way out and within a very short time they are released on Police bond.  This is exposing the bank and depositors to very serious risk, because the people know that once you steal so much money you can always buy your way out and unless the Ministry of Internal Affairs does something I think the banks and depositors are really of exposed.

MR ARUNA ADAMU:  Thank you very much that is very important information I am already to close that chapter.  I would also like to open page 16; I would like the Minister to throw more light on this 6 billion.  First I would like to know what a criteria -(Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Member on the Floor to refuse information, especially from the Minister concerned because this is a matter of public interest for which information should not be denied, is it therefore, in order for the hon. Member to refuse that information.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member is in order; please, proceed.

MR ARUNA ADAMU:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like the Minister to tell us in fact, what a criteria will he use to - this six billion.  Secondly, according to the news we are hearing, is a bit disappointing to say that this money -(Interruption)

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Point of order.  Thank you, Mr Chairman, is it in order for hon. Members behind us to continue whispering and making noise so that we cannot hear.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, hon. Members.  Hon. Members, please refrain from that grave manner which is distorting the cause of the Debate.  Please, go ahead hon. Member.

MR ARUNA ADAMU:  Mr Chairman, we thought this 6 billion covers all the districts, but it appears it covers a few districts.  So, we would like to know what a criteria was used to select these few districts.  And secondly, when funds come available like this I think it would be proper if the NRC is used, because some of us do not know much about this, and development takes place in our places without our knowledge.  So, such a fund is really should be channeled through the NRC Members so that the mobilized people identified projects and know how that money is used by using the NRC Members out in such funds, that is why the rural farmers funds did not do well.  So, I would like the Minister to say something about that.  

I also come to these private investors; that is page 19. My concern is just to say that at least with NRC Members should know these investors, so that if there is any help, we can give them. 

Secondly, there is a figure here of 23,000 jobs for Ugandans. Experience has shown to us sometimes when these investors come, they give Ugandans lower positions like junior clerks, drivers, office messengers and so on. And we would like to make sure that these 23,000 jobs involve senior personnel.  As usual, my concern is only to rise enough revenue for the government. For example, today, we have not got our allowances because there is no money.  So, urban areas are the main source of revenue for the government.  But when it comes to development, these urban areas are very much neglected.  

Look at the roads in our urban areas.  These roads were last tarmacked before Independence; yet it is true.  And immediately after Independence, they were just extended for few kilometres. Like in Arua, it is twelve kilometres; I do not know, how many they are in Masindi, Lira, and Hoima - all the urban areas that have got representatives here.  Since independence up to now, we do not know who is responsible for these roads.

Since Independence up to now, we do not know who is responsible for these roads. and this makes the standard of our urban areas deteriorating.  As a result, the business in these areas is becoming poor, leading to poor collection of revenue. I think the Ministry of Finance should include certain funds in the national budget for the rehabilitation of these roads.  Some of these roads are partly trunk roads; and they are left to municipalities or the Ministry should also present as a world fund project, so that these urban areas benefit life Kampala; but Kampala’s problem is always the maintenance.

Also, allow me briefly to say something about the famine and drought.  My observation is that, we always come to know that there is famine, when people have run out of the last drop of the food they have.  There used to be a system, whereby all information regarding the plantation is to be given to the Ministry of Agriculture. So, if that system is followed, I think we can know exactly how many acres have been affected by drought.  But without this information, I think it will be difficult to know what is being grown at the countryside.  Also -(Interruption)

MR KYEMBA: Point of information, Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that if he took up, I think today’s Paper the New Vision, he will find some information in there, advising farmers what to plant.  Thank you.

MR HARUNA IMAGA:  Mr Chairman, this information is not supposed to come from the top; it is supposed to come from the grassroots. (Applause) For example, a sub-parish would state exactly how many acres of maize is planted in a parish.  Then this information is combined at the division level, at the country level, district level; that is what I am trying to emphasize.  I think the shortage of food is partly because of the following reasons; poor system of farming, also it appears government puts much emphasis on cash crops and no traditional cash crops, instead of emphasizing on food crops like millet and sorghum.  I think food crops should be grown besides the cash crops.  Recently, I think, somebody was saying that, people should not grow millet, so millet is the most sustainable food crop. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Wind up, please.

MR HARUNA IMAGA:  Mr Chairman, lastly, I want to talk about the Arua tarmac roads. Every year, the statement on this road changes.  First it was said Pakwach Arua or Arua Pakwach; and later it was said from Karuma, Pakwach Arua; now recently, it is to Arua, from where? (Laughter)  We in Arua we say let this road start from Arua; because SIETICO started this road from Arua.  Now, if there is any possibility of tarmacking this road, it should start from Arua.  If it does not start from Arua, that is not our road in Arua. (Laughter)  

Briefly, I want to talk about Tourism. Maybe, I can read this briefly.  Tourism is another major source of revenue both in local and foreign currency.  In 1970, Uganda achieved its target in tourism because Uganda Government through UDC had put up its own hotels. Now, why did Uganda Government do this? It was because private hotel owners were conniving with tourists by banking money in their overseas accounts; coming with little foreign currency to settle for compulsory payment in foreign currency.  Therefore, if we start to sell our hotels, or leave the accommodation in foreign or private hotels operators, definitely, history will repeat itself. We should know that, the moment we leave the accommodation side in private hands, definitely, financially we shall be drained dry.  Mr Chairman, with these few words; I thank you very much.

MR KANYOMOZI (Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to make few remarks on the Budget, and first starting with the issues, which I consider as positive, on to this years budget.  I welcome the idea of accelerated depreciation for investors outside the main power.  I am sure that will help us to have industries in the countryside or in the other distant towns, which really need them.

I am sure if these promises fold with provision of other infrastructure, we will be - things will work out very well.  I am worried about one issue; that is public utility. The public utility is because of the need to finance their development programmes, are hampered and end up charging excessive tariffs which could be a deterrent for those who want to invest in the outside areas.

We start with electricity for example, add on telephone. Unless something is done by government, and done very quickly, the policy which is in place with this budget will not help us to get much as to what we would have desired from the policy guidelines that have been given in the budget.  I am looking at how we can get out of that problem. I think government could cut certain areas of expenditure, and pay up for the utilities so that they do not have to rise their tariffs so high as it is the case at the moment.

Hon. Members have stressed charges by UEB, by the telephones services UPTC, and by water.  But we should remember that in the earlier days, these institutions had support in the Central Government. Now that their support is missing, and they are supposed to expand although the money which carry heavy interest, they will have to charge heavy tariffs, in order to survive and perform.  We are requesting the Government, there are areas where they can cut expenditure and be able to enable and pay up for the utilities so that, the utilities are in position to give us lower tariffs for the -(Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA: Point of information.  May I inform the hon. Member on the Floor that, it is not necessary because of the high interest rates.  But rather, it is because of the commissions from some of those utilities.  Sometime back, we saw documents in this House which had been dotted.  And I remember somebody who was in the Post Office came running, wanting me to change the course otherwise, but it was already gone.  So, if Government can control the negotiating machinery so that, even the advancements may put in the right direction, the charges inevitably, would go very high, for electricity, the water and telephone.  Thank you.

MR KANYOMOZI:  I want to tell him that, the charges are up because the Capital Development Expenditure for these institutions is too high and is borrowed on expensive money, and therefore, in order to meet those charges, they have got to surface the laws.  And I am suggesting that, Government can avoid that as a nation, if you look at areas, which could be cut.  The Deputy Minister whispered, where would the cuts come from?  

There are many areas in these expenses.  For example, if we cut on expense on committees and boards, in all the ministries, there are billions and billions of shillings there.  If we cut on contribution to local organisation, there are billions and billions of shillings.  We can even cut on mobilization will need more than what we do as Members of Parliament. (Interruption)

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  I would like to inform this House that in relation - streamlining, controlling efficiently the budget. If we can touch particularly in the Ministry of Local Government for example: we have the chiefs on one parallel line, and the RCs; they are at times. So you find that there are too many coups that follow the growth.  The Local Government is dead practically. (Laughter)

MR ALAI:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  The hon. Member has made a very serious allegation to the House, to the Minister that the Ministry of Local Government is dead.  I do not know whether he meant the centre or the district?  As far as I know, we have decentralised powers and functions to the local authorities.  And the district resistance councils have all the powers to ensure that there is accountability at the district level.  Now, when he says that the district councils are dead, this is a very serious statement from the very hon. Member, so this to be clarified to what he means. 

MR OBWANGOR:  If the hon. Minister for Local Government can give me an annually report indicating the performance and efficient administration of Local Government, I will  -(Interruption) 

MR KANYOMOZI:  Mr Chairman, there are areas where the resources can be got to enable the development programmes of utilities to be bad.  Because at the moment, you will do at times they seem to be running two parallel governments - two parallel civil servants.  One being the NRM Secretariat, and one being the normal Public Service.  And if we did not have to do that, that resource could be channeled elsewhere, and assist us in running this.  Thank you.

I also appreciate the State’s Statement on reduction of excise tax on drinks.  I am sure this will help the consumption. (Interruption)

MR ALAI: Point of information. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  The information I want to give to the hon. Member holding the Floor, is that in addition to the measures which the hon. Member has so eloquently talked about, government can assist in reducing these tariffs by reducing on the amounts of rampant corruption that we all know about.  

Recently, the Public Accounts Committee submitted for - five reports, which pointed out the fact that, the government lost millions - billions of shillings; and recommended certain measures - steps which could be taken to reduce if not eliminate this amount of corruption and embezzlement. So, if these recommendations made by the Public Accounts Committee are strictly adhered to and put in practice, government should be able to save money that would have otherwise, have gone to thieves inheriting subsidize, new parastatals, which are over charging us on water, electricity and other utilities.  Thank you.

MR KANYOMOZI:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  So, you can see there are areas where we can get the money, and the money is there.  It is not that it is not there; we would have improved, on revenue collection.  The Minister admits it and you always hear if from the President whenever he talks about URA.  URA is doing very well, and if it is doing very well, we should see the results in these services.  

Furthermore, it is very important always to know, not only the GDP percentage or revenue collection, but what that percentage is doing.  There are countries - Zaire, for example, with a higher rate of revenue collection than Uganda; but where is the money, you know the state of things there.  If you look at the Background to the Budget on page 23, and see where the money is going, you get the feeling that we have dislocated our priority.  We do need to change those priorities.  The rural areas, which have more than 90 per cent of our population, get the least the money.  And most of the money also goes to general public services, and if you see the definition, in those areas, I am sure we can get enough resources, to enable us to do development projects.  Thank you.

I do agree with the Minister on reduction of excise tax and duties especially on soft drinks and possibly on beer; because ours per capita consumption in this country has been going down and down and down because we have been heavily taxing these soft drinks.  If you compare the consumption per capita in Uganda and our neighbouring countries, ours is so low because of the high margin of taxes.  I hope the people who are manufacturing these soft drinks will also respond to the Minister step and make them ore available and more abundantly because this will help to reduce their unit cost.  

I now want to touch on stabilisation tax. I think the coffee producers and coffee buyers, especially the buyers, the exporters should pay something to help us especially when we have a windfall gain due to the prices.  My only worry with the tax there is that it is on a percentage rather than being on absolute number.  Why am I saying that?  We are also anxious as a country that our coffee tubes being a premium coffee as it has always been, if we tax people who are trying to improve on percentage basis and we tax them on percentage basis, then the quality of the coffee export, the beans may be affected.  I was going to suggest that if the Minister can consider it could it not be better if after reaching the threshold of 1,100 to put on a fixed amount say 120; could we not still realise the revenue rather than the percentage? The reason is, then you do not penalise the quality of coffee being exported.  Because now, the higher the coffee price -(Interruption)

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that the tax on coffee was actually put on a very low threshold.  For you to tax after 1,100/= per kilo, you are effectively saying that the taxation is on the threshold that existed when the lowest price of coffee was and that means, you are punishing the people who are doing a lot to ensure that coffee production goes back.  Since nobody in the liberalisation states what price he will get on the world market, and if you put the threshold so low, you will actually kill the incentives of improving on our coffee beans.

MR KANYOMOZI:  I thank the hon. Member.  It is in the line in light of what I am saying. We want quality coffee on the export market and we want to retain that share of our market.  We should look and examine how we can still tax these people because I think they should be taxed.  

As the President said last year, they should also contribute to the welfare of this country.  But let us design a tax, which does not penalise quality. You can do it with absolute numbers very easily.  There is a negative tax, which I see in the Budget proposition; that is motor licensing. I am a bit worried about it and in addition to CTL load haulage.  I do not know the total impact of this tax is going to be on transportation costs.  We are a landlocked country.  

Already, we have a heavy tax on haulage, I think the costs are going to be excessive and we might price ourselves out of the world market because we cannot get the see easily.  Our own vehicles will not be able to take our goods and we will end up having foreigners coming in here to do the transportation for us. I would like also the Minister to look at this and examine it, with a view to modifying it so that we do not penalise the transportation which has a multiply effect on the other sectors of the economy.  

There is a gray area, which is on page 17; that is Entandikwa is subject to abuse, and it could be used as a patronage to those who support and those who do not support. Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

MR ADYEBO:  Mr Chairman and hon. Members of the NRC, this idea of Entandikwa came about because of the sufferings that other parts of Uganda are experiencing in contrast to the rest of the country.  For example, when you go to eastern Uganda, when you go to Pallisa, when you go to Kumi, to Soroti, and you proceed to north, if you turn round to south, Fort-Portal, for example, you find that the level of suffering in some parts of Uganda is not the same throughout.  


As a result, government is thinking of moving into alleviating of the sufferance in the country side with respect to the improvement of the household incomes by proposing that let there be some amount of money with which we can start and identify some households so that we give them capacity to generate incomes, in the homesteads.  And in the long run turn that fund into a revolving fund, which will cater for as many homesteads as possible.  As a result, they fixed six billion shillings in the budget which the hon. Member on the Floor is talking about.  

To the best of my knowledge, the President has directed the Minister for Finance to sit down with his technical bureaucrats and design methods of allocating this six billion shillings which is actually not very much but it is a start off fund.  And we intend to start with those districts which are really facing more difficult times especially Luwero Triangle, north-eastern Uganda, northern Uganda and so on. But we shall go on and on until we reach the homestead.  Thank you.

MR OPIO: Point of clarification.  Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  Last night, some of us who were listening on the Radio, we were informed by Captain Asiimwe of the NRM Secretariat identifying the measure that the Entandikwa is going to be for Apac, Soroti and Luwero.  Now, is this true?  Because we are now having so many people announcing about Entandikwa that we are getting lost.  Thank you very much.

MR ADYEBO:  Mr Chairman, may I re-assure my hon. friend hon. Opio that whereas Capt. Asiimwe made that statement, unfortunately he does not attend Cabinet.  I am giving you a government position on that matter.  So it is up to you take whichever information you think is more reliable.  If he did make that statement, he made it as one person in government but I think you will agree with us that at times we make different statements and different fora and if the statement was made in good faith but not correct, you should excise him.  I think he had very good intention of disseminating the idea.  All the same, the official position is that we are starting with the districts, which really did suffer more than the rest of Uganda  -(Interruption) 

I am surprised that for the first time, my colleagues are a bit impatient to listen to the explanation.  This matter was raised and I expect you to get the reply thereto.  I am just trying to give you the reply and I would expect you to cooperate; because it is not a miracle to say that some parts of Uganda are facing more difficult time than the rest.  Is that not a fact?  So why are you shouting?

CAPT. GASATURA:  Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  I just inform the hon. Member and the whole House the other day, the hon. Prime Minister informed us of a project for improving and enhancing quality of education in 11 districts; Arua, Moyo, Lira, Kitgum, Gulu and he stopped there.  The other day, His Excellency and the Minister for Finance told us to f a project for NURP - Northern Uganda Rehabilitation Programme and he stopped there.  Now we are told, even the little Entandikwa to get you going is going to pilot a project in the north.  

While I agree  -(Interruptions)- while I do frankly agree that some areas of this country are more hard up than others, for example, I really pitied our friends in Kisoro because you cannot find the water there even if you dig deep.  While I agree that some areas have famine, if you consider individual citizens and individual homes - in Masaka, there are people who go hungry, in Kabale and all over the country.  Whereas you consider the six thousand million, that is six billion shillings, for some 150 counties in this country; that is 40 million shillings per county and that can create an impact on the ground. I think this issue should be reconsidered.  (Applause)

MR ADYEBO: Point of clarification.  I make the last clarification on the point raised by my Brother hon. Capt. Gad Gasatura from Rushenyi in Bushenyi District - no Ntungamo, sorry.  I was there in his constituency about ten days or so ago and I only noted that it is regrettable that in his area, there appears not to be new projects not initiated by none other than the leaders of different levels.  However, I found that his heads of cattle were intact.  None was removed during the insurgence in this country.  Now what we are saying in government, we are saying we do not have enough resources to cater for everybody as a start and he will agree with me as a democrat, as he has been and a well balanced person and save for that matter, -(Interruption) 

CAPT. GASATURA:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, I do not mean it to be just between the two but is it in order for the hon. Prime Minister to mislead the House and the nation that people in Ntungamo never lost any property whereas in fact in 1982, we lost well over 100,000 head of cattle and nobody has ever - and is it in order for him to suggest that 6 billion shillings is not enough to around whereas six billion shillings could be 40 million shillings per county and that could create impact?

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, the Rt. Prime Minister was in the middle of explaining something and it is imperative that we should humbly wait and until he finishes.  I rule that he is completely in order.  Please, Prime Minister, can you finish giving your information?

MR ADYEBO:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I was explaining to my Brother and hon. Members that there is no hidden agenda behind what government is trying to do except that we have a lot of problems almost in every corner of this country.  

For example, when you begin to talk about re-stocking of cattle in the north and northeast, which exercise we have not finished, you find another problem coming in; earthquake and your attention must go there.  As we are dealing with the earthquake, you find the bodies floating in Lake Victoria. You must go there.  

So, we are saying, let us start solving these problem and we put a committee to advise us from time to time as we start which areas of Uganda will be served.  For example, this Entandikwa is just not going to end in Luwero, it is not going to end in Teso, no.  We have other Ugandans who are suffering elsewhere; Fort-Portal, Kasese, Bundibugyo, Kibale to mention a few.  So, we have set up actually a technical team that will advise; but that one was the thinking to help start and to wind up. 

He mentioned something about the rehabilitation of these schools.  What I did mention here last week was a continuation of the rehabilitation of schools under Northern Uganda Reconstruction Programme (NURP) of which I am in charge and I think it is my constitutional right to update Parliament from time to time as to what is happening in my department; and I feel surprised that when I give information, it looks as if I should not. I only wanted to keep you abreast so that you know what is happening. 

Under the Northern Uganda Reconstruction Programme, there is no a continuation of rehabilitating further schools.  There is no any other funding from outside.  There is no any other money in the budget except that, that programme is continuing and I was just trying to update you with the information and it is my Constitutional right and I will do it from time to time.  Thank you.

MR KANYOMOZI:  Mr Chairman, you can see what the heat such a subject can generate.  It is because the criteria  - I am asking for a criterion under which these funds are going to be allocated.  What are the steps?  What is the design light; because we do not want to have thing to become a total failure or to end up as a problem in future.  

Paragraph 40 says, that it is intended for getting small entrepreneurs and small people who cannot get credit.  I am saying the criteria for judging who is small, I fear it being subjective and when it becomes subjective, it becomes patronage and when it becomes patronage, it leads to other things and that is why I am saying, in my opinion and I suggest, maybe it could be better if this money - because we all need part of it  - if it is widely spread and given in such a manner to deal with specific things which affect everybody because all of us are affected and I will come to that magnitude.  I am going to come to that, saying that the development in this country since 1990, our performance, although in totality is good, but if you look at our situation, on the world table we have been declining. We were No.102 out of 130 in 1990, in 1991 we were 134 out of 160, and in 1992, because of the war, thanks to the RPF - because of the war, we pushed Rwanda, we became 133, and Rwanda became 134, out of 160.  In 1993, we were 146 out of 173, and this year, 1994, we are 154 out of 176.

I am saying the problem which face us, face the entire country and, therefore, if this ‘Entandikwa’ is going to be given, let us spread it so that we are all in equal depth.  (Applause)

I would like now to touch on another issue; the other issue is -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: You have one minute, hon. Member.

MR KANYOMOZI: The other issue I would like to touch on is privatisation.  We support privatisation and we have shown it by the massive support we gave the PERD Bill.  But we are concerned with one thing, which I think should be taken care of; and this part is investment and privatisation. To privatise, I thought our aim was to democratise all assets so that all of us would have a stay.  If the incentive to work is because you own, then it is better for the incentive to be spread throughout all over us, because it is always said the parastatals do not perform because nobody knows who wants them except Government.  We would like to privatise, but let us privatise in such a way that most of us take a share in those things, which we are selling to the public.  I think it is in good interest of all Ugandans to feel that they have a share in UCB in Uganda Electricity Board, and something else; because -(Interruption)

MR KAIJUKA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform hon. Yona Kanyomozi, Member for Kajara holding the Floor, that much as he is advocating democratisation of ownership vis-à-vis or through privatisation routes, it is a high sounding principle to go through, at the same time the same statement should not name privatisation of poverty; because the minute you - unfortunately, hon. Kanyomozi happens to be chairman of a parastatal body and he is a Member of GRIK and so I am sure he will make sure that democratisation takes place, but apart from anything else, I wanted to caution and inform him that once you privatise, it does not matter what structure you put in place, unless you do not want to recover it sooner than we want, you could end up having nothing privatised if you insisted.  That unless we buy through your method, where everyone brings in Shs10, by the time you - let me give an example. 

Supposing you want to divest a Company, take UCB and you have got a value at say, 100 billion for the sake of argument, that is 100 billion, try to democratise that through your subscription of Shs 10, what population do you have?  In other wards, with the whole of Uganda contributing Shs10, multiply 18 by 10, what is that?  You will end up not even getting enough capital to buy one item.  So, I am saying - I am informing the hon. Member that it is true; we should try and broaden ownership as a principle, but we should not be tied down if we want to get privatisation going. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I just want to give valid information, and I think that the case put out by the Minister is not very convincing; because again and again, this august House openly and in closed session has advised Government at least to put up some of these industries and companies which are being privatised to the public.  Government would be making out a face if they had to put out one or two and we had failed to take up shares.  But there is not a single one, which has been put up on the market and, therefore, is really not right to continue arguing that it would be academic.  

Secondly, not everybody - rather some of us can afford more than just Shs10/-; Ugandans, some are capable of Shs 50,000, others Shs 100,000; I dare say some could pay Shs 1,000,000. So, if we privatise, some of the Ugandans are more equal than others and they could prescribe for these shares without basing everything on Shs10 and taking the poorest Ugandan as the standard yard for privatisation and therefore, I think that the point made by the hon. Kanyomozi is very serious - it should be taken seriously by the Government.  Let us try some of these industries.

Some of us feel that Ugandans should have a pride; we understand for example, that the Nile Complex was already being put for sale, why can we not privatise management of that and Ugandans continue owning that Complex? There are other issues that we could discuss Mr Chairman.  I thank you.

MR MWANDHA:  Point of information.  I wish also to inform hon. Yona Kanyomozi - Member of NRC for Kajara, that the information given by the Minister of Industry and Trade is totally misleading and I am rather disappointed that a man in charge of Commerce, Trade and Industry, should give that information.  The Minister for Trade and Industry, should be aware that even in capitalist societies of say, United Kingdom, when they privatise, or there is a company to public to buy shares, they do not even 100 million in one go; they call first call, second call, third call, fourth call, until all the Shs100 million is subscribed for.  They will never make one final call for that magnitude of money; even in rich countries like United Kingdom, there is nothing wrong that stops this country to actually privatise in the manner hon. Kanyomozi is putting to us and making sure that we follow the Company Act which gives all the procedure for actually issuing shares to the public and you can actually make various calls until the total capital is subscribed for. I am disappointed by the Minister.

MR KANYOMOZI:  Mr Chairman, we are not saying we are going to privatise poverty.  After all, the purpose of Government is to get us out of the poverty and we get out of poverty by owning shares and what is wrong with hon. Kaijuka having 10 shares and me having one?  That is all we are asking for and it does not affect the concept of our privatisation, which we all support. 

I would like to see put in place a saving programme of how these assets are being privatised; so that we swallow what we can, what we cannot swallow we give it to other people also to swallow with us and in that way, will build up a better society.

MR NDEGE:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I would like to request the hon. speaker who is a Member of the GRIK, to tell us why and PERD to put up one or two companies for the public to subscribe, because he is blaming himself with my opinion or rather we took him there and he is not doing his job.  Thank you.

MR KANYOMOZI:  Mr Chairman, mine is to advise and to give a critical remark and I have advised to that effect; you have heard what the Minister responsible for Trade and Industry has also given his point of view; both of us happen to sit on the same thing.  The arbiters are ourselves.  So, I am putting my case; he has put his case and it is for us all to judge.  (Laughter) Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

MR ADYEBO: Point of order.  You remember hon. Chairman and my Colleagues, that last year, Government was desperately looking for a group of competent Ugandans to advise Government as to how best Government must move in divesting these parastatals; some of which are not performing to date.  In that respect, I did propose that my hon. friend, hon. Kanyomozi now holding the Floor should be the Chairman of the Sectoral Committee of this House to handle matters pertaining to parastatals including even advising me as a Prime Minister.  Now, therefore, is it in order for the same hon. Kanyomozi to come here to confuse you the hon. Members instead of advising me; when he is holding that thing on the -(Interruption and Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please, hon. Members, order, please.

MR KANYOMOZI:  Mr Chairman, let me touch on another issue and I am grateful that the hon. Prime Minister now says I should also go and advise and I will willingly do so.

Let me touch on investment and attracting investment in this country -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member your time is up.

MR KANYOMOZI:  Mr Chairman, we appreciate the efforts the Government is putting in, in attracting investment in this country and we would like to have as many rich people investing in this country, but let me say this, that the easiest attraction to attract investors is to start at best with our local people. Once the investors see that the hon. Prime Minister’s farm is doing very well, the rate of return is very high, profitability is good, they will definitely come.  Investors behave like these birds, which look for prey; where the thing is, is where they go.  So, let us start with making conditions favourable to our own people here and then the others will follow. The steps, which we take, should be such that they make the local indigenous investors feel that they are in control of everything.  

I am saying this because when we started fighting for Independence, we were fighting on two fronts.  One is to fight for political Independence; the other one is to fight for economic independence.  The two go hand in hand, a country which is dominated by foreigners cannot be fully independent; that is why you see investment portfolios or programmes in some developed countries there is always a fight, if the Americans want to buy up a British Company, the British Government puts up a stand and say, no, we must retain it locally and that is what we want.  In attracting these investors let us be mindful of the fact that our own people take precedence over and above everybody. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member your time is up.

MR KANYOMOZI:  I am just going to wind up. Looking at the state of things, Mr Chairman, we agree we need competition in industry and I think that is acceptable; we need competition in investment, I would end up by saying, and we also need competition in ideas.  Let everybody be free to compete even if it is in terms of ideas and I shudder when I imagine what happened during those elections.  We need a degree of tolerance to make the necessary condition for development to take place.  But if we exclusively say it is we or it is me who knows best, then we are creating an atmosphere, which cannot neither allow political development nor accept economic development. Mr Chairman, with those few words, I thank you.

MR MAYNGO (Kyamuswa County, Kalangala):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to start exactly where hon. Kanyomozi has ended.  In a sense, I would like to wind up him comments on privatisation then I will add on things which I had thought earlier.

If the Minister for Finance in his speech had given us a report on how privatisation is going on, probably these curious remarks from hon. Kanyomozi and from Dr Magezi would not have happened on this Floor of this hon. House. I think it was necessary in the Minister’s speech to tell this nation how privatisation is going on, how many companies he has sold, for how much he has sold, and where the proceeds are.  On the other hand, if there would be no proceeds, he would again tell us why he sold for nothing.  When we passed the PERD Statute in this House, there are things we suggested; we suggested as hon. Kanyomozi was indicating, that all these public companies, which were intended to be privatised, should first of all, be re-registered as Public companies that is companies in which ownership of shares was unlimited.  

It would have been decent for the Minister to tell this House why it was found impossible.  Then, of course we had also suggested that in order to facilitate the method of privatisation as hon. Kanyomozi has been suggesting, that the Government should have facilitated the creation of a stock exchange by private businessmen; so that, that institution would assist in the privatisation in the selling of shares of these companies to our public.  

The Government has been fumbling with this question and I do not blame them so much; because it is a difficult question and it has sort of tended to shy away from what would have been a direct approach. As I think about the stock exchange, I even wonder whether Uganda shilling in its present form would be workable in the stock exchange; it looks to me to be too large, too cumbersome, and I would not shy from suggesting that if you are looking forward to a stock exchange, probably it might be wise to consider another currency reform at this stage.  Let hon. Members hesitate a little to explain that the currency reform should be without the conversion tax. 

Secondly, it should be without a deadline; in other wards, it will be a currency reform of say, creating one new Uganda Shilling, equal to 100 old Uganda shillings and the two would work side by side until the old shillings would fade away and be survived by the new shillings and the new stock exchange would be working only in the new shilling; one equal to 100. 

But in the meantime, one would say, Shs100 old is acceptable as much as 1,000,000 shillings is also acceptable.  This is being done in several countries, Mr Chairman, and I think the new Stock Exchange would only work in that type of currency. I cannot imagine a stockbroker talking of several thousand shillings per share.  Even the recording will be cumbersome.  I see no harm in considering a currency reform at this stage.  

Not only that; let me add something else for the Minister to think about.  To consider the practicality of writing down Uganda Shillings the way they have been doing it - I see no harm in adopting a symbol for the Uganda new shilling.  Either I have been thinking of the letter U with a diagonal from top to right to the bottom left and that symbol stands for the Uganda shilling.  I do not know whether the world will come and argue against that we have adopted something, which is suitable for ourselves.  

Mr Chairman, I will now accept the information. (Interruption)

MR NDEGE:  Point of clarification.  Could the hon. Member through you, clarify how the Italians do it with such ease and the Japanese Yen and so on and so forth.  I am sure they must be having Stock Exchanges.

MR MAYENGO:  Mr Chairman, I believe that the hon. Member has never been to the Italian Stock Exchanges. If he had, he would have noticed the stockbrokers have shorthand writing some of these figures but I am saying instead of going to that extent we would start from the beginning and make it sensible.  

Not only that, the Ministry itself is saying that they would like the Uganda Shilling to be internationally convertible and in order to do that, the government has acceded to the relevant sections of Article 8 of the International Monetary Agreement, in order to make the Uganda shilling more convertible internationally.  I think it will be a more and more respectable Uganda shilling if one would say, a dollar is equal to 10 shillings; rather a dollar is equal to 1,000 shillings.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Mr Chairman, could the hon. Member on the Floor clarify to this House, Sir, whether it is economically feasible just to presumably devalue the shilling just for the purposes of Stock Exchange.  Should there not be other economic factors for which devaluation or evaluation at least maybe justifiable?

MR MAYENGO: Mr the Learned former Attorney General should make a difference - a currency reform is not devaluation. Definitely not.  As a matter of fact I have said that the old Uganda Shillings and the new would work side by side; since the former Attorney General was in England, he must have been some of these currency working in England.  The old and new working side by side and it was only waiting for time until the old will be phased out and will be sufficed by the new.  

(Interjections)- I think it is along those lines, that privatisation will be made possible so that Ugandans would own a share in these companies.  Otherwise, complaints that foreigners are buying us will never end.  

Let me now talk about how government cooperates with this House.  As I look at the Minister of Agriculture, I remember that when she announced that there was some money available in districts - something called the Investment Term Credit Refinance and Guarantee Scheme. It sounds a stranger to many of the Members here but this scheme, an agreement was signed for it on the 9th of January, 1992 in Washington and some 65 million dollars was I think made available for the scheme.  

Ever since that time, we in the Back Benches here have known very little except for the very inquisitive to find out that after Agreement had been signed, the Government then went ahead to sign another agreement between itself and the Bank of Uganda to administer this scheme. Then the Bank of Uganda went ahead to sign more agreements with commercial banks and since then two of those commercial banks signed first and only few days, did some three other commercial banks sign - The Standard, Stanbic and the Barclays.  The first were Baroda and Gold Trust.  For those that signed first, all the five projects had been worked on and even those have not taken off yet.  The question is - what was the purpose of the scheme?  

It is so well known that investment here is hampered tremendously by the absence of long term finance.  Here now was coming a scheme that would guarantee that - but because of some kind of over sight, I think, the negotiators permitted a condition to creep in. The condition being that before any project would benefit from the scheme, the sponsors of the project would have put down 25 per cent of the cost of the project.  

Here now are negotiations, which were taking place in America; ask any bank in the United States whether such a thing can ever take place in the United States.  What will they ask? They will ask is the project viable? Will it be workable, profitable? If the answers are positive to all those, finance will be made available.  This is probably where I might support slightly my hon. Friend from Budadiri when he says some more people would be added to the job of negotiations.  If obstinate, let us be and insist that a condition like that will prevent a scheme like this one from taking off.  But then, I said cooperation between the governments; all this takes place, the Ministry of Finance and the Bank of Uganda appear to be doing things, which are entirely unknown to us.  They look like conmen on the sideways of playing ‘Karata’ (Laughter) 

I do not mean to incite the Members but the fact is that we should be informed.  We should be informed - if it is impossible to have these agreements to all of - at least to the relevant committees.  Those relevant committees do find some way of letting the other Members know about it.  So would be the case with the matter like what the hon. Minister of Agriculture talked about. (Interruption)

MR KABUUBI:  Point of information.  Thank you very much.  I really would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that the point he is raising very crucial.  It is so crucial because I, personally complained to this House that the hon. Prime Minister was not in this House to inform us of what was taking place in government and it is purely out of that, that we can see the Prime Minister amidst us and it is true that many of us who are part of government, we are not informed of what is taking place and yet we are expected to communicate to our people - to the rural masses.  We inform them of what government - how it operates.  Therefore, if this country is to develop, the government must use the Legislature, must use NRC Members, and must be informed of what is taking place.  

Otherwise, either the government wants do things secretly so that in future it will be our children and our grandchildren to pay debts that are badly negotiated, and in fact even all those loans which we are getting, it is our children who are going to be called upon to pay.  (Interruption) So, the matter is very serious.

MR MWANDHA: Supplementary Question. I want to give the hon. Member Floor two pieces of information. In the first place, the example which the hon. Member has quoted is in breach of the Foreign Loans Pact.  Government is supposed to come to this House and receive the approval of this House before they can actually get a foreign loan.  

The second piece of information I want to give, is that you know very well hon. Members that some time last year - it must have been November, that our President with the presidents of Kenya and Tanzania signed a document to revive the East African Community and committed citizens of their respective countries to the revival of the East African Community.  

Up to this moment, nobody in government has come to this House to actually at least inform the House that this serious commitment had actually been undertaken by government and also to give this House a progress report on what actually has happened ever since this document was signed between the three countries.  It is important that the government really briefs the representative of the people in this House on major issues such as I have mentioned and hon. Members have just mentioned. (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, there is now a question of time and try to use it as much as possible.

MR MAYENGO: Mr Chairman, leaving those matters to questions that might arise in future, I would like to say that still the idea of using this House as a link between the government and the population is inevitable.  I wanted to suggest something, which might be tactful.  Members in this House do not have so much freedom to move around because of the hindrances of the economy, nor do the people they represent have so much chance to look them up.  I sometimes wonder if an ordinary citizen came from Karamoja to look for his representative in this House; where would he look? Of course, the advice would be that he stands by the steps at 2.30 p.m. and wait for the hon. Member’s arrival.  The hon. Member would arrive probably a little bit late rushing up the steps and the fellow countryman will move forward to say in his local language that he wants to talk to him.  These are not very practical things. 

I suggest that hon. Members of this House, the mail that they write and the mail that they receive be paid for by the government - the postage.  How does that work?  Very simple.  All Members mail would be collected in the Clerk’s Office. In other words when you write a letter to anyone in Uganda, you just drop it in the Clerk’s Office and the Clerk has a way of delivering this to the post office.  The Clerk that means will negotiate with the Post Office for the rate and it would be part of the Budget that this be paid out.  Then, all that will be needed was the hon. Member’s signature on the envelope.  That would be the postage stamp.  I am not talking of what is impossible; I have seen it in some countries.  Then mail addressed to hon. Members - provided that it is addressed to honourable so and so, Parliament Building, Kampala, should also be received without any need for postage. This would increase the substance of a representative form of government.  (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Your time is up hon. Member.

MR MAYENGO:  Mr Chairman, it is a pity but I have said nothing about the Ssese Islands.  Let me say one sentence that government has still neglected the Ssese Islands so much that there are complaints as to whether these islands belong to Uganda or not.  I would like this sentence to remain echoing in the mind of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister until he gives me a chance to meet him and expand on the sentence.  These islands should not be forgotten.  They are very productive.  Even the Vatican, which does not produce anything except postage stamps and religion, cannot be forgotten.  Thank you, Sir.

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Thank you, Mr Chairman, for allowing me to contribute on this very interesting Debate.  I want to address myself to the issue of poverty, the country is full of poor people especially in the rural areas - the areas that we represent in the villages.  The issue is - are these people working hard to combat poverty?  I think they are. But are they being helped?  I think the answer is no.  The other day somebody said that Members of Parliament must come up and find out projects and institute systems that would alleviate poverty; but even the Members sometimes are poor.  So, it is a vicious circle.  

But are there no ways that we can fight poverty in this economy?  Some members have articulated certain ways that we can actually fight poverty.  I wish to add on, what is one of them?  The economy is busy attracting investors and we are really seriously attracting investors.  Both local and foreign, but we are not putting logistics in place for local investors to participate in investment.  We are busy borrowing money for the service sector but are we busy borrowing money for the investment sector? The answer to me is, no.  I want you to imagine what 100,000,000 dollars would do to this economy if we borrowed it and lent it to the borrowers who want to invest.  It will be a fantastic scheme but only if you do not put in provisions that actually hamper the borrowing system.  

If you are to borrow from the scheme like the one hon. Mayengo mentioned, he has already told you the problems involved. If somebody wanted to borrow 1,000,000 dollars and you are asking him to provide Shs 250,000,000 in advance - if he had that money, he would have gone ahead and done another project.  We are putting up systems as if we assume that the extremely rich.  

We said that one way to combat poverty is to democratise and I repeat democratise businesses in the country. The Minister of Trade has gone, but all the countries in the world have survived by the Stock Exchange. Now, the Stock Exchange does not start in a vacuum.  It has got to start somewhere.  We have been accustomed to businesses that are of a family nature.  You are not going to turn somebody’s family nature business tomorrow into a public company without him knowing how he is going to handle it.  The best solution will be for us to have some three or four companies, float them, sell them and let them begin the Stock Exchange.  The sale of shares is the only way that can rescue Uganda.  That is the only way that everybody can save and invest.  If we are going o for Ugandans to invest, 100,000,000 - forget, we shall never get Ugandans investing that. If they do, it will be a handful and if they are swamped by the foreigners, in liberalisation, which I support though, is that we may have more problems  

As I talk now, Japan is refusing America to invest in rice growing.  As I talk now, America is refusing Japanese companies from selling in the United States and yet United States is the biggest economy in the world.  Why are they fearing the Japanese?  They do not want to be swamped by the Japanese.  If Britain can actually quarrel with Germany over the investments of a building in Britain, who are we to say that all foreigners must come in and invest in everything.  Why can we not participate in that investment and how can we participate in that investment, if our people have no capacity to do that.  One way to do it is to borrow now, lend the Ugandans and have them have money to invest. 

The money supply as provided in the key to Economic Indicators this last week, shows that the total money supplied in the country is only 370 billion. Half of that is in the hands of the people; and in fact money supply per say, which is M3, is not all currency.  We are only talking of a currency in circulation, which is M2, and M2 is only Shs 200,000,000 that one cannot survive an economy.  We need more money in the economy, but how do we do that money in the economy? 

Every time we export, we must accompany it with the supply of local currency after buying it.  There is no way we are going to control inflation to less than ten and think we are going to actually grow. I beg any inflation below 10 per cent is not growth rate inflation.  That is stagnation rate of growth.  If you are going to have development in this country we must allow some inflation because inflation is a structural way or actually, helping the economy to propel itself forward.  

These are not theories; these are practises.  They have been done everywhere in the countries that have actually grown.  How do we fight poverty? That is one way, we borrow to lend, to lend to the investors at low interest rates.  If they Government can get a loan of 40,000,000 dollars to be repaid in 40 years with a nine year period of grace we should on lend it to the investors with a five year period of grace to repay in 20 years; and in that way the Government will get back the money and pay in time. It has happened everywhere and it is happening.  

When General Motors was about to collapse in America, the Government of America had to put up billions and billions of dollars to save it.  Why? Because it employs more than a million people.  If it collapsed, a million people would not have jobs and would be on social security.  We do not give social security here and, therefore, we do not mind where people are going, but I think we should care; this time we should care.  

How can we save money for investment? The road to Jinja has been done four times.  Why? It maybe true; it may be true that the contractor is going to pay back 2,000,000 dollars but is that an efficient way of actually handling an economy?  Were there engineers who supervised it?  Is the monitoring system in this economy really right?  Take 6th Street it was done only a year ago, but there is no road in 6th Street, it is just potholes! (Interruption)

CAPT. BABU:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the hon. Member is doing so well I did not want to disturb him.  But I wanted to inform him that, actually, it is not the contractors who are paying if the Ministry of Works will pay.  They are going to pay an equal amount of money and we did criticise them last year in the committee, in fact, one of their reports was why should the Ministry of Works pay?  They are going to pay to repair the road where it is broken done in Mabira forest.  Both sides are paying, contractors and Ministry of Works, which means that there was negligence on both sides.  Thank you.

MR MANZI:  Thank you for that information. That means, Mr Chairman, that the resources, that are being diverted to repay and to do the road and the fact that the road is going to be redone itself is an inefficient way of development; and I am serious I am talking about development not growth.  Certainly is growth as long as you keep spending money in the economy, the economy will grow, but the issue is, are we developing, and how long are we to wait until we start developing?  

I want to talk also about the utilities; the utilities are killing the economy that is the truth.  The other day two investors had to go back because they were asked - one of them was asked to pay Shs19, 000,000 to pull power from the main supply line to 1 KM of where his industry war; and he said why, why do I have to pay that?  

As we talk, if you pay for a transformer, to pull power to your place of operation, the transformer is paid by you but is owned by UEB, and without consideration of that investment.  Surely, is that not robbing in day light? Any other person who gets power from that transformer is paying UEB, instead of paying you and you recover what you invested. What kind of utilities are we actually handling?  

The same will go for water, and for telephone services. Why is it that telephone services worldwide are cheaper than the telephone services here?  Is it because we cannot - we do not understand what to do - I think there is another problem; and the problem is mismanagement.  The problem is mismanagement, and we need to save money we need to ensure that this thing is not done in that way.  

Government is participating in creating poverty; how? I will give one example of one estate, Bugolobi estate.  The fact that Government rents block 1 to block 17 and has not paid rent and the balance is rented by the private sector from block 18 to block 31, the housing has got to increase rent to recover what they do not get from Government.  The same happens with Posts.  This is a serious matter. 

Now, in the last Budget it was stated that any Permanent Secretary who does not pay his bills, that the Minister of Finance will deduct money at source and pay the bills, because then he will not be accounting for the money properly. But was it done? No, why? I do not know.  Government ministries must pay their bills.  Otherwise, if they do not pay the bills the utilities will have to recover their costs from the few that can pay; and in the process they will cripple the economy; and of course unless there is enough money to throw around in investment and increase the purchasing power in the economy then we are increasing poverty.  Because, poverty is a function of lack of purchasing power.  (Interruption)

MR OPIO:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the hon. Member who is on Floor has touched a serious matter.  We should know that right now where we are, the Parliament is disconnected there is no telephone service.  Two months there is no telephone here, in ministries you cannot ring and connect Ministry so and so, because they are all disconnected.  Even water, it is the same for us.  Thank you.

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  In economic terms where there is no connection between the factors of production, and the commodity to be produced there is poverty.  (Laughter)

MR MANZI:  Thank you, Mr Chairman for that information.  In other words, Government must live to its obligations.  I want to touch on another aspect that is creating poverty, because we are busy retrenching people in the public service, which is very good.  We are also retrenching soldiers from the Army, which is also very good because, we need smaller services.  But where are we sending them in the wider world.  Now, what provisions are we making for them?  The only alternative to me would have been to allow the private sector to expand faster to absorb them.  

But as we talk, I may say and beg that our import bill is likely to increase for the consumer goods for one simple reason.  While Kenya is still giving a redoubt for all its exports we are imposing a 10 per cent Tax duty on raw materials.  10 per cent on raw materials is in the cost of production; and increased production, the output will certainly be very expensive.  If it is expensive, people will buy the imported goods because we are a liberalised economy.  Now, we are actually literary expanding the economy on the other side and killing ours by that 10 per cent. 

I am told in the Budget Speech that, that 10 per cent is retention fee, which can be recouped at the end if the industry is, actually, going to export, but must be only half industries that export?  The answer is no, because export has two aspects - negative export, is import substitution. If we cannot export, we should produce what we want to import from other countries; and the only way to do it is to make them cheaper in the country, especially if there are young industries and, therefore, their quality is still very low, then they must be cheaper to attract customers, otherwise, we are killing the economy that way.  

It is possible to use and to eliminate 10 per cent duty and put it at the end on corporation tax when somebody has made a profit rather than kill the industry when it is actually progressive.  (Interruption)

MR RWABITA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I want to inform the hon. speaker that in order to improve our exports and the private sector, we could copy an example of the Chinese economy now; the Chinese economy or Government has opened the doors to foreigners to come and do joint ventures.  You see our people do not have enough capital but if Government could have good environment for outsiders to come and invest with our people here, the benefits are many; we get expertise, technology employment of our people and we produce goods of quality and quantity of International standards and, therefore, we can export them to the very countries at cheaper price because of cheap labour.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  

MR MANZI: Mr Chairman, I thank him for that information.  Fortunately, I was lucky to be sponsored to go on one of the trips on investment promotion and I want to say that the people who want joint ventures in this country are just too many.  But can we have them? I will tell you why.  The smallest business they are talking about is half a million dollars.  Now, how many Ugandans have half a million dollars to be joint ventures of those organizations?  If you are ready we shall give the company tomorrow.  But, most of them want a half million dollars, 1,000,000 dollars and above. 

So, with the joint ventures - I think the Government has done everything possible to have an environment that allows joint ventures in this country, to allow investment in this country, all the policies are ripe, but there is one thing missing, it is the financing part of it; and that is the financing that I am talking about.  The other environment is good everybody wants to come but they want to share with us, and when they talk of business, a businessman who handles 200,000 dollars in America or in United Kingdom does not want to come to Uganda.  He does not have enough capital to keep traveling around.  The one who wants to come is the one who is handling millions of dollars and yet we have no Ugandans as counterpart joint venture investors. 

Let me talk about my Constituency. In that area  - in Rukiga County, we are busy doing a lot of small projects, which are of public nature.  For instance, take the water gravity schemes.  But, while I agree that SWRP is helping but I think the Government should also come in and actually some little money on the Budget to help these people when they are doing that! It maybe interesting to note, if the hon. Minister talking can show it to me in their Budget I will be very happy.  

It is very interesting to note that we do realise that some people are really very poor.  If I can give an example, I will not talk about other people’s constituencies but I know they are the same. In Rukiga County, we have got very many people who have no access to land, and who do not own a small piece of land.  World you call that person not poor?  Surely he is very poor! A subsistence farmer who has no land means he is a beggar in the village, where there is nowhere to beg and I appeal to the Government that when they are talking about these Entandikwa whereas it may start in some other areas, there are some other areas which are really right for it; and I will add on, that in the last war of Rwanda the nine subcounties at the border lost property valued to 2,300,000,000 dollars.  The NRC had said it was going to come in, and we met and wrote reports, we made recommendations and up to now, that money has not come; and people think we -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order, please. Wind up.   

MR MANZI:  Mr Chairman, I think in this Entandikwa, somewhere, somehow, we must cut somewhere and spread this Entandikwa, it is a very serious issue.  I agree we must start somewhere but everywhere people are poor, and they need assistance; and they need assistance, which is not necessarily free but should be ready available.  We can fight poverty if we are serous.  We can fight poverty, if we actually as hon. Ntimba said, we can recover the money, which is being embezzled.  Everyday money is being embezzled but nobody is being arrested.  

If you go around - I have said this before. If you go around why can we not implement the Leadership Code and we all declare our property now, and we see how it increases?  Because the increase of property is a function of income. So you either pay tax on that income or you actually declare where you got it.  I think we can fight poverty, poverty is killing people in the villages, people are dying because they cannot buy medicine, medicine is not available because districts cannot pay for it and -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, please finish up your point.

MR MANZI:  Mr Chairman, I think, fight poverty if we would come for the serious we can fight poverty if Government cooperates with the Back Benchers and gives us information and actually helps our people, because the fact -(Interruption)

MR ADYEBO:  Point of information. Mr Chairman and my Colleagues, may I ask hon. Manzi Tumubweine, to read his copy of this Budget - information that the project he is talking about is well catered for?  For example, last year I went to Kabale myself; I went and visited the borders, and I inspected how much destruction was caused by the Rwandan war.  We designed a project, which project is catered for here in this Budget, amounting to what he is talking about. I would also urge you that if you are hon. Members of a National Legislature where you are sitting, please get some of these information by yourself rather than every time the Prime Minister.  I am even surprised that you do not know what is happening in the Budget! This now shows how serious we are.  It is good to blame Government, but I am telling you this is how we are doing things. I will give you homework to go and look into your copies  -(Laughter)- and to be brief -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Rt. hon. Prime Minister, please inform the Members.

MR ADYEBO:  I will inform you, therefore, as follows; the matter he is raising is in your copy, I believe you have the copies of the - it is on page 112.  The topic, in fact, the project’s name is Micro-Projects, Small Scale, this is meant for Kabale, and you can as well read it as Project Code MS06D-125/OTHR/94 Micro-Project Rwanda Border Rehabilitation Programme.  The value is about the figure he mentioned 1,000,000,000. In fact it is  -(Interruption)

MR MANZI:  I thank the hon. Rt. Prime Minister for the information.  One; it is that, the amount he was talking about is much higher than that, and two; that I hope this money will be released.  I thank you very much for my contribution.

ADJOURNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I now adjourn the House to tomorrow at 2.30 p.m. 

(The Assembly rose at 5.40 p.m. and adjourned till Wednesday, 27 July 1994 at 2.30 p.m.)
  
