



Wednesday, 29 July 2020

Parliament met at 3.32 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I do apologise for the late start. We were undertaking serious consultations with Members on different issues that are coming before the House. That is why I took much longer. However, I am sure that we shall catch up, as we normally do. 

There are just three issues of national concern. Let us have hon. Abott Ouma and you have two minutes. 

3.34
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Madam Speaker, I have been informed that the matter that I wanted to bring before the House is being handled. I request that it is stayed so that after it has been handled, I can bring a report which is exhaustive. Thank you. 

3.35
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance. My district, Amuru and over 40 other districts are still under lockdown. Unfortunately, the institutions of higher learning, including universities, are going ahead to do the selection for those who are supposed to join universities. 

Over the weekend, I was in the constituency and about seven students approached me. They did not even know that admissions were going on and they had not applied to any university and even up to now, they cannot come to apply to the universities. They do not even have internet where they live. I think this is not only in Amuru but also in other districts in Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that the Ministry of Education and Sports comes and explains to us the fate of these students who have been locked down and are unable to apply to any university, while most of the institutions and universities are sending out lists of students already admitted. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. That is a very important issue for the students. Does the minister have anything to say? 

3.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my honourable colleague for the concern he has raised. Of course, you are all aware that for the admission of Government-sponsored students, we used the applications forms that were filled in before they completed their examinations and that has been done very successfully. 

The part that perhaps, is of concern, is the admissions for privately-sponsored students. In the ministry, we are saying that no student should be disadvantaged because of what is going on in the country. If there are such cases, my ministry will take up the matter and something will come out. 

I submit, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what we want is an assurance that those students, who are in the lockdown and cannot move, will be able to access admission forms. 

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, that is exactly what I am saying. We will make arrangements to enable those who have been locked up, to access application forms. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Muyanja, you have two minutes. 

3.38
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here over a concern of our brothers and sisters in the traffic police who are deployed on the roads at night but without any reflectors at all. One of the traffic officers was almost knocked yesterday because motorists could not even see him at their spot on the road. They stay there up to midnight without reflectors. 

These officers are suffering and their problem is not only about the lack of reflectors; when they finish work at night, they have to find their own means to go to their homes, which is also very risky for the traffic personnel. 

My prayer, Madam Speaker, is that the minister gets interested and solves the problems of our brothers and sisters in the traffic police. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Muyanja. Is it the Minister of Works and Transport or the Uganda Police Force that should provide the reflective jackets? No one knows? 

We direct the Minister of Internal Affairs to come to this House and explain to us the arrangement to provide reflective jackets to the traffic officers who work during the night. He should come back to us by Tuesday next week. 

THE SPEAKER: Let us have hon. Panadol Mugema. Hon. Masika should also move forward if he is here. 


3.41
MR PETER MUGEMA (NRM, Iganga Municipality, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My issue is a matter of national importance regarding a doctor who has been working with Kawempe Referral Hospital. Dr Balikuddembe is a senior gynaecologist, who contracted Hepatitis B while on duty, due to the little or inadequate personal protective equipment at Kawempe. When he went for further examination, he was diagnosed with cancer of the liver. 

The Ministry of Health has neglected its personnel. This doctor has been down for the last two years. The only help they gave him was Shs 1 million and yet the doctor uses $7,200 per month. He is now at his place in Seguku, seeking financial assistance from well-wishers. 

I am mindful that this is the same doctor we called at night when my then Woman member of Parliament, hon. Grace Hailat Kaudha, needed medical help. He came but by the time he reached the hospital, he could not save the life of hon. Kaudha. 

It is our time to maybe raise money – Madam Speaker, you together with colleagues, have a good heart. We know we are in a political period and there is also the COVID-19 pandemic but previously, you forced Parliament and we raised some good amount, which went to the Uganda Cancer Institute. We could as well look into the health status of this doctor. 

I told Dr Bukenya about this doctor and he said that he is even younger than him but that he was very good at his work except that due to the failure of the Ministry of Health to provide personal protective equipment, he contracted Hepatitis B. He also has a liver problem and he cannot be flown out of the country. He is, however, on anti-cancer treatment, which is expensive. So, I request that you compel the Ministry of Health to come to his rescue, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I do not see the Minister of Health here but the issue of the medical doctor is a serious one. Can we ask the Minister of Health to come and inform this House on what arrangements they have to support their medical staff who contract ailments while on duty? 

Secondly, concerning our contribution, honourable members, I do not think I forced anybody. I asked you and we agreed. So, similarly, if you would like us to help the doctor in question, it is up to the House. Does anybody want to speak to that issue? Should we leave you to think about it? Okay, let us hear from the Chairperson, Committee on Presidential Affairs. 

3.44
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS (Ms Jesca Ababiku): Madam Speaker, thank you for the opportunity. I am of the view that we wait to receive a response from the Ministry of Health because we have the Medical Board that supports people, where necessary, based on the nature of the illness. 

However, I feel we need to first internalise this because it is the first case. It may, however, create a precedent for more people who are serving this country and that will encourage them to always come with such issues. Therefore, I think we should first think about it as Parliament. Nonetheless, the ministry can give us their position. 

3.45
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, it may be difficult to make a resolution here. I would like to appeal, like we have always done for others – if hon. Mugema can pass a paper such that Members willingly give other than us passing a resolution here. If that can work, then it is fine or we can get a designated officer in your office, Madam Speaker, so that those willing and able can go to that officer to make their contributions other than us waiting; we do not know when the minister will come to make a statement. Thank you. 

3.46
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When we talk about saving life, it is a matter that is very close to my heart. I would like to seek your indulgence and that of my colleagues that in the interim, we make a contribution. I accordingly make a contribution of Shs 100,000 and I implore others to do as such, as we wait for the Government to come up with a policy to let us deal with this matter not in a haphazard manner, the way it is being handled now. I beg to submit. 

3.46
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have a Government. This is a medical doctor who has been working for the Government. We have systems and procedures in place. The Government should be able to help him; he has been down for two years. 

We do not want to create the impression that everyone who is sick will run to Parliament and ask members of Parliament to give them money for treatment or that for every problem that we have, we will run to Parliament and members of Parliament will pay for it. I think we need to put the Government to task. The Minister of Health is listening, even if she is not here. Let someone draw her attention to this matter. Let them look for this medical doctor and take the right action rather than saying that members of Parliament should pay for his treatment. 

We need a Government that is at hand and this is a simple matter where we need to see Government in action. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Health is required to come here – actually, today is Wednesday; we need some answers tomorrow. This is a question of human rights and the right to health. We need answers about what they are going to do about this medical doctor’s situation. After that, we shall take other measures. 

I do not see hon. Masika. Let us go to the next item. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) (NO.2) BILL, 2020

3.48
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to move that the Constitution (Amendment) (No. 2) Bill, 2020 be read for the first time. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Okay, it is seconded. 

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Constitution (Amendment) (No. 2) Bill, 2020 as gazetted on 24 July 2020. I also beg to lay on Table a letter from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to the Clerk of Parliament, objecting to grant the certificate of financial implications in respect of this Bill to the effect that it has financial implications. 

The law, as envisaged in Section 76 of the Public Finance Management Act, requires the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to issue a certificate of financial implications and not just to issue a letter stating a refusal. 

I am fortified by the ruling of the Deputy Speaker on 03 December 2019 and on 10 December 2019 where he guided and rightly so, in my opinion, that a letter by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development rejecting the issuance of a certificate of financial implications itself is not in compliance with section 76 of the Public Finance Management Act, which requires for the issuance of that certificate. 

Therefore, this Bill would be moved under section 76 (4) of the Public Finance Management Act, which is to the effect that where the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development refuses to issue a certificate of financial implications within 60 days from the date of the request, it would be presumed that the Bill has no financial implications. Therefore, I accordingly, move that the Bill be referred to the relevant committee for processing. I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Mwiru. As we have done in the past, we shall send the Bill to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. 

For the record, under the law, it is the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to issue the certificate of financial implications. I believe that the Secretary to the Treasury cannot assume the powers of the minister to write to the Clerk to say that they are not issuing a certificate of financial implications. 

And even if they are doing so, they should do so based on the grounds stated in the Public Finance Management Act on what constitutes the certificate of financial implications; what should be there. They cannot just write anything and say, “We do not like this and therefore, we are not issuing a certificate of financial implications.” That is not a reason and it is not valid. 

Therefore, the Bill is sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. I am satisfied that the minister has refused to issue the certificate and we shall, therefore, proceed with the consideration of the Constitutional (Amendment) No.2 Bill, 2020 in the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for perusal and report back. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NATIONAL COFFEE BILL, 2018

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had done major parts of the Bill and we had asked the stakeholders to meet. So, let us go to Committee Stage and hear from both stakeholders. Honourable members, as you may recall, there were three clauses that had not yet been concluded; clauses 28, 37, 1 and the title. Can we hear from the chairperson? 



Clause 28
MS OKORI-MOE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. On clause 28, the committee proposed that we amend sub-clause (2) by inserting immediately after the word “may” the words, “within 60 days after being notified of the decision of the Authority.” 

The justification is to provide a timeline for appeal. 

Madam Chairperson, the committee also proposed that we insert two new clauses after sub-clause (2) to read as follows: 
“The minister shall respond to the appeal within 30 days from the date of appeal.” 

The committee also proposed that we include another new clause to read, “The procedure for appeal shall be in accordance with the regulations prescribed by the minister under section 57 of this Act.” 

The justification is for clarity in the appeal process. 
I beg to move. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. De-registration of a farmer means a farmer will not be called a coffee farmer. They are giving procedures on how to deal with it but the way the chairperson has stated it is that it is going to be in the regulations. 

I would like to make it clear in this case and give practical examples. In Bugisu, we have fragmented pieces of land; I have a piece here and another there. On each of those pieces is coffee. Suppose I have got a problem on one farm, as tiny as it may be, what happens to the nine if you have de-registered me as a farmer? 

Secondly, the issue is for a farmer to sell coffee. If he does not have good coffee, nobody will buy it. It is a matter of quality. I thought that registration was to know the volume of the coffee we can produce. However, if you come to de-register me because I have a problem on one farm, what happens to the other farms? You are saying that the minister is going to prescribe regulations on de-registration. The minister who is in Entebbe can decide that anybody who has been de-registered should come to Entebbe. 

Madam Chairperson, I would like to propose that this clause of de-registration is very dangerous. It means that if you de-register me and I have nine plots of coffee remaining, the ‘big boys’ will come and say, since you are now de-registered, let us buy this from you so that we run it in our names. The purpose of the law is to help the poor farmers to survive. 

I would like to propose that de-registration should not apply to small farmers. It should apply, in the value chain, to the ‘big boys’ who are making the coffee process very bad. Therefore, I would like to move, having looked through this law again, that there is no need for de-registering a farmer because if a farmer does not produce coffee, he loses. 

I would like to share one practical example that sometimes in Bugisu, I can leave one farm to grow bushy and this is called fallowing. After two years, I come and cut it, prune it very well and do it again so that it flourishes. I beg to submit. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you proposing for the deletion of clause 28? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, Madam Chairperson. I have come with this bag because I would like to demonstrate to you the coffee but may be, after dealing with that. Coffee is a bean and the other day, when I was explaining, many Members did not understand. A green coffee bean is the one from where you get a ripe red berry, pulp it, put it in water for two days and ferment it, wash it -and that is why it is called washed - dry it on a mat and when it is dry, it will have a skin. Then take it to those who remove the skin so that it becomes a green bean. This green bean is the one we export or the one we roast to make the coffee. 

Madam Chairperson, they are talking about de-registering a farmer but they are not talking about the Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA). The only way to export coffee is by UCDA authorising you. UCDA has a habit of coming and saying, “I have rejected this coffee.” I have examples, which I will give later. 

When they have rejected the coffee, it means that Bugisu Cooperative Union or any farmer will not sell it. They will then go and tell a certain man somewhere that in Bugisu Cooperative Union or somewhere in Mbale, there is rejected coffee. The man comes and buys the coffee and when you ask him where he is taking it, he says that we are handling it with UCDA and this is where the problem starts. 

The law is talking about de-registering a farmer, rejecting his green beans but there is another one coming to buy and there is no appeal procedure for anybody to appeal if UCDA has rejected his or her coffee. Therefore, why are you on a farmer and leaving the big players like UCDA and others? 

Madam Chairperson, I would like to plead with the committee and the Members of this House that there is no need for us to de-register the farmer. It is the product he produces, which will de-register him or her. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, are you saying that if I have a bad garden, it is my business? I should stay there with my overgrown and bad coffee and no one should touch me? 

MR KAHIMA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to concur with my colleague, hon. Nandala-Mafabi that the purpose of registering a coffee farmer is to have the inventory of coffee farmers in the country. However, if you go ahead to say that you can de-register a coffee farmer, you are creating a scheme of controlling farmers to sell their coffee. 

It is not necessary for a farmer to be de-registered. In any case, if a farmer fails to take care of his coffee plantation, he is the one to lose and the onus should be on the Uganda Coffee Development Authority to always mobilise and encourage farmers to take care of those gardens so that we increase our exportation. 

However, if we make a law to de-register farmers then we are giving leeway for the officials and extension workers of the Uganda Coffee Development Authority to take advantage of the farmers and regulate the free sale of their coffee. Therefore, I would like to appeal to Members that the clause on de-registration of farmers is not necessary in this law. I beg to submit. 

MS WEKOMBA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I support hon. Nandala-Mafabi on de-registration of farmers. Growing coffee is basically someone’s will on his garden. If I plant my coffee, then - this time the Bill has come and they have asked us to register them, which is okay. Yes, we are registering farmers for perhaps a better output for them and the country as well. 

Then, tomorrow - as we have made this Bill - Government is going to take time to implement it, perhaps even give the farmers the fertilisers, the pesticides and the seedlings. Then tomorrow, because someone’s garden is not doing well – maybe the diseases and pests affected it – then, we shall wake up and say, we are going to deregister you and yet the onus of bringing this Bill is to see that we empower these farmers so that they can have a good output in their gardens. 

This will also be economic enslavement of these people because I will wake up tomorrow and decide to change my business, when I can no longer grow coffee. For example, if may decide to grow beans or cabbage but you have told me that you will deregister me. Madam Chairperson, deregistration of farmers is really unfair. Thank you. 

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to support the proposal as put forward by hon. Nandala-Mafabi. The very gist of business, honourable members, is the ability of someone to take their risk. Coffee growing, just like any other businesses, is a risk undertaken by a person. 

Registration, if I may understand, for the purposes of this Bill, is to try and mobilise for betterment and coming together to create markets for these people. Therefore, if you tell someone that you will deregister them, then it kills the very notion of entrepreneurship; that a person wakes up in the morning and comes up with the idea of growing coffee, cotton or even rearing animals. 

Therefore, you do not tell me that you will register me to do a certain business for the purpose – even in company law, business deregistration is upon request by the individual who started the business. To the extent that even when you register in URSB, it is upon you to say that now I cannot continue to do this business; either I am changing name or closing the company. 

To even the smaller businesses, if someone takes the responsibility to start it and then Government takes the interest to register them for the purposes - as outlined in the functions of the authority to promote them, give them input and create markets for them - then deregistration is something they should not think of because the issue here is primarily encouragement. 

Therefore, I would like to request the chairperson and the minister in charge to drop this and clearly follow the guidance of hon. Nandala-Mafabi. Thank you, Madam Chairperson. 

MS ALUM: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I rise to support the position of the committee that we do not drop the issue of deregistration. Deregistration is very important as far as this Bill is concerned. The first question that I would like to put forward is that we have come with this Bill to enable us regulate, promote and also enable us compete at the international level. 

Madam Chairperson, coffee – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, take your seat. You are a member of this committee.

MS ALUM: Can’t I give information, Madam Chairperson? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, you fraudulently came to the Floor. 

MAJ. GEN. KUTESA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to inform hon. Nandala-Mafabi that this is the year 2020 and the method of work has changed. When Government comes and distributes seven million or 10 million trees using Government money and you do not know where it goes, how do you plan for that? Who receives those seedlings and where are they? Why do you hate registration? 

In my area, I have got a database of 1,200 farmers and they are all registered. Their coffee is all in one database. Does anybody have the number of the farmers we have in Uganda? When you meet a Ugandan, he will tell you that he is either a farmer or a trader. Ask them what they are trading in and where they are farming. Why do they hate being registered and known? Thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we are not talking about registration but deregistration. Members agreed on registration. 

MAJ. GEN. KUTESA: What I want is to be registered; register yourselves. Once you are supposed to be a farmer and you are growing coffee, there should be a law of how they make you cut off those trees; whether it is registration or not. Science itself knows how to do it. We should deregister if – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I had no intention of raising a point of order to Gen. Pecos Kutesa because he is a highly respected Government and army officer. However, for registration, we have all agreed. We are now talking about having registered someone; why do you deregister them yet they have done it for purposes of earning income? 

The Member is now coming to talk about registration, which we concluded. Is Gen. Kutesa in order to confuse the House with registration which we have completed? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we already agreed, under clause 27, to registration. We are dealing with clause 28. 

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I would like to support my senior colleague, hon. Nandala-Mafabi whom I also respect as a senior coffee farmer. 

Coffee can be grown for different purposes. I see a very wrong assumption here that coffee can only be grown for export and everything to do with its quality must be in line with what is needed outside Uganda. I am a traditional coffee farmer and I grow part of the coffee for domestic use. You cannot deregister me because of what we call poor quality, when traditionally, it is the best quality for me. 

Madam Chairperson and Members, whatever purpose one grows coffee for, he or she can be a coffee farmer. The worry for poor quality can be addressed in the extended value chain. For those who want to export, Government can control quality through, for example, regulating exporters. It is the Government that issues licenses for exporters of coffee and those actually get the licenses specifically to do coffee export, not for the other purpose I mentioned early. 

Therefore, you cannot suffocate this traditional farmer who is growing coffee for other purposes and actually make the farmer seem like he is not in farming because he is not in line with what you want. 

However, the Government that has licenses can revoke them - (Interruption) 

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Chairperson, I think my honourable colleague is confusing these issues. The issue of licensing is a matter that is off farm - when someone is licensed for instance, to process, to roast and to export. 

However, issues of registration are on farm. We are registering a farmer on the farm. Madam Chairperson, is my colleague in order to confuse these two aspects? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, license is different from registration. 

MR KASIBANTE: Madam Chairperson, I would like to clarify because the worry of having somebody producing poor quality coffee is when it goes outside Uganda for export and it would be actually suffocating our market outside – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we are dealing with registration and de-registration, please. 

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you, for the guidance. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I want to submit in support of the proposal by hon. Nandala-Mafabi that we delete clause 28. When you make it mandatory to de-register a farmer, it is as if you had given him a license to be on his garden which is not the case. 

The second point I want to submit, Madam Chairperson, is that they enumerate a number of a reasons why a farmer should be de-registered. However, they forget that, for instance, they are saying that when he ignores the extension officers. In many instances, some extension officers have even given wrong advice to our farmers. They have not catered for this. 

In my constituency, for instance, I have held 339 meetings. I have met 17 extension workers and I asked them one question; you are asking people to plant coffee but do you tell them how much water it consumes in a week? Can you tell us how many litres this tree takes in one week? Out of the 17, none of them - If the coffee garden becomes bad because the extension officer has not even given reasonable advice, whose fault is that for you to go ahead and de-register a farmer? 

Madam Chairperson, the third point is that sometimes the seeds that are given to these farmers are carried have too much fertilizers on them. When they are supplied to these farmers, they are planted in the ordinary soil and in the process, they start wilting. You come to a farmer’s garden of around one year wilting and you say he is doing badly, so he should be de-registered. Really, a man who is even struggling; I think this would be asking too much from the ordinary farmer. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now, honourable minister, I hope you have understood the principle of the objection that what you are setting is a precedent where somebody can come to my banana garden and say this garden is not good, I am de-registering you. Then you go where they are keeping cattle and say these animals are poor, I am de-registering you. This is what is happening. Honourable minister, are you still insisting that you want to de-register a coffee farmer? 

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Chairperson, I still insist and I want to give my reasons for this House to appreciate. First, the practice that we are introducing here is a practice that our colleagues and players in the game of coffee like Brazil, Vietnam, Tanzania and Kenya are doing. Madam Chairperson, I cannot come on the floor of Parliament to tell a lie. 

Secondly, Madam Chairperson, if we do not de-register when this House has agreed for registration, then it defeats the purpose. When you leave a garden to go wild like hon. Nandala Mafabi has said, you are leaving the garden to have a concentration of pests and diseases - antestia bug, twig borer and coffee bean borer- (Interruption) 

MR NSEREKO: Honourable minister, with due respect, I am only posing a simple question for you. You might be operating a garage. Assuming you left the garage - it did not have seven cars for service and it would have required a minimum of four, if you had registered a company with the Uganda Registration Services Bureau, do they de-register you? 

The answer is very simple. Let de-registration be automatic. The moment you cannot supply the market with coffee, you have deregistered yourself by act. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Honourable minister, are you aware that most of our farmers struggle on their own? They have been struggling for years. I always tell my people in Mitooma that I was able to study because my father was a coffee farmer. Now, unless Government is able to give quality seedlings and inputs and make sure - do you know that we have been crying for extension workers and they are never there to assist our farmers in giving them that basic knowledge as to how they should grow their coffee? 

Therefore, when you come with your demands and say that unless they give you a certain quality of coffee you are going to de-register them, are you being realistic? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, I want to know whether as Government you are going to provide seeds to every farmer of coffee and therefore, because you have given the seeds, you are also controlling how they manage the farm. These are private farms and not Government farms. I want some clarification. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order. Honourable members, take your seats. 

BRIG. GEN. BYEKWASO: Madam Chairperson, we want to agree with the minister on what happens in other countries. However, we also want to inform the minister that this is a country that is full of fake products like pesticides where you go and buy, treat your garden and the diseases do not respond to the kind of pesticides that are on the market. 

Therefore, I would like to request the honourable minister that before he deregisters, he first puts his Ministry and his officials in order so that they do the right thing. We want the right pesticides on the market, we want extension workers in place and we want the Government to do its work such that you do not victimize the farmers yet you have not helped them. 

Madam Chairperson, we are talking about a perennial crop, a crop that you can give farmers - if you have found out that perhaps their garden is not okay - room to improve but not to deny them their rights to do their economic production.

The question of deregistration without the Government first putting itself in order to make sure things on the market are correct, available and accessible, Madam Chairperson, should not be allowed. I beg to submit.

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, this idea is good for a country where morality is the order of the day; where something bad is bad and where when something good is good. 

However, in our case, the farmers are the ones who are struggling to buy land without support from Government. When they are looking for seedlings, there is no Government. When they want services, there is no Government. Now, when they are at some level, you begin saying they must be deregistered. 

Madam Chairperson, we should not entertain deregistration of farmers in this current environment unless otherwise. For example, there are very many challenges that the authority is experiencing. Anyhow, I agree with the position that we delete, 100 per cent, clause 28 such that we proceed from there. I thank you very much.

MR ANGURA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Government has moved in to distribute coffee seedlings even to areas where coffee has not been grown before like in Tororo. Unfortunately, whenever the distributed coffee seedlings are planted, they all dry up because they are not supported with extension workers to educate the farmers on how to manage this new crop. 

Before we go to deregistration, let the Government put its house in order. It is incumbent upon the farmers to emulate this coffee growing, see it as a venture and be able to earn a living from it. Otherwise, if we start scaring them with deregistration before they even settle to understand what coffee looks like, we will lose the point. Let us encourage our people to work hard and ensure that they have farms that are competitive enough; farms that can breed coffee for export to challenge the one on the international markets. That comes only with the support from the ministry to ensure farmers get all the necessary inputs. The market will determine which coffee to be bought. If yours is not good, it will be abandoned. If yours is good, you will have the market and the number of bags will continue to grow. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like to appeal to the minister to understand that this is a private-sector activity. The farm is for an individual, the crops are for an individual and the labour is for the individual. Therefore, how does the Government come in to regulate the – Minister, why don’t you leave the issue of deregistration?

If my coffee is bad, the market will chase me and nobody will buy my coffee. Are you still insisting?

MR SSENYONGA: Madam Chairperson, what the minister is telling us about Brazil – I have been doing some Google search here and got to realise that a small farmer in Brazil has 150 hectares. Our farmers here don’t have such big land. The so called coffee farmers here have small gardens and you are referring us to Brazil, yet here the farmers have two, five or 10 hectares? I thank you.

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Chairperson, I beg that we redraft that clause. I am proposing to redraft it to read thus: “Notwithstanding the provision of subsection (1), the authority may direct that a farmer whose coffee garden has been neglected, the trees be uprooted and destroyed.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 28 be deleted.

Question put and agreed to.

(Clause 28, deleted.)

Clause 37
MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes that we insert two new clauses to read as follows: “(1) The minister shall respond to the appeal within 30 days from the date of appeal. (2) The procedure for appeal shall be in accordance with the regulations prescribed by the minister under Section 57 of this Act.”

The justification is for clarity in the appeal process. I beg to move.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the appeal they are talking about in clause 37 is about powers to issue licences. It is coming from clause 35(4) where the headnote says, “Power to issue licences.” It reads thus: “Where the authority refuses to give a license to an applicant, the applicant shall be informed in writing stating the reason for the refusal.” This deals with the procedure.

A licence is to allow me to trade. If, for example, UCDA refuses to give me a licence to sell my coffee - for anyone to export coffee out of Uganda, they must be given clearance by UCDA. Now, after removing the shells, the maximum number of days to allow coffee to go when it is packed, is 90 days. If you are telling me that you will take 60 days and by the time you look at my appeal that UCDA has rejected me to export my coffee, the quality of the coffee would have gone down. 

Now what happens if UCDA staff comes and says that my coffee is not suitable for export and they reject it? Where do I go next, if it is rejected because that means nobody should buy it? Why should other people now buy it if it is rejected? I need to understand that before I can move on.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister, this is your Bill. Can you give us the explanation? 

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, this proposal by the committee is good because it is not related, in any way, to clause 28. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, the appeal arises from clause 35. It is not about de-registration but about denial for a license, arising from the issue of licenses.

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, I think the issue of licenses has no problem. As a committee, we think it is important for the licenses to be issued because how are we going to operate? I now understand why Uganda used to be ahead of Vietnam. Vietnam must have overtaken us just because when we propose certain things for the betterment of our country, we oppose them. Why are we the Pearl of Africa? If the rest can do it, why not Uganda?

We did benchmarking in order to come up with some of these amendments. It is not something we just thought about in the committee room. We have taken one year from April, 2019 to process this Bill. We had to be patient and capture all the views. Madam Chairperson, I see no problem with this.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Why I am raising this is because I have come with practical experience and I would like to share it. The only person who allows you to export coffee is Uganda Coffee Development Authority. I will give an example. Last week, UCDA refused coffee of Bugisu Cooperative Union. We have AA, A, PB and C. They said that they refused A because it does not pass the test. They rejected it yet we had a buyer in Taiwan who wanted it as A. He had even taken a sample. 

There is a company in Kampala, which came and UCDA authorised that, that A is good. Locally they agreed but on export, they rejected the same quality. Why am I bringing this? Madam Chairperson, coffee is the biggest traded commodity after oil. I would like to plead with members. You are aware that Uganda was built on coffee. This law should be made in such a way that we use this gold called black gold to develop our country. We are not against the law but we must make sure that the regulators are doing the right thing. 

I would like to make a proposal – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you on 35(4)?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes. One, that UCDA staff – Under 34, they said, “Where the authority refuses to issue a license to an applicant, the applicant shall be informed in writing stating the reason for the refusal.” This is where I am coming in. If you have rejected and given reasons then that coffee should not leave those premises. You have rejected it, maybe on quality, maybe you do not want it to leave the country so nobody should do it. At an appropriate time, Madam Chairperson, I will share with you information on why UCDA does it. 

I would like to move that, “Any person aggrieved by the decision of the authority under sub-section (5) shall, within five days –“ the reason I am giving it is because the quality of coffee when it is green deteriorates very fast – “appeal to the minister and within 14 days, the minister shall have a response.” 

The justification is to protect UCDA staff but also to protect the exporters, the roasters and all the others at a particular time.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I have not quite understood the rationale, hon. Nandala-Mafabi because this is an appeal against refusal of a license. They have not given you the roaster’s license, processors, grading, etc. That is what they have refused. I have not understood the rationale. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, you are right. For every export, you must have authority to export. If I am going to export a container of coffee, UCDA must come and give a certificate, which is the authority to export. It is common that they can reject that. 

Madam Chairperson, I would like to seek your indulgence. Where can we put it so that we deal with where you are getting permission to export a particular container? Every container, even if it is 10 kilogrammes, must have a certificate to export. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you. Madam Chairperson, it seems to me that we have failed to identify matters that should be in the law and matters that should be handled by regulations. I think that issues like de-registration would be dealt with by regulations. Even issues like number of days - Why would you want to mention number of days in a law? 

I do not have specific reference to specific laws but I think we need to separate matters that should be in the law from matters that should be dealt with by regulations. I beg to submit.

MR NSEREKO: Madam Chairperson, the practice during business is normally determined by the free forces of demand and supply. Let us look at the export frontier. The bulk of the money Ugandans earn through coffee is through export.

In the nation in which we are, assuming I was to export coffee and I have a purchase order from someone and I send them the sample and in their country my sample passes the test - I am talking about licensing. I send my sample, the response from that company in Morocco or Tunisia says, “We pass your sample and we agree on the price”. When my coffee sample passes the test of the buyer, there should be no reason at all as to why the UCDA withholds my export permit. 

Therefore, over legislation of trade in itself hampers trade. We are looking at promotion of export for the benefit of our people. We have witnessed this before on the issuance of the phytosanitary certificates on exportation of agricultural products. 

Madam Chairperson, the reality is, there is a formation of cartels when you are competing. If, let us say, you are exporting matooke or beans or whatever it is, when there is a big player, they frustrate the process of acquisition of the phytosanitary certificate. What happens is that the entire bulk of export is left to them. Let us not give a loophole or give chance to a possibility where there is withholding the issue of issuance of a permit. 

Madam Chairperson, when you send it to 45 days and someone has given you a purchase order, they will definitely change to another country where this would be expedited. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, you are really complicating issues. I imagine this is an annual license, which you probably pay for in January to run until the end of the year. 

MR NSEREKO: No, Madam Chairperson. At every export, they give you a permit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let me find out from the mover. Is it true that for every export you issue a license? I thought this meant that if you are an exporter, I give you a licence in January until the end of the year. That is how I understand it. You explain to me if it is not.

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Chairperson, every exporter is given permission for a given period of time. However, for purposes of certification, every batch that is exported is looked at and it must be certified to indicate that whatever is being exported in this batch meets the standards put in place by the country and the international organisation that deals with coffee. This is an issue that colleagues must appreciate. Every batch must be inspected and certified and permission given for export.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Therefore, this is different from the annual licence.

MR NSEREKO: It is different.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Chairperson, the purpose of this Bill was to raise the standard of our coffee so that we fetch a premium for our farmers. All the way, this has been a very expensive Bill. Members working on it had to consult widely in the region. Most of the clauses here are really borrowed from our competitors in the region. I can see members trying to water it down and bringing it to zero. I urge members to really have the spirit on which the Bill was made.

Right now, we are banned from the European market because of aflatoxins and our horticultural items are not going because of quality. 

Madam Chairperson, the purpose of this Bill, really, is to help our farmers and to help Uganda to get value for money and to compete in the region. I urge members to be rational when approaching some of these clauses. For instance, deregistration – we have done it but we have actually watered down the whole essence – (Interjection) – Yes. This is because right now in the world market, we are looking at every commodity from farm to fork. We are failing to export our dairy products to Europe because of these standards – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, in 1976 when the coffee prices went down during Amin’s time, many farmers left their coffee for a short time while some maintained it. In the process, when the market reappeared, farmers went back automatically and cleaned up their gardens and started producing coffee, which was exported. The prices determined deregistration for about three years. 

A member is saying that we have deleted the clause wrongly when we know – I am growing coffee for money or for drinking. Is the member in order to come and say we have done wrong when we know we have done right and we know this will benefit our small farmers as opposed to those who keep cows? Is he in order?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I just want the House to understand that the proposal which we deleted was not sitting well with the private sector because these are private gardens, private homes and private labour and there is no input from the Government. How do you - No, you leave me. My coffee will be poor and nobody will buy it.

Honourable members, on clause 37, supposing we just leave there a new sub-clause that, “The procedure for appeal shall be in accordance with the regulations” and we do not deal with the one of the minister – “in 30 days” – is that okay?

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, I think that would be okay.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourable members, I put the question that a new sub-clause be introduced as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 37, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 1
MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes that, in clause 1, we substitute the title: “Regional coffee extension officer” with the title “Coffee extension officer”. We also propose to carry the same amendment in clauses 10(1) and (2), 11, 12 and anywhere it appears in the Bill. The justification is that this is a title which might change with the changes in staffing and it presents a broader option.

Madam Chairperson, the committee also proposes that we introduce a new word to define “seed” as follows: “’Seed’ means a propagative material, plant and parts of plant intended for the propagation and multiplication of a variety.” The justification is that the word “seed” has been used several times in the Bill and this same definition is used in the Seeds and Plants Act, 2006.

Madam Chairperson, the committee also proposes that we insert new words “agronomic practices” to mean “actions in crop management system undertaken by the farmer to improve plant health through enhancing soil quality, water retention and uptake and protecting the environment leading to good crop productivity.” The justification is that this is for clarity.

Madam Chairperson, the committee also proposes that we insert new words “adulterated coffee” which means “mixing of different types of coffee or mixing coffee with non-coffee material or mixing immature cherry with mature red-ripe cherry. This is for clarity. I beg to move.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to seek your indulgence. Do we move the amendments together or we deal with this one first?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are they related to clause 1?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You present them.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, there is the definition of a farmer in the Bill and it says, “’A coffee farmer’ means a person who grows coffee for commercial purposes”. 

Madam Chairperson, this is very dangerous. A farmer is a farmer. A coffee farmer is a coffee farmer. I do not know why the minister wants to put “commercial”. I would like to move an amendment that “’A coffee farmer’ means a person who grows coffee”. The justification is that he has grown coffee, whether for drinking, drugs or whatever.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you want to remove the word “commercial”? 
Is there any objection? 

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, this Bill is intended to regulate farmers who are growing coffee for commercial purposes. It is not meant for a farmer who grows just ten trees. 

Madam Chairperson, this definition is taken from the glossary of terms used by the International Coffee Organisation. When you look at these terms, coffee producing countries are defined as countries which produce coffee in commercially significant quantities and which are net exporters of coffee. Whereas a producing member is defined as a member country, which grows coffee in commercially significant quantities. 

Even when you do it for domestic consumption, it is still considered commercial because you do not grow it just for consumption within your home. You may grow coffee to bulk it with another farmer for sale. So, I feel we should retain the position of the committee. I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, I just want to – If the inspector comes, would he ask me, “Is this coffee for commercial or domestic consumption?” (Laughter) 

I heard the chairperson of the committee talking about a member country which grows coffee in commercially significant quantity. They are talking about a country which is a member, and not the individual farmer.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, maybe to help the chairperson of the committee, the countries are measured on the quantities they put on the world market. You can, however, have your coffee which is for domestic use. So, I do not see anything which will injure the chairperson of the committee if we say you are a coffee farmer the moment you have coffee trees. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: You know this requires that the country – when the farmers put together the quantities, they are in commercial numbers – 

MR NSEREKO: Madam Chairperson, for purposes of the classic definition of what a commercial farmer is to rest the case of the chairperson of the committee, commercial farming is the farming practiced on large scale operations, and where you specialise ordinarily on a single crop. 

In the case of our Ugandan farmers and the nature of our farmers, we do mixed farming where you have coffee as part of your plantation, and definitely, you grow what you can use domestically, and you sell the surplus to other players.

The rationale of what we want to do is to promote everyone to become a big commercial farmer, but what do we have now and what are we legislating for? 

Therefore, Madam Chairperson, I would like to also associate myself with the submission of hon. Nandala-Mafabi in the definition of a coffee farmer. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank hon. Nsereko for that submission because that is what was on my mind. We are making a law for Ugandans. We may have done benchmarking and studied laws of other countries, but we are making these laws for Ugandan farmers. Can we, make this law to be relevant to the Ugandan situation? 

As hon. Nsereko has said, we know the categories of our farmers. We know that we have not got to that stage where most of our farmers are farming commercially. This is where we would want to go. So, do we start with the law or something which is in place and then we work towards the law? I would like this law to be relevant to our farmers. 

It is true we would like to encourage as many of the farmers as possible to have commercial farms, but we must also take into accounts that we have small scale farmers that fit into the trade. Most of the coffee that we export is grown by small scale farmers. How is this law relevant to them? Thank you.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to clarify to the House that Ugandans are not very good consumers of coffee compared to Ethiopians. Much of our coffee is exported. So, it is important that we make standards for export. 

I also would like to remind members that aflatoxins do not only affect Europeans; they also affect Africans. So, poor quality is not only bad for Europeans or for bigger markets, but it is also bad for the local population. The essence of this Bill is to actually access lucrative markets and to get value for money for our farmers and Uganda as a whole. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, I would like to know whether the buyer in London will say, “I would like to know whether this coffee came from a one-acre farm or a ten-acre farm before I buy it.” (Laughter) It is because you are talking about –

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Chairperson, two kilogrammes of bad coffee from one acre of land is enough to disqualify a whole container of coffee. It is because they use equipment –

THE CHAIRPERSON: What equipment do they use? 

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Chairperson, the aspect of commercial farming should not be mistaken for size of land that is used to grow –

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, how do you quantify commercial farming? 

MR BAGIIRE: A commercial farmer is a farmer who grows a crop for selling purposes. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: How will you do that; when you go to his garden, will you say show me the crops for domestic and commercial use? 

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Chairperson, it is known that most of our farmers in Uganda grow their coffee for selling purposes. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I do not know why you are quarrelling about very simple things. A coffee farmer is a coffee farmer. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Chairperson, we should not be misled by the ministers. I would like to know whether they are in order when they come here and say farmers mainly grow coffee for export. We have been in this country seeing coffee being used traditionally to build friendship. They cut incisions and take – it is used in marriage ceremonies. Are the ministers in order to come here and mislead us? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, are we really going to insist on these small words? 

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, people may be growing coffee for traditional purposes the way hon. Tinkasiimire is saying but for purposes of this law, we need a farmer who grows coffee for sale and not for other purposes, for example for blood relations, traditional purposes, etcetera. For purposes of this law, we must focus on those who are going to sell. 

MR AKOL: Madam Chairperson, I have the experience of dealing with farmers in cooperative societies. I believe that what we are trying to do is to cater for all types of coffee farmers. We have smallholder farmers who sell to the cooperative societies and then those who grow coffee commercially on big farms.

Therefore, to make sure that we capture all, we either say that coffee farmers are those growing coffee or if you want to add the word “commercial”, then make sure you say, “smallholder farmers and commercial farmers”. That will serve the two purposes, other than leaving out those who are growing coffee on a small scale.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this farmer is not going to export; he is going to sell to somebody else who is going to export. Can we remove the word “commercial purposes”?

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the committee has no problem in conceding, but this means that all the regulations will affect a farmer who grows five trees of coffee or something like that. However, we concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, is the buyer going to say, “this coffee came from three trees, so I will not buy it”? Is UCDA going to say that this is a small garden so they will not buy the coffee?  First, let us delete the words, “for commercial purposes.” I put the question that the words, “for commercial purposes” be deleted?

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that clause 1 be amended as proposed by the chairperson of the committee.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, an amendment was moved to delete the regional coffee extension officer. If we leave it in the definitions -

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have adopted the chairperson’s proposals. So, wherever the words, “regional coffee extension officer” appear, they will be deleted by the drafts people.

The Title
THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the title do stand part of the Bill?
(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report thereto?

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE
5.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE)(Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The National Coffee Bill, 2018” and passed it with amendments in the following clauses: 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 23, 24 -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you had reported on that; just report on today’s amendments.

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The National Coffee Bill, 2018” and passed clauses 37 and 1, deleted clause 28, and passed the title without amendment. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE NATIONAL COFFEE BILL, 2018

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Bill be read for the third time - Honourable members, I know that you have clauses to recommit but I have to fulfil the requirements for the third reading, then you can move your recommittals. Who is going to move for recommittal? The minister and hon. Nandala-Mafabi gave notices.

5.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The National Coffee Bill, 2018” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: There are some areas for recommittal. Identify those areas and justify why you want them recommitted before we complete. Chairperson, are they yours or the minister’s?

5.08
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Ms Janet Okori-moe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move that the following clauses be recommitted: 14, 22, 26, 43, 54 and 57.

THE SPEAKER: Can you justify.

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Speaker, in clause 14, the committee proposes that we redraft subclause (3) to read as follows: “At least one-third of the members of the Board shall be women, one of whom shall be a representative from the value chain actors provided for under subsection (2) (g), (h), (i) and (j).” The justification is that this is for affirmative action and inclusiveness.

In clause 22, the committee proposes that we amend subclause (3) by substituting paragraph (e) with the following: “he or she is removed from office by the minister on the recommendation of the Board for misbehaviour, misconduct or incompetence.” The justification is: to adhere to the principle of separation of powers.

Madam Speaker, the committee proposes that the provision in clause 26 (2) (b) be maintained because evaluating the land is important for the farmer. It assists in determining the variety of the coffee to be grown by the farmer in a particular area. This provision will have effect on some of the provisions, which the House has already adopted including clauses 29(2), 38 and 39. 

Madam Speaker, in clause 43, the House had adopted the deletion of paragraphs (c), (d) and (e). However, the committee proposes that paragraphs (c) and (d) be maintained. 

The justification is that this is in line with Article 153 of the Constitution and section 29 of the Public Finance and Management Act. 

THE SPEAKER: Which paragraphs do you want to be retained under clause 43? 

MS OKORI-MOE: We would like paragraphs (c) and (d) maintained. We had earlier on deleted (c), (d) and (e) but the committee proposes that we maintain (c) and (d) as they are in line with Article 153 of the Constitution. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you can refer to the Constitution and also section 29 of the Public Finance and Management Act. 

Under clause 54, the House had adopted the amendment of subclause (1) on the penalty from “not exceeding forty-eight currency points” to “not exceeding 200 currency points.” The committee proposes that the House recommits subclause (1) and amends subclauses (2) and (3) consecutively. The clause should therefore be amended as follows: 

    a) In subclause (1), substitute the words, “a fine not exceeding forty-eight currency points” with “a fine not exceeding one hundred currency points”; and on the term of imprisonment, replace the words, “not exceeding two years” with the words, “not exceeding four years.” 

    b) In subclause (2), substitute the words, “a fine not exceeding one hundred and twenty currency points” with the words, “a fine not exceeding two hundred currency points”; and on the term of imprisonment, substitute “not exceeding five years” with “not exceeding eight years.”

    c) In subclause (3), substitute the words, “a fine not exceeding one hundred and forty-four currency points” with the words, “a fine not exceeding three hundred and sixty currency points”; and substitute “a term of imprisonment not exceeding five years” with “a term of imprisonment not exceeding 15 years.” 

The justification is: 
    1) To align the provision with the Law Revision (Fines and Other Financial Amounts in Criminal Matters) Act, 2008; and 

    2) For proper flow of the provision. 

Madam Speaker, the committee proposes that we amend clause 57 by inserting paragraph (x) to read as follows: “procedure for appeal including the right of a farmer to appeal through any other person delegated by the minister.” 

The justification is to provide for the procedure of appeal arising out of sections 26 and 37, which we have already passed. I beg to move, Madam Chairperson. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, concerning clause 43, I would like to draw your attention to the provisions of the Public Finance Management Act, especially section 30, which reads as follows: “All revenues or other monies raised or received for the purpose of the Government, shall be paid into and shall form part of the Consolidated Fund except the revenue specified in section 29(2)…” 

It has been our practise in the House that we no longer allow agencies to get donations and grants. Everything should be appropriated by the House. That is why we had rejected that in the first place. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, again to help the chairperson of the committee, for any grant or any loan to come into this country, it must come through the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. It will be illogical for us to cede coffee, which should be able to generate a lot of revenue. By the way, at appropriate time, I would like to show you that coffee should be treated the way we have treated the law on oil. 

Therefore, I do not think the minister or the chairperson is right to recommit that one. I plead with the minister that if you come to bring that, then we are going to recommit clause 44, which talks about the cess tax. 

Madam Speaker, at an appropriate time, allow me to also move my – 

THE SPEAKER: Can we have the comments first? My issue was on clause 43 because it is in breach of the law. Are there comments on clauses 14, 22, 26, 54 and 57? 

5.17
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County West, Kibaale): Madam Speaker, the recommittal that the chairperson of the committee has thought about in subclause (3) is trying to cure the mistake that was committed in subclause (1). I submit that you give me some time to move a recommittal in subclause (1) such that we do not need subclause (3), which she has submitted on. 

THE SPEAKER: Are you talking about subclause (1) of clause 22?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Yes. If it pleases you, I will go ahead and make the recommittal, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you can speak to your proposal.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to move for the recommittal of clause 22(1), which was amended in the House and adopted. It reads as follows: “There shall be a managing director of the Authority who shall be appointed by the Minister on the recommendation of the Board, on terms and conditions specified in the instrument…” 

My recommittal seeks to adopt the original position that the committee had proposed. 

THE SPEAKER: That is what the chairperson came back on; isn’t it? It was clause 22; so, you can speak when we are at the Committee Stage. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: She recommitted subclause (3) and not subclause (1). She did not recommit subclause (1), even when she read – Unless you say that we recommit the whole clause and then I submit on what I intend to on subclause (1). 

THE SPEAKER: You will submit on the clause when we are at Committee Stage. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I think you had some recommittals. Did you give notice? 

5.20
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Yes, I already submitted my recommittal and I have circulated it. 

Madam Speaker, I move to recommit clause 32. I would like to recommit it because I want to move that we add a subclause about staff to read as follows: “No staff of the Authority shall be involved in the value chain except as a farmer.” 

The justification is to avoid conflict of interest and insider trading. 

Madam Speaker, coffee is big business world over and it can be mismanaged by cartels. The justification I am bringing is that the moment you have the authority in place regulating, there is no way a member of staff should be a participant; how will he or she regulate himself or herself? 

I also want to allay the fears which were raised the other time. A Member said that the Attorney-General is the legal advisor for the Government but at the same time he has chambers. Yes, he has chambers - I am happy his deputy is here - but he cannot do Government business in his chambers. He can only do family law - for example if someone has fought with his wife - and maybe cases where I may have a trade dispute with my brother, hon. Nsereko. Therefore, you can have your chambers, but you cannot take on cases that hinge on where you work because of conflict of interest.
	
Madam Speaker, I will justify this one very well as we go ahead. Clause 35 is about issuing licences. The moment you start giving licences, then you should not leave out the nursery operator because now you are giving those who are in the value chain. I will move an additional amendment to say that we add a nursery operator as one of those to get a licence, except for those who grow coffee seedlings locally in their gardens and use them as planting material.

Madam Speaker, again in clause 35, I need these people to be registered. They are talking of giving these people licences, but for you to have a licence, you must have a tax identification number. The justification for requiring a tax identification number is that this is a big market and money laundering could be brought in. So, we need to avoid money laundering by monitoring the activities of the coffee sector. It will also help in identification and for tax purposes. This is big business, so everybody must be brought into the tax bracket.

Madam Speaker, since clause 37 has just been passed-

THE SPEAKER: Are you now moving to a new clause 37?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, clause 37 is about the appeals process and we have just passed it -

THE SPEAKER: You can submit when we are at committee stage. We are just asking you to justify why you are recommitting and then we shall go down and you give your reasons.

MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO: Madam Speaker, as our legal brain here, just look at clause 35. In clause 35 (1) (b), there is a coffee buyer’s licence and then there is a coffee exporter’s licence.

THE SPEAKER: Yes. The buyer may not be an exporter.

MR NSEREKO: I agree. Does that mean if I go to buy coffee from anyone, I must have a licence? Unless it is defined well -assuming I am entering Oasis Mall to buy coffee as a finished product, do I have to have a licence? I will be a consumer-

THE SPEAKER: No, I am sure they are dealing with what is coming from the farm, not the finished product. The finished product is in the market.

MR NSEREKO: Madam Speaker, when you read the justification from the introduction of this Bill, the Bill deals with the entire value chain up to consumption.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, about coffee buyers, I wanted to state that we may need a definition for this one. In the village, there are those with bicycles-

THE SPEAKER: That means you want to recommit clause 1. Okay, we will do it at committee stage. 

5.25
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Madam Speaker, we would like to recommit clause 37, particularly to provide for the time within which the minister should make a decision when an appeal is made to him or her and also to provide for an appeal against the minister’s decision to the High Court by way of judicial review. That is what we would want to include under clause 37.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, let us go to committee stage. 

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NATIONAL COFFEE BILL, 2018

Clause 14
MS OKORI-MOE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The committee proposes that we re-draft subclause (3) to read as follows: “At least one-third of the members of the Board shall be women, one of whom shall be a representative from the value chain actors provided for under subsection (2) (g), (h), (i) and (j). 

Justification: For affirmative action and for inclusiveness so that the women are not only restricted to representation as farmers but they can also be coffee roasters and processers. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that-

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I do not have a huge issue with what the chair is raising. However, since clause 14 has been opened up and since we have agreed that coffee is very big, I want to move an amendment to subclause (4). I propose that it shall not be the minister but Parliament to appoint members of the board - (Interjection) – Listen! I am going to explain.

Madam Chairperson, what we did with the oil law should also be dome for this law. We are saying this because coffee is taken highly. Remember, has been one of our leading foreign exchange earners and up to now it is still leading-

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, maybe what you mean is that the board shall be appointed with the approval of Parliament. However, when you say Parliament will appoint, that is problematic.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, with approval of Parliament, Madam Chairperson. Thank you for the English -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, do you have any objection? Okay, honourable members, I put the question that clause 14 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 22
MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes that we amend subclause (3) by substituting paragraph (e) with the following: “he or she is removed from office by the minister on the recommendation of the Board for misbehaviour, misconduct or incompetence.” The justification is: to adhere to the principle of separation of powers. I beg to move. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Chairperson, I moved for the recommittal of the clause because-

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think she was addressing subclause (3).

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Yes, she is addressing subclause (3) and I had submitted that she is trying to cure the mistake which was made in subclause (1). My proposal is that the subclause should read as follows: “There shall be a managing director of the Authority who shall be appointed by the Board on terms and conditions specified in the instrument of appointment”. If the board is appointing, they should also have the powers to disappoint. 

Madam Chairperson, the justification is that we want to promote strong institutions and not strong individuals. We have had cases where ministers have bulldozed boards and managing directors and messed up a sector. This law is not the first one to be made here. This is the third law concerning coffee. 

The first law was made in 1991 and it was proposing the same thing we had adopted in the House. However, since there was a problem during the time of Richard Kaijuka, they had to amend the same law in 1994 to provide that the board shall be responsible for appointing the managing director. 

It cannot be the minister to appoint the board and at the same time also appoint the managing director. It is totally wrong for corporate governance. People will ask, “What was happening in this Tenth Parliament; were they really thinking right?”

Madam Chairperson, we should not tolerate these ministers bulldozing us. In this sector, we already have issues with the National Animal Genetic Resources Centre (NAGRC). A minister went to one of their farms – and the centre is presided over by an executive director, who is the custodian of what is going on in the farm - and he picked cows because he is a minister and went to celebrate. These are cows that should be transforming the quality of cattle in this country, and we want to allow the same minister to have too much powers -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Just make your proposal after you receive this information.

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, we shall also end up wondering what happened to hon. Tinkasiimire when he went back to kneel before the chairman - (Laughter) 

I would like to ask him whether we are making this law for the minister who sold the cows. You are basing your argument on the minister who sold the cows but I thought that we are making this law for the country and not for an individual. The honourable minister who sold the cows is not going to die in that office. 

I think we should follow the provisions we have made in all the other laws, that the minister shall appoint the managing director upon the recommendation of the board. That is how we have been doing these things. I do not see any problem with that. If there is a problem with the individual, then we censure the minister.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: How many ministers have you censured in this place? I would not like to have an engagement with my honourable colleague – (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: There are three ministers who have been censured in the Parliament of Uganda.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: In the Parliament of Uganda - Oh, you are talking of history. We should be talking about what is pertaining now, and it is good corporate governance for us to build strong institutions not individuals. This law is just making the minister too powerful for nothing. You cannot appoint the board and the managing director.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, what I understand is that the board will advertise, interview and make a proposal to the minister to write an instrument. That is what I understand.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, in clause 14, we said that the managing director is an ex officio member and we passed that -

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, before we go there, let us deal with the issue of the appointment. 

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Yes, Madam Chairperson. The argument was around the fact that the appointment is by the minister. Other boards appoint managing directors; we can allow the coffee board to appoint a managing director.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to give some clarification and begin where my honourable colleague, Okupa, stopped. 

First of all, the members of this board are from stakeholders and they are not appointed by the minister. When these are submitted to the ministry, they are approved by Cabinet. The only job the minister does is to approve Cabinet’s decision.

Secondly, when we take responsibility as political heads here, will the chairman of the board appear here in the House to answer questions? No. Therefore, it must be the minister who appoints the managing director on recommendation of the board. This has been the standard practice world over.

Thirdly, we appropriate money to these agencies. Therefore, if you leave it to the private sector, then we may have anarchy in the country and no policy guidance in the sector. 

I implore Members to take the recommendations of the committee because this has been the practice with all other boards and coffee is no exception -  

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, honourable minister. I am reluctant to agree with the position of the minister but this time, I think he has put in place something. I know where hon. Tinkasiimire is coming from but there is what we call the reality in practice. The reality in practice is the political accountability and responsibility of a line ministry is undertaken in this House by the minister. 

The Chairperson’s wise guidance and counsel was that interviews and everything else are conducted by the board. Therefore, there is no way a minister can decline when a single name, if the board so wishes, is presented before him to perform the duty of signing an instrument and announcing to Parliament that the managing director that has been appointed is x, y or z.

In any case, that is the same reason Parliament, in wanting to build this strong institution and given the unique nature of coffee, has said that even when the minister appoints the board, they will present it to Parliament for approval. Therefore, there is inclusivity. 

We cannot legislate the responsibility of politicians outside their mandate because that is where we need to promote the corporate governance by appointing the rightful ministers to do their rightful duties. It does not matter which minister occupies the office now but it should be the minister to appoint because the minister also carries the mandate of the people to be in this august House.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Chairperson, I am aware that the minister is a political head and so, he is responsible for policy issues in that sector.

I also want to submit that the reason the board exists is mainly to examine policies related to the coffee sector. They are not technical people; they are helping the minister. 

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Chairperson, the responsibility of any board is to take care of the shareholders’ interests and policies. In this case, it is Government policy and the people of Uganda. 

Therefore, is he in order to mislead the House that the board will only be taking responsibility of their own issues? 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: I would like to put the record straight. I said the minister is the political head - (Interjections) - she cannot rule when she has no facts. (Laughter) And she has asked for facts. Those are the facts I am providing. 

I submitted to this House that as a political head, the minister superintends over all the policy issues of the ministry. In this circumstance, they have a board. A board is solely for – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: You are shouting in the microphone. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Much obliged, Madam Chairperson. The board is in charge of policy formulation while the Managing Director is in charge of policy implementation. They are working for the minister. I did not say they are doing their own things. Please, if you have medical problems with your ears – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, no. Honourable member –

MR TINKASIIMIRE: He cannot impute improper – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is un-parliamentary language. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Much obliged, Madam Chairperson. Allow me to submit that in 1991, this law was made, proposing what we are proposing. There was a scuffle between the minister then, hon. Richard Kaijuka and the Managing Director. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, no, Mr Kaijuka cannot come here to defend himself. Just say, “the minister then.” Do not go into names. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: These are facts, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I know but Mr Kaijuka cannot come here to defend himself. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Much obliged, Madam Chairperson. There was a crisis and they had to amend the same law in 1994. Now, we have no crisis. The sector is moving on well yet, you are saying we should return it to where we met a crisis. What are we trying to cure?

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is your proposal?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Chairperson, my proposal is that this should read thus: “There shall be a board who shall be responsible for appointing the Managing Director.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Will they only do that? Is that all they will do? They have other tasks.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: They have other functions. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you want the instrument to be signed by the Chairman of the Board?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Yes, it can be signed by the Chairman of the Board, no problem. 

MR KIBALYA: Madam Chairperson, we are making this law in good spirit and for the interest of this country. 

The challenge only comes in – and which is the reason you see some members of Parliament debating with emotions - when some ministers over-exercise their powers. 

It is very unfortunate that we are debating here, focusing on hon. Ssempijja, the current minister. Members are worried about the powers that hon. Ssempijja used to terminate the appointment of Mr Lagu the other side and that he could use the same powers to terminate the appointments for other managing directors in other institutions. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: On that one, I think the chairperson has provided a solution. She has said, “…he or she is removed from office by the minister on the recommendation of the Board.” It must go through the board. 

MR KIBALYA: Much obliged, Madam Chairperson. As long as there are soft nets to tame the powers of the minister and bring him to order to avoid over-exercising his powers, we have no problem.

MR ABALA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. We may not concentrate on talking about the current office bearers because this law is going to address matters of coffee in the entire country and not necessarily targeting so and so who will be there in future. 

Madam Chairperson, you gave a very proper managerial guidance to all of us in terms of how the Managing Director will be got and how their services will be terminated. What you said is the best option and I agree with it. My honourable colleague is just annoyed because of what is going on but what you said is the best. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 22 be amended as proposed by the chairperson. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 26
MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, in clause 26(2)(b), the committee proposes that the provision should be maintained because of the following reasons: one, evaluating the land is important for the farmer because it assists in determining the variety of the coffee to be grown by the farmer in a particular area; and two, this provision will have effect on some of the provisions, which the House has already adopted, including clauses 29 (2), 38 and 39. I beg to move.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, this country was zoned during the colonial times - where coffee would be grown, where cotton would be grown and other cash crops. Therefore, if one tries to grow coffee where it is not supposed to grow, it will die on its own or it will become a wild tree. 

This is a private sector. A farmer in Karamoja could decide - for example, in some places, they have got some good water. They tried to grow coffee and it is coming out. 

We are not sure if there will also be coffee grown in a dry area. You saw what happened with upland rice. Before, rice used to be grown in places with plenty of water but upland rice is now grown on dry soil. 

Therefore, for anyone to say that they have to first come and test the soil before I am allowed to grow coffee is a big mistake; it is very dangerous. I would plead with the chairperson of the committee to let the person grow their coffee and if it can grow, well and good; if it fails to yield, it happens. It should be up to the extension worker to come and tell the grower that they got a poor yield because the soil they are using is instead fit for growing groundnuts, not coffee. However, to say that you will come and test the soil on my piece of land before you allow me to grow coffee is very impossible.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank hon. Nandala-Mafabi for his submission. However, in addition to that, this is a process and a condition of registration. Once you put land evaluation, when even the Authority that we are demanding to do this evaluation cannot carry it out, we are making a very big mistake. It is a precondition for registration and that implies that the Authority will not be able to go to every farmer to evaluate their soil before these farmers are registered. 

This, Madam Chairperson, complicates matters of registration. The country is zoned and we know where coffee grows. Maybe, somebody is trying to promote some fake tests that they are planning to use on this but it is not a condition for growing coffee and it is not a condition that is necessary for our farmers.

You may remember that I submitted here that we have only two laboratories that can sufficiently test soils in this country. Therefore, asking a farmer from Kassanda to test their soil is a complicated matter.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like to know from the minister; how many soil experts do you have in the country before we go further?

MR AKOL: Madam Chairperson, the way everything is being written there is as if we have started growing coffee today. People have been growing coffee and we know where it is grows. If they are interested in testing the soils for purposes of areas that are not growing coffee, that would be another matter altogether. There is no reason to put the issue of testing the soils in the law. 

We know very well that the country lacks equipment and human resource. If the human resource is there, the equipment is not enough to move to all areas where coffee is grown to first test the soil. Some of the gardens are too small while others are too big. How are you going to test the small-holder farmers’ land and everything? This is not practical.

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, I have two issues to raise. You might be shocked that there are no agricultural officers in some districts. Another big problem is the issue of soil scientists. 

I would like the minister to tell the entire country the reason behind this. It seems to be an issue of wanting to starve the coffee farmers, who are now trying to survive. To say your soil must be tested - and that if your soil is not tested, you should not be registered makes things very complicated.

Secondly, the people who zoned this country – I am sure it was approved by Cabinet. I do not know why the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is now trying to say that what the Cabinet approved is wrong. I would like them to tell me because he is part of Cabinet but now, they are saying they must evaluate. That is an abuse to the people who took the decision to zone this country because they know which places are good for coffee growing, citrus, bananas, cattle rearing and other activities. 

For you to tell me that you must evaluate the soil becomes a problem. Tell me the reason you are taking us that far.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, are you still insisting on the amendment of clause 26?

MR KIBALYA: Madam Chairperson, I think we better delete this because even just having these people who come to evaluate our nursery beds is a challenge. Unless we want to create a loophole for some of these people to be corrupt. We do not need to take any more time on this. We just need to abandon it.

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, he was giving me information. The most important thing, as I conclude, is that we must delete it now.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We deleted it.

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We agree with the House that this clause be deleted.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Therefore, we leave it as it is; we already passed it. Is there any other clause?

Clause 32
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, have you seen that this one has an effect on clause 29? Clause 29(2) says-
“Application to operate a coffee nursery- 
(2) The Authority shall assess the soil type to determine the type and variety of coffee to be planted.” Have you seen this?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, coffee man.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, it has an effect on that because it is saying that for you to operate a nursery, you must have your soil tested. So, how do we deal with clause 29(2)? Is it a consequential amendment?

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Chairperson, I would like to respond to hon. Nandala-Mafabi on this one. First of all, on the issue of nurseries, the number of nursery operators is quite small. One of the issues raised by colleagues here is that it is very difficult to go and determine the types of soils of every farmer. However, it would be really bad to allow a nursery operator in Buganda, for instance, to operate a nursery for Arabica Coffee. This is where we are saying that, at least, for the nursery operators, let the Authority be allowed to assess the soils. 

There are some areas, where we do not grow coffee at all and they are zoned. If we do not put this in the law, somebody might go to an area where we do not grow coffee at all and he puts a nursery there. There will be nothing that would deter that person from operating a nursery. Therefore, the Authority should be allowed to take the samples of the soils, at least for a nursery operator. They are really very few. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I have an experience, which I would like to demonstrate to the minister. Coffee from Buganda can never grow in Bugisu. It is automatic that the altitude of Buganda would not allow it. 

If we go by this, we are now creating a cartel and this is how I can demonstrate it. Coffee grows in the garden and the one which grows in the garden is far better than that from the nursery operator. If I picked my seedlings from the garden and planted them, what will you do? Will you say, “You never tested the soil? Where did you get the seedlings?” 

Secondly, Madam Chairperson, we must be specific and sincere in this House. I would like to seek your indulgence. The main coffee nursery operators are people who are chief regulators in the coffee sector. This is very dangerous and because they are regulators, they will come and say, “Hon. Patrick Nsamba, you will not plant coffee because your soil is bad. Let hon. Nandala-Mafabi plant.” - because he knows what he is going to get something from hon. Nandala-Mafabi. This is very dangerous for our country. 

I would like to propose that clause 29 (2) should not be applicable. It should be removed.  (Interruption)

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, for yielding the Floor. I would like to implore our colleague, the honourable minister, that the more red tape and hindrances we put to the promotion of innovation and the basic foundation of what you want to promote to increase growth of coffee and etcetera, the more it would lead to destruction and disruption of the same business. When the process becomes rigorous, you will deter those who would like to join the coffee value chain including the operation of coffee nurseries. You would be killing the business.

The question the Chairperson has put to you is very simple; how many laboratories do you have to test soil samples? How many people will be operating nurseries? We implore you to allow the same business regulated on the soils and altitudes to regulate themselves at the level of soil sampling. You can give them licences but do not test the soil. If the coffee fails to germinate to seedling level when you do not give it the necessary conditions - Let us leave the matter of science to determine itself. 

The only thing you should do is licensing; we have licensed you and these are the measures we would like you to undertake. If you are in Buganda, please, make sure you do not come up with this because it will affect you. Education and persuasion will help.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, I am a nursery operator. I would like to thank UCDA because they encouraged me to start up a nursery to produce coffee seedlings for my farmers. However, on what we talked about in testing soils for potting, every season, we get soil from different places and heap it at the nursery bed. This, with fertilisers and other things. That is done every season.

We put money in the process of potting. You get the soils and pot them. It is at the level of potting that we want UCDA to come to tell you that the soil you used is not the right soil and yet, somebody will have spent money to pick the soil, mix and pot.

So, the reason we do this process is for the seedlings to have good soils. We want them to have good yields. Madam Chairperson, I urged, last time, that this is not a matter that requires us to put a law on. If the soil is bad, the coffee will not grow as expected. If the soil is good, coffee will do well. Every nursery operator wants to have good seedlings so that he can have a good market. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, you have seen – I think some of you, honourable colleagues, have planted flowers at your homes. When you are planting flowers in your compound, you go and pick manure to make sure the plant grows healthy. In this current state, would you first measure the manure I am putting before you allow me to be a nursery operator? 

Secondly, I would like to say that I have learnt from here the things I have been telling you – Hon. Patrick Nsamba said they even put fertilisers to make their seeds better. When you give a farmer a seedling, which has been grown with fertiliser and they plant it in a garden where there is no fertiliser, that will seedling will die. This is very dangerous for the community – (Interruption)

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, hon. Nandala-Mafabi is consistently trying to sell the idea that farmers should leave coffee fall down under the tree, wait for it to grow and that is what they should plant. He has insinuated that I have said that seedlings with fertilisers will not do well in the gardens. The process of potting is intended to make – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think we removed the word, “potting.”

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: The entire process does not need that. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi should pick up the idea. We cannot leave farmers to continue picking up plantlets from the coffee that has fallen. The process of making seedlings enables the farmers get better quality seedlings to plant. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I desire that you buy that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we have already passed the provision that allows those who are able to do nurseries to operate them. Let us not go back.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank you very much for that wise ruling. If hon. Patrick Nsamba can sell fertiliser and the seed that is growing with a fertiliser to me, as a farmer, without telling me that he has put fertiliser in the seed, then definitely, when the seedling goes to my soil, it will die. I have now confirmed that you are the one who has been supplying us seeds, which have been dying. I think that is wrong.

Madam Chairperson, I would like –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us move. I put the question that clause 29 (2) be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 29(2), as amended, agreed to.

Clause 32
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Clause 32 deals with the Authority. I would like to move an amendment for a clause there, which will be clause 32 (3) that says, “No staff of the Authority shall be involved in the value chain except as a farmer.”

The justification is to avoid conflict of interest, inside trading and cartel. I would like to demonstrate this with more information. Currently, UCDA demands for between Shs 200 billion to 300 billion for coffee seedlings. If you divided Shs 200 billion with Shs 200, that equals to one billion seedlings. 

Madam Chairperson, an acre, according to the Brazil’s standard takes 450 seedlings. In the case of Uganda – because the money we have spent in the coffee seedlings is above Shs 1 trillion for this period. Therefore, if we have really spent it on seedlings, even here, where we are sitting in Parliament, would be covered with seedlings.

Given that, the people who have been approving nurseries are UCDA staff because they have interest. Those who roast are UCDA staff. Madam speaker, the reason cafes are doing well is because they are managed by UCDA staff. One is here along Parliamentary Avenue opposite Farmers’ House, another one is at Oasis Mall and another at Shoprite - you know especially those running exports.

Madam Chairperson, to avoid this, we need these farmers to be only farmers and not be involved in the value chain.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What does the mover say?

MR KIBALYA: Madam Chairperson, my submission before the mover comes -
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: He is the mover of the Bill. Where is the minister? What do you say on that proposal?

MR KIBALYA: We wanted to put in something as the mover concludes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I want the mover of the Bill to respond to the proposal.

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. This is being very unfair to some actors of UCDA because somebody may have inherited a roaster from his father and he is a young man but he has been working with UCDA. Does he resign? There are laws in this country that govern issues related to conflict of interest.

Secondly, all the staffs that work in UCDA are professionals. Therefore, ethically they know what to do. If they do not know what to do or they deliberately go against their ethics, then the laws are in place to deal with them -(Interruption)

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, I hear the worries of hon. Nandala-Mafabi but if we pass this legislation and say that the staff are not supposed to participate in what they are doing, we will have to do the same with the Ministry of Education and Sports and say that all people in the ministry are not supposed to own schools. We should do that to every other department.

I don’t think that should not be the way to go. Let us deal with matters of conflict of interest because I can be a member of UCDA and own a Coffee hurler. What is wrong with that? In my savings, I do something for myself. I would like to believe that there is no reason for us to go that far.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What does the mover of the Bill say?

MR ABALA: As he comes, I have two issues. First, I would like clarification from him. He is talking about the actors of UCDA and I do not understand that because it is not defined in the Bill. Who are the actors of UCDA?

Secondly, I would like my colleague on the other side - my opinion is that we should not go too far. We have mentioned here and that can send a signal, which can be understood by those officials from the UCDA. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can’t we require them to declare their interests?

MR KIBALYA: Madam Chairperson, I would like us to respect some areas where people have a right to property and equal opportunities must be respected. We must not be seen practising discrimination only in the field of coffee because this is a lucrative business. As you have said, people must declare their interests so that we disclose those areas of conflict of interest.

Where we have the Attorney-General of Uganda running a chamber, we have ministers of Education and Sports running schools, Ministers of Security owning security organisations. In all fields, people are practicing. We can require somebody who owns his big plantation in Kamuli to surrender it simply because he has been appointed an inspector. We should not be seen to dictate that this can only be done in UCDA.

If somebody has a conflict of interest somewhere, let the laws that deal with such areas handle such people. We cannot discriminate people and stop people working at UCDA to enjoy what others are enjoying in agro-business in coffee.

MR NSEREKO: Madam Chairperson, I have a contrary view to hon. Kibalya’s. I am sorry because we do not normally disagree. We are making a special law for coffee because it is special. (Interjections) Yes. You can say no.

I will give you an example in oil and gas; by nature, the regulator – (Interruption)

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Coffee has existed here, for a long time and it is the cash crop of Uganda where every citizen of Uganda has a right to participate in it. Is it in order for hon. Nsereko to say that we are making a special law that caters for a special project called coffee; therefore, some people must not be seen participating in it, yet, coffee has existed even before hon. Nsereko and his father were born?

MR NSEREKO: Hon. Kibalya, I think I better conclude my point. I would like to persuade you to listen. Madam Chairperson, we were talking about cartels and by nature of the trade of coffee, gold, oil and others; you give them special treatment because of the following. I cannot be a coffee exporter and regulator at the same time.

The fact is that I issue licenses to my competitors and I can withdraw licenses to the same. That operates - ordinarily what you are saying, hon. Kibalya, with due respect - when these regulations we are putting forward are not present. The issue the Chairperson is saying in a win-win situation is that disclosure of your interest is very vital. However, you cannot go silent. 

For example, we are going to a clause that talks about licensing someone buying, someone exporting and someone operating a hurler and a nursery. Therefore, you cannot be a regulator of who operates a nursery and who buys on behalf of Government and you are the same person operating a nursery. In itself, that is a conflict of interest; whether you have inherited or not, you disclose that I am one of these people that are operating nurseries that are probably even supplying Government. Therefore, if you are going to license others, you cannot license others in a business where you are a competitor. 

Hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s issue does not conflict with yours. The issue is disclosing that you are operating this business. In the case of the Attorney-General, he does not regulate the trade of chambers. We have the Uganda Law society, which is in charge of that field.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can we paraphrase it so that what we are talking about is that any staff engaged in the value chain should disclose their interest? Can we do something like that instead of saying, “do not touch.”

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, that is very good. However, you are aware that- incidentally, even the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries - the moment you are appoint the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, you should have declared your interest in coffee because when you are a leader, you cannot be a regulator of UCDA when you are one of those whom they are supposed to regulate.

Madam Chairperson, please, look at it - I am a coffee exporter and I am the one who gives certificates to enable traders export. If want to make money, I will not give such a certificate to hon. Nsereko because I will need him to sell to me his coffee, which I will export.

I would like to implore colleagues not to treat coffee – somebody can build a school and children do not come to study in it. People come when they know the standard of the school. However, for coffee, officers could exploit the poor farmers using their office. 

As much as the Attorney-General is licensed and regulated by the Uganda Law Council, he cannot go to court to defend a case of a client who has sued, for example, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Please, do not compare things that cannot be comparable. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us adjourn for now so that we have a paraphrased provision but you should also give us time to check other laws; what we have done with the other laws in respect to this area. We can conclude it tomorrow. 

Honourable minister, please, move the motion for the House to resume. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME
6.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The National Coffee Bill, 2018” and passed clauses 14 and 22 and stood over clause 32. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall continue tomorrow. We will have the legal team look at how to redraft that provision without creating discrimination but establishing the parameters of accountability. 

House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 6.23 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 30 July 2020 at 2.00 p.m.)


