Thursday 27th July 2000.

Parliament met at 10.20 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Francis Ayume in the Chair)

(The House was called to order).

MOTION

“THE PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:
    (I) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE YEAR 1999/2000 AND,
    (II) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSAL FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE DISCAL YEAR 2000/2001”.

DR. NYEKO (Kilak County, Gulu): Mr. Speaker, I thank you.  I would like to say one or two things in respect to the motion on the Floor. Mr. Speaker, I would like to request the Minister of Finance that those of us who are Members of Parliament presenting the northern part of this country particularly Gulu and Kitgum, have a problem.  When it comes to micro finance to service the rural areas, we do not have any institution in place.  Those days our people used to depend on the Co-operative Bank. When the Co-operative Bank was closed our people had all their funds locked up for close to a year, because when the Rural Century Development Bank took over some of the assets of the Co-operative bank, those of us in Gulu and Kitgum who had no branches for the Century Development Bank had to be again locked out for a long time until the Bank of Uganda directed that the depositors can get their money through Uganda Commercial Bank somewhere in December.  

And now I hear there is this Micro Finance Project coming up. Some parts of this country already have a Micro Finance institution, I understand one is opening in Apac, one is in Lira.  We have not heard anything about Kitgum, Gulu, Arua and Nebi and I do not see how our people are going to benefit from this Micro Finance Institution where the Ministry of Finance is giving money for such rural loan activities.  

So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to request  the Ministry of Finance particularly to encourage the spread out of facilities for giving our small, small, money to rural people in nothern areas. I thought I should make this one very clear and Mr. Speaker, I thank you for giving me the Floor.

MR.BAKU (West Moyo County, Moyo):-  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I rise to support the motion.   Mr. Speaker, I would like to begin by supporting the over role objectives of the Budget for this year.  When we go through the Budget we find it has addressed a lot of the concerns of the people of Uganda, it address the area of good governance and security, it address the area of poverty eradication, it addresses the area of infrastructure development and it addresses areas and measures which are geared to improving the welfare of our people.  I think the broad objectives of the budget are very important and they are very closely related to our concerns as a country.  

However, I would like to make some specific comments on areas which are of serious concern to my constituency and also probably to other areas.  Mr. Speaker, when we look at the Budget Speech on page 3; this is a general observation which affects the whole country.  I see we have a very big problem. 

On page 3; under paragraph 5; we are informed that the total projected earnings from exports within this financial year is going to be 450 million US dollars which is less by 100 million US Dollars from the earnings of last financial year.  This reflects a reduction in our export earnings which I think is a very dangerous trend as we are going to be earning less and less as we advance to modernisation and improving the welfare of our people.  

The scenario  is made worse if you compare it with our projected imports which is addressed in paragraph 8;  it says, “imports increased only marginally from US Dollars 1.38 billion to US Dollars 1.39 billion”.  Now, when you look at the imports in relation to the exports, I think the margin is too big, we are talking of over 900 million US Dollars in deficits, that means we are consuming or importing much, much, more than what we are exporting.  It means we are consuming more than what we are producing if we relate what we export to imports, this is a very dangerous trend; I think it is unsustainable, I think the Minister of Finance and all other agents of Government should focus on addressing this critical issue.  

I would also like to make reference to page 7; paragraph 6; which talks about the introduction of long term bonds which should be introduced as a mechanism for encouraging alternative saving mechanisms.  This is welcome, I would be very happy to see that the Government introduces the long-term bonds which mature after two years, three years or five years.  But, my comment on this is that the bonds should be issued to address specific areas of concern in development.  

If we are targeting for example; road infrastructure we should draw up the bonds and address that specifically rather than addressing it as a means of generating money for the Ministry of Finance, so that we are able to see the impact of the bonds on the areas which are targeted to raise money for; and also I propose that these should be bonds which are raised to invest in development infrastructures where it can also help to create employment, it can also open up avenues for generating resources internally.  I think we focus too much on looking for money from outside the country when we have idle money in our banks here. We have a lot of money in the banks because most of our people are very poor, they do not have capital therefore, they lack access to financial all resources which are within the country.  

The government, which has got the credibility and capacity to pay if the money is properly used, does not focus on the resources which are available here.  We tend to look always for monies outside. I think it is high time we start looking for resources within our country so that where even we pay interest, we pay interest to our people rather than paying interest to external funders.

I would also like to appreciate the efforts which are being used to address the issue of poverty through the poverty action funds.  The poverty action fund is a very important fund which have been introduced within this financial year.  I had the benefit of participating in sensitisation workshop for Moyo district officials where the money which was earmarked for poverty action fund for water and sanitation was being discussed.  In my participation in that meeting, I notice that the people have been very excited about that fund because they are hoping that it is going to be a source of alleviation of their poverty and health concerns.  

Therefore my appeal in this area is that the Ministries should be vigilant in monitoring the use of the monies which have been sent to the districts.  I think our districts still require a lot of guidance and support in monitoring their activities.  Otherwise if we do not closely monitor, these funds may not realise the objectives for which they are being sent to the various parts of this country.  

I would also welcome the provisions under paragraph 60, on the issue of improving accountability in primary schools.  The Minister is proposing to institute awards so that primary schools which make improvements in accounting, in record keeping will be rewarded.  I think rewards are very good, but also where the headteachers and other accounting officers fail to perform and fail to satisfy the authorities, we must also use the law enforcement agencies so that people who mismanage or who abuse public funds do not go scot free while we aim at rewarding those who have done very well.  It is good to reward those who have done very well, but also it is good to penalise those who have not done what they should have done.

The next is paragraph 61.  I would like to commend the Ministry of Finance for proposing to establish scholarship schemes for secondary education.  The secondary education is becoming very expensive and this is not only limited to secondary education, it also affects tertiary institutions and University education.  I think this proposal has not gone far enough.  If we are aiming at addressing giving bursaries and scholarships only for secondary schools or secondary school students, this is not going to be enough.  

Since the introduction of cost-sharing in tertiary institutions, I have experienced a lot of difficulties because I have been requested so many times by so many students to support them in their education because the parents are not able to support the students in various tertiary institutions and especially the university.  Now, in my constituency there is a very high concern about how people are going to access the university.  For example this academic year we are expecting to send only 13 students from Moyo district and Adjumani district, two sister districts of Madi.  These are very few.  Now, the question is, there may be some who would qualify to come to the university, but they do not have the capacity, the parents do not have the capacity to pay the charges which are being imposed by the university.  What is going to be the fate of those kind of students?  

So, my appeal to the Ministry of Finance and to government in general is that the government should not limit itself in providing bursaries and scholarships to secondary schools, but should extend it to the students of tertiary institutions and universities; I also welcome the proposal that these students should be identified at the sub-county level.  The structures or institutions to identify the students to benefit from the bursary schemes or scholarships should be based in the sub-counties; and there should be quarters which should be given for the sub-counties so that there should be a minimum of students per sub-county to benefit from government scholarships and bursaries.  I think this is a very important proposal which should be implemented as soon as possible.

The next area of my concern is addressed in paragraph 66.  Here the Minister is proposing to consolidate payment of salaries and lunch allowance for medical staff.  This is a good proposal but where he proposes that the lunch allowance should be added to unconditional grants for districts, I think it is not a fair proposal.  I have experienced in Moyo district, Medical staff have not been paid for several months, actually some of them have not been paid for even up to five months and then the money which is disbursed under unconditional grants are being used for payment of all various activities of the district.  

So, if you put the money on lunch allowance on unconditional grant, it means you are giving a leeway for the district authorities to have the powers to allocate this money to other things; to make sure that the lunch allowance for medical officers or medical personnel is not diverted, I think the Minister should think of putting it as conditional grant specifically for payment of lunch allowance.  Otherwise, there is a risk that the money will be used together with other monies to address other urgent needs of the districts instead of paying the salaries and allowances for the medical staff.

I would also like at this point to say that in Moyo district we have had a problem of money which is being sent for wages under the conditional grants not being sufficient to pay the salaries of the staff within the district.  Consequently, we have now staff who have got salary arrears of 5 months, some of them of 4 months and some even more especially the local employees of the districts and sub‑counties many of them are not paid even for 7 months.  So, I think the Ministry of Finance together with the Ministry of Local Government should address the issue of how to ensure that all employees of districts are paid promptly every month.

Lastly, I would like to also address myself to the decentralisation of development budget.  The Minister has addressed this matter on paragraph 94 saying that the funds which are meant for development activities in districts or sub‑counties are going to be sent to the sub‑counties.  I welcome this measure.  However, I would like to observe that before a lot of money is sent to the districts to be channelled to the sub‑counties, there should be deliberate efforts to improve the capacity of the sub‑counties.  

In my district practically all the Sub-County Chiefs are Junior leavers, I do not think we have anyone who is a Secondary school leaver, leave alone being a senior 4 leaver.  So, I think we must give very clear instructions to the District Service Commission and the District Authorities to now start addressing themselves, to recruiting graduates as Sub-County Chiefs, because, if you do not have a graduate Sub-County Chief and then you are sending a lot of money to the Sub-Counties, millions of shillings, how are the Junior graduates going to manage these monies?   How are they going to be conversant in planning for development of the Sub-Counties?  I think it is high time we focused on graduates, competent recruits for Sub-County Chiefs; then combined with other technical people in the agricultural extension service and others, we should be able to achieve higher levels of development because the money will be planned for and utilised at a level which is very close to the people.  

Under paragraph 98, the Minister reports that we have recognised that there is need to have uniform standards for Local Governments regarding the creation of posts and for the general administrative structures.  We cannot allow the indiscriminate recruitment of staff to strain Local Governments as we would find that more funds are being used  to pay allowances, pensions and other administrative expenditures other than spent on development activities aimed at poverty reduction.  I think this is a very important observation.  

At the point of decentralisation in Uganda, many districts were at different levels of staff recruitment.  Some of the districts were over staffed, some of them were under staffed.  So, when the districts were decentralised, we found a situation where there was inequity because monies which have been sent to support the salaries of the staff in the districts were not equal or equitable in various districts.  That is why in Moyo, for example, up to now, we are accumulating  arrears of salaries because at the time of decentralisation most of the positions in the district were not filled because of lack of personnel, because of the insecurity that  period and other factors.  

Now, after that, when the recruitments were done, the Ministry of Finance had declined to pay those who were recruited after decentralisation. Therefore, decentralisation imposed a heavy responsibility on the district and the district has encroached so heavily on use of unconditional grants for payment of salaries to the extent that the districts are now not able to implement their programmes because all funds which are available to the district is being used for paying salaries.  Therefore, I welcome this measure to streamline or to standardise the administrative structures in the districts so that all the districts are equitably treated by paying salaries to an establishment which is approved by the Ministry of Local Government that will support the services within each district.  

These are a few comments I wanted to make on this Budget. Otherwise, the overall opinion I have on the Budget, is that it is a very good Budget, it is addressing the concerns of our people, it is going to have a very big impact on poverty eradication if provisions for financing are followed and if monitoring and supervision of the activities of the district are very closely monitored by the Ministry Headquarters and other organs.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  

PROF. VICTORIA MWAKA (Woman Representative, Luwero): Thank you very much, hon. Speaker. I wish to appreciate Government effort in all that has been addressed last financial year. However, Mr. Speaker, I wish to address a few issues. 

The first one is on the decline on growth attributed to the fall in production of cash crops due to drought and the coffee disease.  Hon. Speaker, we have a problem here as far as our agriculture sector is concerned.  We know it is the core of Uganda’s existence, but where I get confused is, we know that we have the coffee disease and this is the area which has been always emphasised, telling people to plant more and more coffee, and have been equating coffee disease to AIDS; that because people are dying, you do not stop producing children.  Therefore, as more coffee is dying, we should plant more coffee.  

But Mr. Speaker, there is no other alternative to reproduction other than from the woman conceiving but there are other alternatives to coffee. So, I think that analogy does not apply.  What we are saying, is that, instead of making people to plant more and more coffee, why don’t we encourage them to grow other crops, and instead of putting too much emphasis on coffee, put it on other areas so that we diversify our economy?  The area I come from, that is Luwero District, the core of its production is coffee but when you go to the country side, even if people are told to plant more coffee, even the clonal coffee which was planted is also drying and therefore, there is not encouragement for them to plant more coffee. 

MR.OTAGE:  Point of information. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to inform the Hon. member holding the Floor that the problem is not only on coffee wilt disease, but that about 60% of the Robusta coffee grown in this country is composed of old trees.  Thank you.

PROF. MWAKA: Thank you for that information which emphasises the point I was trying also to emphasise. We are not saying that people should not continue planting coffee, but we are saying, let the emphasis put on coffee also be spread out to other commodities like vanilla, like flowers, like vegetables. But the problem is that those other sectors are not supported and the area which is supported is coffee, because I remember the Vice President distributed coffee seeds to the farmers. Unfortunately, those seeds were distributed at a wrong time when there was drought. Most of them dried, they never germinated. So, we go back to square No. 1. Now, we wonder why was that money wasted to buy the seeds, which seeds never germinated?

Then another area related to this problem is; these seeds were given to women.  I know that some women do not have a right over land, they do not have access to it.  But men do not allow women to plant coffee on their land because coffee is a perennial crop.  Women are entitled to planting seasonal crops, not perennial crops.  So, some women would not even plant the coffee they were given.   So, that one also was wasted.  I think, hon. Speaker, we need input of the farmers rather than making plans on a table and not going at the grassroots to see  what is happening there. We will continue wasting so much money in the so-called investment and in the so-called modernisation, when nothing actually is taking root on the ground.   

My second point is on the claim of the firm control of inflation.  I think this was based on the wrong premise, with due respect to my OB, who is in charge of this area. I think inflation has not been controlled actually by Government.  Inflation has controlled itself, because people are so poor that they have no more money to spend.  It is like equating a very sick person – I thought the Minister was going to get up; let me finish my point.  It is like equating a very sick person on his or her deathbed not getting up and somebody says, “you know, my person is recovering because he is resting.”  You only realise when the patient is dead.  So, the Ugandans are so sick they cannot even buy anything and you are proud that inflation is controlled, people are not buying.  People are not buying because there is no money to be used, and especially people in the rural areas, they are really poor.  

All these programmes, PAP, micro-finance and whatever have you, are given to those who have already started.  Now, how about those who are the poorest of the poor who cannot even afford a loan, what are we going to do with them?  I think we need to go deeper than this so called inflation being controlled, because the big people like we, the workers, the Members of Parliament have the money to spend and the little we spend we capitalise on that one that everybody has money!

I come to the controversial issue of cows.  Now this one on page 10 paragraph 26 talks of ownership of cows rising from 11 percent to 20 percent.  That is from 1991 to 1999.  We appreciate that statement and can be confirmed because my people of Luwero and Nakasongola are very happy with the restocking programme, and they specifically instructed me to come and appreciate the President and the Ministry in charge of this restocking programme. As of now, the Parish Committees have been instituted and the distribution of cows will soon take root.  And those who are going to receive these cows have already started constructing their shades.  At least this was a consolation, because Mr. Speaker, the earlier Luwero fund was made meaningless by spreading it over to 14 districts. Instead of being Luwero District, it became Luwero Triangle.  Our earlier one, the 86 million, that one disappeared unceremoniously. So up to now actually, Luwero had not counted itself as ever been given anything for the things which were destroyed during the liberation war.  At least this was a consolation, and people are happy.  

And to make even matters better, the fact that women are going to receive 60 percent of this allocation was even very well appreciated.  Surprisingly, even the men who make the majority never made any noise about women getting the lions share.  Of course they know, when you give a woman you have given the man and you have given the children.  So they appreciated that aspect of the women also being given the lions share as far as the restocking programme is concerned.  

On the consideration of including secondary and vocational education under the Poverty Action Plan, that is introducing the polytechnics at sub-county level, is also a welcome plan.  But you see in Uganda, we have a syndrome, plans are always put on paper and they take 10 years to be implemented and I hope this one will be implemented as soon as possible because we will run into a crisis sooner or later.  Because with the UPE enrolment from two million to seven million, or 6.5 as we talk of now, all these child soon will graduate and will need many secondary schools.  

But the problem is, because we have UPE it is free, and parents may expect free secondary education, which will not be soon forthcoming.  But if we introduce the aspect of polytechnics and vocational institutions, at least those who cannot manage to go up to university or other tertiary institutions of higher learning will have somewhere to go.  And by the way, those people may even be more useful.  Those who pass through the polytechnics may even be more useful than those who go up to university and become redundant with no employment.  Because those who join polytechnics, when they graduate, they become job makers and not job seekers.  So, these boys and girls could get employed earlier than those who go up to university expecting white colour jobs, which they do not have access to.  So Mr. Speaker, I pray that this programme be taken on very vigorously.  

The private sector should be encouraged to invest in these polytechnics.  And Mr. Speaker, these polytechnics are very expensive, because they need heavy equipment if you are to do a good job. And very few people can invest in that heavy equipment.  So if the private sector also could assist in taking these polytechnics to these rural areas, it would be useful.  But Mr. Speaker, because of the expense, all the schools which are being introduced, I mean which are being opened by the private sector are secondary schools, because they know you do not have to put in much investment.  You just hire a building, get teachers, collect school fees from the children and you have started a school.  As of now, that is what is happening.  So they are investing where they can get quick money.  So they need encouragement if they are to invest in an area where money recovery may not be so immediate.

Now I come to the area of land, Mr. Speaker.  We the women of Parliament, we are still waiting for the re-introduction of the Land Act back to Parliament.  Because our provision on co-ownership was smuggled out unceremoniously and we do not know how it was done.  Let it come back here in the House, we debate it and you throw it out.  Let it be thrown away in broad day light.  So we shall know that the women of Uganda are not entitled to own land together with their spouses.  But now we are hiding our heads into the sand, the thing you know, we want women to have land. So, it is confusion.  So, let us iron out that confusion so that we know  that women are denied the right to own land. –(Interruption)-

MR. KATWIREMU:  Point of clarification.  Thank you Mr. Speaker and thank you hon. Member on the Floor for giving way.  The point of clarification I am rising on Mr. Speaker is that is it possible to smuggle something out which was never in to begin with?  Because to my understanding, the co-ownership clause was never in, in the Bill and it was never in, in the Act. 

PROF. MWAKA: Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. Member.  But as far as we re-collect, why is it that all the women, are we all stupid?  How come that all the women in this Parliament and outside heard the debate and hon. Matembe brought that motion or that amendment? We all supported it and I remember, if it was debated then why was it not decided on?  If it was a motion, why did the Speaker not put it to the House to say “Aye or No.”? If it was “No” then, let us do it again.  What is the problem of bringing it and we do it again. Because it is a controversial issue? (Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I cannot resist making a comment on this matter of smuggling out because I was the Minister in charge of that Bill.  True I, as the Minister negotiated with the hon. Matembe  and the women generally and I accepted the proposed amendment. The issue really was that it was not enacted into the Bill because it was not formerly moved.  That is what the Hansard says.  Now that issue in my opinion - I am sorry, I do not want to appear to be debating but I am giving this information that - that issue of smuggling really should not now exercise your mind; what you should exercise your mind is, how either to get back here or get this thing into law. You remember I also gave audience to a group of ladies and I associated myself with their cause and I advised them how to proceed.

PROF. MWAKA:  Thank you, Mr.Speaker, and when you look at me, you see I have a smile on my face, because when issues are not clear they can be revisited. I remember hon. Olum and his group when they had a problem of the quorum here and so forth, everybody was not comfortable, they gave them another trial and they are still trying until, you know, the issue is brought to rest.  What we are saying, let us have a trial so that we also have something to explain to our people concerning the land issue and I thank you very much sincerely, Mr. Speaker, for that gender sensitivity to allow us to have this issue resolved. After all, the land sector has not been operationalised, and I hope by the time it does, we shall be talking at the same wave length.

Mr. Speaker, I want to look at the issue of security.  It is good the Minister in Charge of Security -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon.Mwaka, will you be kind enough to come to your last point?

PROF. MWAKA:  Yes, please, but  I was also interrupted, Mr. Speaker.  

On the Security; we know that rebels are infiltrating from Kibaale through Mubende, Mpigi and soon they will be in Luwero.  I am not saying that I am not a Ugandan, I am a nationalist.  I care when problems arise in the whole country but when it comes nearer to my house, I even become more concerned and therefore, I am just requesting that Luwero be given special protection because if people gent into security problems, this time everybody will just run away.  They are not going to start fighting because most of them, definitely, are young, others are very old, they either degenerated and would not like to leave home.  Especially in Ngoma and Wakyato where people have their cows, they will definitely just run away and definitely we need more security.  I am happy that the issue is being handled but I am just ringing another bell that we should not relax that people will do the job themselves they need assistance.

The people of Nakasongola - because I also belong there, Sir - are very happy and they sent me to send their thanks to the President and the Minister of Energy for having extended electricity to Nakasongola.  Before electricity reached there, they had no petrol pumping station but now, you see, we are growing very fast.  You know, we are not very careful these young districts are going to take over the old districts because they have a mission of development of growth.

Lastly, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk on the Youth Programme.  Mr. Speaker, again it is good the Minister for the Youth is around here.  Mr. Speaker, can you request hon Muruli not to disrupt the Minister for Youth because she is the one I am addressing? (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I would like to request the hon. Minister for Security to refrain from disturbing the hon. Minister in Charge of Youth.     

PROF. MWAKA: Thank you Mr. Speaker. The youth, Mr. Speaker, who are a little bit enlightened, I mean those in leadership are a little bit okay but the youth at the grassroots level are left to whom it may concern.  They are in disarray, they do not know what they are doing; national programmes do  not concern them because the Minister in charge of the youth has not taken efforts to leave her office to come down and see what is happening to the youth. 

This is exemplified by the mobilisation tour by the Vice President.  The Lady was ridiculed by these youths, hooliganism is increasing because they have not been given the way forward, how to go about, you know, solving their problems.  At least for the women, they are lucky because they have the women Members of Parliament who are moving together with women councils for development but these youths do not have anybody to give them a hand because of the way of representation of the youth. We have only one youth for the whole region, definitely they cannot go down to the grassroot. So it should be the work of the ministry. 

Even this money (750 million Uganda shillings) which has been given for rural mobilisation of the youth, that money will never be of any use to the youths because they do not know what to do with the money. They have not been sensitized and even when you say, you bring them to one spot in a whole district, a district like Mukono which is very large, Iganga, Luwero and you except that you are going to get any benefit to the rural youth? 

You only preach to the already converted because those who know, are the ones who will be able to report for that so-called conference and those who do not know are the ones who remain in the country side destitute. They become vagabonds, drunkards and what have you, and Mr. Speaker, if that is how we are going to bring up our future leaders of this nation, I am very sorry, we are digging a grave for Uganda. 

You know the people who make the majority, the youths, many of them are non-educated, even the educated have no jobs and then when they do not support government effort, it is understandable because they do not know what is going on in the government.  So how can they support something they do not understand? It is always crisis mode of operation.  When we see that things are going out of hand we start making, you know, ad-hoc programmes when already it is too late.  Mr. Speaker, let us not wait for the wound to kick the medicine when we are about to amputate the leg and then we think of therapy.  I thank you Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we will now start allocating time because they are going to run into problems.  I am going to give each one of you five minutes to make your presentation and the bell will go when you have one minute to go and please, please, hon. Members, as hon. Members, let us stick to the time and if you would like to have more time make - seek for a special permission.  Do not just rumble through disregarding the time allocation.  Is that okay?

MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Now let me have hon. Pinto and then hon. Sulaimani Sembajja.

MR. PINTO (Kakuuto County, Rakai) Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. Under the circumstances of constraint of time, I shall concentrate on the issue of poverty eradication. We must appreciate the efforts government and the population of Uganda are taking into trying to alleviate poverty.  But there is a crucial consideration we must focus on, and that is our population.  

I have a document here, which indicates - I think it is produced by the Ministry of Gender - indicates a pyramid as a pattern of Uganda's population.  In other words a very broad base of very young people and at the top of adults and old people.  In countries, which can manage their population and plan for it generally, you do have a box.  Square or base or otherwise a broad top of more adults and fewer people at the bottom. In effect, you plan for and control your population.  But the way we are in Uganda today, there is real fear.  If by 1991 we were 16 million, and now we are already 22 million in 2000 and it is estimated that we are going to be 31 million in 2010. By the year 2025 we are going to be 25 million.  In other words in five years, an addition of 5 million people, how are we prepared to deal with this situation?  

This document says that Uganda's population accounts for 59.5% being below 20 years.  And only 36.7 are between 20 and 60 years.  These are the ones in the bracket that would be in production.  These are the ones on the labour market.  But only .07% of the 19 per cent available labour force, are in the informal sector and 0.05 are in the formal sector.  In other words your population is not all productive.  You have to plan for it, you have to provide for it. Do we have this kind of money?  So when my colleague was talking about Agriculture -

MR BAKKABULINDI CHARLES: Clarification.  Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker and hon. Member.   Mr. Speaker I have been listening so attentively and I am a bit getting interested in the argument. So when hon. Pinto started by saying according to the document he has, there is a sort of triangle pattern and in developed countries who do plan very well for their population they should have something like a box; which is in a rectangular pattern.  The clarification I am seeking is, if it is a box type that means that the number of adults or elderly must be almost equivalent to the production rate.  How is it possible do they determine how they are going to produce in the country depending on the number of the old one they are having?  I want to seek that clarification because I know that automatically the apex must be there.  The elderly keep on reducing others by death, others by what but the production rate must increase.    Can I seek clarification about the box?

MR PINTO: Mr. Speaker that is a very easy question.  First of all you have to look at your average life.  Ugandans of forty years the one you are talking about in those developed countries who are seventy years, eighty years, you know some of them go up to 100 and this is brought about by the quality of life which gives longevity. Many of our young ones here just die by the way side at the age of forty years. By forty years we would have all perished.  May I seek additional time since I was interrupted, Mr. Speaker? 

I would like the government to put a lot of emphasis on this question of population.  It is very important.  It is very very important for us to plan for our population even to go further now and ensure that we make strong efforts to get people to understand that we have to bring out children that we can maintain, children that we can educate, but the way we are now this points a bad picture.  

Let me sir, since I have very little time left, talk a little also about the Small Scale Investor. I can use examples of what has been done in countries, which have succeeded in economic development like Thailand. There is very little incentive that has come to the Small Scale Investors to encourage the people to produce more.  I pray that government finds ways and may be even copy patterns of small scale incentives that are successful in countries like Thailand.    

The Budget Bill if it were to be brought as promised by government, the budget bill as you kindly allowed government on their promise that they are going to come back here with a budget bill in which Parliament will be involved well before to give its in put on policy so that they may equitably allocate the resource envelope.  This is contrary to the document I have seen which the Ministry of Finance has produced.  Parliament is are completely out.  But these are the issues we want to put emphasis on.  Population, planning and so on.  So that is very important.  

Finally Sir, for the solar power to support rural electification the duties should be exempted.  It was very sad for me to listen to the First Lady receiving a donation in Luwero from Americans who have come to help us with solar power in schools and they are going to electrify schools and many other community projects - you know Uganda will be supported to obtain solar power but the donor’s biggest constraint is the heavy taxes on solar equipment.  This is solar equipment which that has been donated being excessively taxed.  We would like government, and I pray you hon. Members, please when the time comes to go to specific items in the finance bill to ensure that the Minister waives duties and VAT. We insist that we remove duty on solar power equipment and anything that goes for rural development. (Applause).  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker.  

HAJJI SEMBAJJA SULAIMAN (Bukomansimbi County, Masaka):Thank you Mr.Speaker for giving me this opportunity to contribute on the Budget Speech.  Mr. Speaker I will start with roads in the country.  I want to thank government for having put 27 billion shillings for rural Feeder roads and urban roads.  And I want to urge government that when they release this money to the various sector Ministry concerned, they should follow that the money has done the work that is supposed to do.  Many times when this money is released to the districts, Works supervisors the work that they do on the feeder roads or even on the trunk roads leaves a lot to be desired.  It is pseudo work and what they do is to report that they have done the work.  

In most cases what they do is to get contractors to maintain these roads and the roads, which they maintain, are substandard.  After two or three months when the rains come, the roads are washed away.  So there should be very strict control on the expenditure of this money.  The people we represent have a tendency of thinking that the work of an MP is to construct roads and I think a very member will believe with  me.  People think that our work is to construct roads, which is not the case.  Ours is to legislate so that money goes down as we are now doing.  But what government must do is to ensure that the road network is done.

Take for example, this Katwe road, it is a shame that a road within the City centre from the main round-about at Kibuye, as you enter Kampala, the road is worse than my roads in Bukomansimbi, and this is the road in City centre.  I do not know whether this money that the Government has set up is going to cater for these roads.

MR. WERIKHE KAFABUSA: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I would like to thank hon. Sembajja for giving way.  It is true the money is given to local authorities to do these roads, and of course there are guidelines that are given to these local authorities, whereby we insist that quality must be actually delivered.  As you are aware, hon. colleagues, you are also partners in this struggle.  Really what hon. Sembajja is talking about may be true, but we need to get this information so that we can actually follow up with those local authorities.

The road hon. Sembajja is talking about, Mr. Speaker, is actually under Kampala City Council.  So, we are saying, the local authorities together with area MPs, we can actually get the Ministry to make sure that the guidelines provided are followed up. So, we are all partners and I call and invite colleagues that we work together to ensure that quality is delivered to our people.  Thank you.

MR. MWANDHA: Point of information.  Mr. Speaker, the thing that intrigues me about the Ministry of Works is the fact that they never repair roads.  All they do is to allow the roads to go to the dogs, and then they will put in requests for grants, for loans and come here and beg Parliament to approve loans to repair roads which would otherwise be serviceable if they were repaired, and when the Minister stood up here, I thought he was going to say, “The policy of the Ministry is to ensure that roads are repaired regularly.”  But of course he could not say that because he does not have a policy.  So, this is the biggest weakness with this Ministry of Works.

MR. WERIKHE: Point of information.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform the hon. colleague that there is a policy of the Ministry vis-à-vis feeder roads, trunk roads and community roads.

Repairs, Mr. Speaker, I think many roads have been repaired across the Country, including the road which hon. Mwandha uses when he goes to his Constituency; it had been repaired several times.  Otherwise, he would not, actually, have been able to reach his Constituency or Constituencies, rather the area of his operation in Eastern Region.  

Take for example, Tirinyi – Iganga Road, it has been repaired several times.  Soroti – Mbale Road, as I talk now it is being repaired. Tororo – Mbale Road, for example - I am talking about these roads because they are in hon. Mwandha’s Constituency. They are being repaired as I talk now and the company that is working on these roads is Stirling.  So, it is not true to say that roads are not repaired, and there is a policy in place which enables actually the Ministry to do these roads, Mr. Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: I believe there will an opportunity for Committees to discuss Policy Statements of Ministries.  

MR. SEMBAJJA: Mr. Speaker, I have to appreciate the effort the Minister is putting in.  But I wanted to ask him, and to inform this House and the people of Masaka, when will he provide the road unit?  It is now five years, the road construction unit for Masaka District is not in place and Sembabule, my neighbour here, the grader that was off was used by the ILO, after constructing a lot of roads in Mbarara and so on, was dumped in Masaka.  We cannot use this grader.  The Minister promised, the LC.5 Chairman has been contacting the Ministry, nothing is coming, and yet the weather is going to be worse and we cannot perform.  So, I would like the Minister to inform me whether the road unit is on or it is somewhere so that I can tell the people of Masaka what is happening.

I wanted to move to this question of salary increase.  Surely ten per cent salary increase to a Police Officer, is a joke.  That one is a joke!  A Police Officer is getting shs.87,000/= per month.  Calculate very briefly ten per cent, how much is this?  This is the one who is manning a Sub-county.  He has no communication gadget, he has no bicycle, he has nothing, and what would you expect of him?  Corruption?  While the Minister is thinking of increasing salary so that everybody gets happy, I think these people should be considered.

Lastly, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to thank Government for having realised that land is a big problem.  But I wanted to urge the Ministry of Finance to quickly release money so that these land tribunals can be put in place.  The Committee on Natural Resources has already worked on the regulations, and once these regulations have been passed by this Parliament, it is incumbent on the Government to ensure that the money has been released.  Otherwise, people are cutting themselves - the landlord owners and the bibanja owners - and the Magistrates have continued to entertain these wrangles even if they are not supposed to do so under the Constitution of Uganda.  So, the Ministry must, actually, get on and ensure that money is released in order that the land tribunals are set up.

Mr. Speaker, I would have talked much, but since I am within time, let me stop here, I hope the Minister will respond.  Thank you.

MR. ADOME (Jie County, Kotido): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Given that the time is short, I will confine myself on one item in the Budget, and that is specifically on Security.

I would like to know from the Minister in concrete terms, what the two per cent of the Security Budget means to Ugandans, those Ugandans I represent from Karamoja and specifically Jie County. When we talked of the issue of disarmament there were mixed feelings. But when His Excellency promised them that they would not be left like orphans, that they will be something like a company that is about 146 worriers trained to take care of the security concerns in their sub county, people were relieved.  

But now as I talk, people are dying in hundreds because one, Government has not shown its presence in terms of security in that area.  That is why on Sunday last week the New Vision reported of 200 people dead and by yesterday, the New Vision again reported that 95 people were killed and this goes on, on a daily basis Mr. Speaker. In my calculation, given that the population of Karamoja is about 500,000 by the year 2006 there will be no human being in that place including the MPs.  Now, I am specifically narrowing myself on this because now the thinking of these worriers is that since Government is coming to collect these things, let us make a maximum use of them and that is the situation.  

It is so unfortunate that some people associate this raids with – they called it yesterday ‘Local politicians’ I tried to be courteous enough to call one of the New Vision people but as usual they deliberately leave they want to choose their own thinking and so forth.  Because Mr. Speaker, I would ask ‘ if Adome Lokwii is sleeping in Kireka and he comes every morning here to this Parliament, how does he even if there is not telecommunication between here and Kotido how does he influence the worriers to go and raid?’  How?  First of all the attire of Adome Lokwii is quite different from these people.  

I have tried to advice colleagues especially those who are privileged to be in position of power on how to help these Karimojogs.  This is why Mr. Speaker I speak with sadness in my heart because irresponsible reporting can destroy the Nation and I think that Government should help us in getting the correct information.  Because Mr. Speaker, today’s New Vision again reports about the Vice President and the Minister in charge of Disaster preparedness having flown to Moroto and she nearly cried when she saw a woman who was dying of starvation.  

I recall when hon. Butime here said ‘MPs in Karimoja do not go there’ and I remember standing up here saying I missed five ambushes in that place - thank God I am still alive and that is the cost of an MP in that place including any other person travelling.  But Mr. Speaker, they are lucky that they flew there and I hope that they will come with a good report, because I am still wondering how hunger can be surveyed areally.  I thought you would meet people on the ground and make sure that you see them and you count the numbers, you see the emaciated, you see also the graves of those who have died.  But you go on area survey as if you are looking for wild animals that is a bit unfortunate for a high ranking official of the Republic of Uganda.  

And I say Mr. Speaker that the security situation now going on is because of the hunger which has lasted there for two years and that is why the – (Interruption)

MR. MURULI:  Point of clarification.  Thank you very much Mr Speaker and I would like to thank the hon. Member for giving way.  I would like to clarify one point.  The visit of the Vice President and the Minister for Disaster preparedness by air is not really an aerial survey of the hunger situation.  The helicopter was the quickest means to take them to the place so that they can meet people, assess the situation and come back and take action. It was not really to survey the area and assess the situation by air.  

The plan for disarming the warriors is now under serious discussion. Resources are being looked for. Arrangements are under way to do the disarming jointly with our neighbours especially in the Republic of Kenya. Definitely when the plans have been concretised, the little presence of security around the boarders of Karamoja with the neighbours will change. There will certainly be security even within Karamoja.  Of course the resources required are a little bit substantial but there is commitment towards the pacification of that area and no effort is being spared to make sure that the resources are found to make the area secure. We will definitely avoid some of these problems which MPs and other travellers in Karamoja meet. 

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Adome in addition to your one minute which was lef, you have an additional one, now you have two.

MR. ADOME LOKWII: Thank you Mr. Speaker. I was afraid the Minister took three if you could give me three.

THE SPEAKER: I have given you two only.

MR. ADOME LOKWII: Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the point of clarification from the Minister but I think he will also appreciate that we have taken time to warn Government before people started dying that there is imminent hunger but 2000 it takes the Vice President three years to go and asses that there is something wrong somewhere!  Because I am telling you ‘ people are dying’.  The other times World Food Programme went and surveyed, now the Vice President has gone to survey; whom are we going to trust?  Are we not part of Government?  Are we not sincere to ourselves?  Are we not sincere to our Ugandans?  We report to Government specific things and we expect Government to act accordingly.  Government has all machinery in the districts to know any situation in any part of Uganda.  I expected that even by the time MPs speaks in this House there is some relevant information some where.  

So, Mr. Speaker when we are talking about security and hunger it is a very tricky situation.  In fact to call for a meeting of any kind in that scenario where people are hungry and they are harmed – (Interruption)

MR. KITYO:  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker and my colleague to allow me to inform him.  Mr. Speaker we did a research in Karamoja on their food security and production. Our  findings were that, if they had a good season, the people of Karamoja can grow enough food to go throughout the year.  The problem with the people of Karamoja is that when they get food, they make a lot of festivals.  They drink a lot of their food and they are wasteful.  I think it is now upon the leadership of Karamoja to teach the people of Karamoja that when they grow and get food, they use it sparingly.  Thank you.

MR. ADOME:  As I conclude, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say this that a lot of theories have been said and a lot of literature has been written but the situation is such that, before we do anything for me I will not talk of electricity, of roads of what, we could deal with this security problem.  If you do not deal with security problem all the rest of the beauties of wasting food, of doing what are all null and void please help us save the Karimajong.  I thank you.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I will also be mindful about time and concentrate on the concept of taxation in the budget as well as the environment.  Mr. Speaker, I did not agree with the minister for finance when he raised this question of high rate for taxation.  The taxes are not supposed to be punitive.  They are meant to engineer development.  In the case of Uganda, the people I represent, Mr. Speaker, are not happy with the rates of taxes.  Many a tax is too, too high to be paid.  Let us think in terms of taxes that are payable and not taxes that are there to punish us all the time to worry people, sometimes people are forced to run away from the cities simply because they are being chased by people who are demanding taxes.  

Just to revisit what the minister said when he quoted Edmond Back, I thought his quotation was irrelevant in the case of Uganda, because he said and I quote, “Edmond Back in 1775 said, to tax and please no more than to love and be wise is not given”.   I would like to say that if you relate that to the occurrence of a political phenomenon which brought about the Independence of the United States of America you are going to discover that the 13 colonies rebelled from Queen Victoria basically because they were not represented in the House of Commons where they were paying the taxes.  So, contrary to what the minister was saying the 13 states said, no representation no taxation.  We do not pay the taxes for as long as we are not presented.  

Mr. Speaker, the people I represent in Lubaga South in accordance with that quotation, they are not happy with what is happening in this country.  It is not easy to pay taxes, it means a lot to pay taxes.  You make reservations, your children cease to go to school, you eat badly to ensure that you pay the taxes but when you the taxes, what do the taxes do?  

My people are not happy with the size of Cabinet.  They are too many ministers each one demanding several cars to survive and several other demands.  The ministries and districts are created over night.  When the President spots of a problem of the political nature and he visits Katakwi he says to please these people let me talk about the development of the new district.  The President of Uganda travels almost every week-(Interruption)

MR. OTAGE :    Point of order.  Mr. Speaker, is it in order for the hon. Member to impute that when the President visited Katakwi we asked for the District when actually we requested for the establishment of armed LDUs and the member is well aware that Katakwi District was established in July 1997. Is he in order to mislead this House?

THE SPEAKER:  I think he is not in order.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Mr. Speaker, with due respect to your ruling-(Interjections)-  Okay, Mr. Speaker, I will take your ruling.  But I was giving examples.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Lukyamuzi, if I do not do what I am doing what am I here for?  Proceed.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, so the point I was putting across is that, in accordance with that is happening, the people I represent are not happy with the way their taxes are being used.
  
MR. ONGOM:   Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you hon. Lukyamuzi for letting me give information.  Recently I was in part of Lubaga south and the information I have is that, the people of Lubaga are very happy with their representative in Parliament, representing them very effectively.   

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Mr. Speaker, mindful about time, I am not going to entertain any other-(Mrs Mavenjina rose_)

SPEAKER:  Are you taking the minister’s-

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Is it a point of order?  But the time aspect. 

MRS. AKUMU MAVENJIANA:  Point of information. I would like to inform hon. Lukyamuzi for giving way.  I would like to inform him that ministers are appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Yes, I agree they are appointed by the President-(Interruption)-

MRS. AKUMU MAVENJINA: And, Mr. Speaker, I am sorry, and as far as vehicles are concerned, there is no minister who is on food, and we are catering for all our ministers.  One vehicle per minister, per ministry;   and  there are also new vehicles on the way they will be here in two weeks time.  Thank you.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Mr. Speaker, I did not want to spend much time on that aspect, because my constituents were quarrying the magnitude of Cabinet.  So the initiator of that Cabinet in terms of magnitude is the most worry of the people I represent.

The people I represent are also not happy with the way the army, the military.  For example many of us would like to know how many soldiers we have.  But according to the information I have at hand, this army keeps on expanding unceremoniously from time to time; and with reference to what has happened recently where one 1.6 billion shillings just disappeared, to go towards the army, that, Mr. Speaker, has raised eye blows of the people I represent.  

On that particular note, the people I represent are not happy with the way the Uganda government has ignored the farmer in Uganda.  Coffee is about to dilapidate and the government is not caring as what steps it should take to ensure that the farmer has something in substitution.  I propose in that regard that NARO by now should be looking forward to venturing into a new breed of coffee close to robusta.  Otherwise the two species we have so far over which we have been brought are about to disappear.  

Lastly Mr. Speaker, because I was interrupted a million times, I would like to propose that now that the generation of power in terms of UEB is up, the time is now to persuade urban dwellers to begin using electricity for their cooking purposes.  This demands that the rates should come down.  There is no convincing reason why the rates should be kept up when this generation of power is natural in nature and should be seen to benefit the people that own Uganda.  Finally Mr. Speaker, the budget speech talked about the provision of  300 million shillings to the wetland sector and this sector is partially associated to NEMA and many of us know circumstances where NEMA and related institutions mess up environmental matters.  

I am a living example of having initiated the wildlife clubs of Uganda.  I propose very strongly that the time is now for us to enhance wildlife education and environmental education in schools and other communities because I have discovered –(Interruption)- so Mr. Speaker, I was concluding by saying that NGOs in terms of environmental organisations because of the free atmosphere they are in whenever they are implementing the philosophy of conservation, they should be given money by the government to enhance wildlife literature, wildlife education, environmental education.  Otherwise, I can see a problem judging from what I have seen during my recent expeditions countrywide.  A number of people would like to conserve wildlife.  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker.

MR. BAKKABULINDI (Workers Representative):  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I am going to be brief on two issues concerned with this budget speech.  Mr. Speaker, I am sorry I do not know if this speech was a foreign draft speech or it was initiated from this country.  Looking at the whole speech when I perused through, it looked as if somebody who was writing it either had spent some months in a foreign country or was being told what is happening in Uganda.  

I get concerned about my workers I represent.  In that budget speech on page 25, they talk about the total wage bill increasing from 407.4 to 468.8 billion.  Mr. Speaker, to us, we do not understand the language of increasing in billions.  We understand the language of how much are you going to get as net take home per month.  In that speech when he is talking about the increment across the bar to the lowest workers of being ten percent, one wonders either it was a very big increase or not.  But based on what?  

As we talk Mr. Speaker, the majority of the teachers, the policemen are getting just a figure of about 70,000/= which is according to the increment of 10 percent is an addition of one bunch of matooke and you think you have increased salary to that worker!  Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, I think it is high time that we accept that we initiate a negotiating machinery for all government workers rather than somebody coming from a foreign country to come and say I am increasing either six percent not knowing on which base he is increasing the percentage.  If we initiate this negotiating machinery for all government workers, they will be in position to know who is getting the lowest and what percentage they can increase on that worker depending on the daily expenditure of that particular person.  

When I perused through again on page seven, they talked about the former East African workers and as I said that it seems this speech was made by somebody who has not been staying in this country, he is talking of now being ready to start paying the former East African workers in three instalments starting with this financial year; not knowing that as we talk now, 30 percent of them have already died and yet he wants to prolong the payment for another three years.  I do not know what theory, what formula this Minister was using and even Mr. Speaker to make it worse, much of the money of these former East African workers  accrued as savings and when it comes to paying in instalments, they are going to tax this little amount.  The government was using this amount. It must have accumulated very good profit using this amount. Instead they would have added some money rather than taxing it.  

MS BABIHUGA: Point of information.  Thank you Mr. Speaker and hon. Bakkabulindi for giving way.  I am giving you information regarding the payment of former East African Community workers because that falls within the mandate of the committee of this House that I chair.  I would like to inform you that the government is unwilling to pay these workers this financial year.  There is no provision for any money and I have been advocating for very poor and sick people and going to the Ministry and they have told me that there is no money that is going to be paid.  Therefore there is no good faith regarding payment of these vulnerable people.

MR. BAKKABULINDI:  I thank you hon. Member for that very good information. Hon. Members, now you can hear for yourselves that this budget speech was written by somebody who does not know what is taking place.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE:  Point of information.  Thank you hon. Bakkabulindi for giving way and I did not want to reply at an early stage but I want to seriously challenge hon. Babihuga’s information; because my information and the available documents that we have given to you show – we have given you the recurrent and development expenditure document which shows that we have provided 25 billion shillings for this year for the East African Community workers.  If you have got a different figure, I will wish to know where you got it from.  I thank you.

MR. BAKKABULINDI:  I still thank the hon. Member for giving me the other information; because much as there is a provision for it in this budget speech, it is not the first of its nature.  Things have been put in the budget speech and they are not being implemented.  A good example is that we have got the Kyotera-Mutukula Road.  It has been there for about five years and it has never been implemented.  So when I hear my colleague moreover a whole chairperson of a committee saying so, I have to buy that idea that there is no provision for these East African former workers and they are going to die without getting their money.  And not only that Mr. Speaker, as we talk now, the majority of the workers who were employed in education institutions, since 1997, those who were retrenched have never got their package.  But when it comes to buying intercoolers for Ministers, there I think the provision straight away the Minister will come and tell you that the others are  in Mombasa coming.  But they do not think about the wanainchi of this country.  

Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, I think it is high time for this Parliament to start considering the fate of this citizens of this country, rather than depending on the theory and foreigners drafting what we are going to represent in this House.  I thank you very much. 
 
MR. OTAGE (Usuku County, Katakwi):  Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity to contribute towards the Budget speech presented by the Minister this year.  First of all, Mr. Speaker, when I read through this speech, there are quite a number of issues which I would like to comment on.  The first one, I note that the Minister has described this economy as robust, but when you read on the next two paragraphs below it you begin to see threats to the economy. Then I begin to wonder what robustness we are, actually, describing.  

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, one of the greatest threats stated in this Budget speech is the question of drought.  Mr. Speaker, as you look at the plan for modernization of agriculture, and when you read it together with the budget speech, one thing that is completely silent is  the question of water for agriculture. This country has all the rivers;  this country has all the lakes;  this country has all the waters and the best rainfall in the region, but there is no mention about irrigation at all!  You cannot do agriculture without water.  This is our natural resource yet it is not catered for. 

To make matters worse, Mr. Speaker, on page 34, paragraph 112, it reads, if I may quote:  ‘Our tax arrangements already take due account of the overwhelming importance of agriculture in our economy.’  Mr. Speaker, that is a very important statement, but I would like to observe that the irrigation equipment is heavily taxed and yet this would have been the best way of giving a relief to farmers engaged in agriculture.  Agricultural pumps for irrigation and their accessories are heavily taxed, yet this would have been the key element to enable small scale farmers to go in for intensive agriculture that will promote growth in this country.  So, the commitment in terms of modernizing  agriculture should not just be concentrated on services, but it should go into the provision of the necessary strategic inputs that will spur the –(Interruption).

DR. NKUUHE:  Point of information.  I would like to inform my colleague that there were about 100 pumps which were donated by the government of India , and when we look at the list of the people who are receiving these, a lot of them are MPs or ministers, and the subsidy is they should be going for shs.20 million, they are going to be sold to these people – rich people, at shs. 2 million!

MR. OTAGE:  Thank you hon. Nkuuhe for that information –(Interruption). 

MR. MWANDHA:  Point of order.  Mr. Speaker, is it in order for hon. Nkuuhe to say that MPs and ministers benefited from pumps from India without mentioning names; in other words to create the impression out there that all of us got pumps from India free of charge.  Would the hon. Member substantiate?  Is it in order for him to make the statement without substantiation?  Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER:   Now, did he say all of you?

MR. MWANDHA:  Sir, he said they were bought by ministers and Members of Parliament.

THE SPEAKER:  He did not say some;  okay, if he said ‘some’ it will be different.  Now, he said most of the MPs and ministers.  What is wrong with that?  They know themselves!

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Speaker, you see, when we go out of the countryside, we may be suspected having got these free pumps from India.  

THE SPEAKER:  Okay, let us hear, hon. Nkuuhe.

DR. NKUUHE:   Mr. Speaker, the list of pumps is known;  I cannot remember all these, but it is known, I can find it tomorrow or maybe this afternoon. I will find it and it is a list of shame, because these are people who should be – the poor people out there who are trying to  struggle and farm, and getting 80 per cent – I will bring the list and show it here.  Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: But are ministers not supposed to benefit, or MPs are not supposed to benefit?  What is wrong with that?  Any way, we will talk about that when we get there. 

MR. OTAGE:   Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  You can see hon. colleagues where we are putting emphasis in strategic sectors, in promoting development in this country.  I would like to touch very briefly, Mr. Speaker, on the issue of micro financing.  We have always talked about the issue of availing capital to the production sector, especially, at a primary level.  We have reformed the Land Act;  we have plenty of labour, but the biggest  problem now is capital.  Few attempts have been made to provide capital at a micro level, but up to today, there is no provision for a legal framework to protect the farmers to access or to operationalise the micro finance in this country.  

I read on page 4 that the Bill is being drafted and yet the Minister of State for Investment had promised this House that this Bill has already gone through cabinet and it will be presented to this House, but in the Budget Statement it talks about the Bill being drafted.  So, why are we postponing the issue of micro finance to rural farmers?  This goes together with formation of an agricultural bank which has been talked in this House for the last four years!  Let us be committed in providing finance for agriculture.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

MRS. MUSUMBA (Bugabula South, Kamuli):  	Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to limit my contribution to about four areas, since this is an annual ritual which bears no fruit at the end of the long debates.  So, I will limit it to what, I think, might be of value to the people of Bugabula but which will bear them no fruits.  Mr. Speaker, we sat here last year, at this time, and made contributions to the Budget speech, but the super ministry, the Ministry of Finance did not take a single word that was passed in this House. So I come with the frustration of wasting time, of wasting tax payers' money when we have no impact as a House on to the budget process.  I would have been happier if my lamentations were seeing the last of its day by way of putting a Budget Bill in place, but that too has hit a dead end and I do not know whether we are going to pass on the ritual of lament from the Sixth Parliament to the Seventh Parliament.  

I will start with the Ministry of Education.  Last year, Mr. Speaker, for Kamuli district, this House approved a budget provision of 549 million for UPE.  I have information here - (Interruption) - Mr. Speaker, I will not take any information yet- from the Ministry of Education.  This is a letter written to all Members of Parliament on 16th May, the year 2000 at the end of the financial year and still Kamuli got 238 million shillings as had been indicated in their proposal.  

There is a big problem with the Ministry of Finance.  The Ministry of Finance is distorted and disjointed yet we do rely on it for facts and figures.  Mr. Speaker, they have not provided the approved estimate book for the financial year 1999/2000, it is not there.  So, what they have and where they stop is the draft estimates, which they bring to this Parliament.  They do not make any change and I wonder whether that is legal. The Permanent Secretary, Secretary to Treasury does not, in fact, adhere to the provisions of the financial regulations of this country.  No Ministry knows what Parliament has passed, no district knows what Parliament has passed because only the draft estimates is what is provided. So our input actually is a waste of time and since I am sure it is a waste of time, I will just waste some more five minutes and sit down.  

Secondary School education.  I have lamented in this House for the last four years about the state of Secondary School  education in my district and my constituency in particular. When I look at the provisions this year, there is still not a single provision for a Government aided Secondary School again in my constituency.  So, for all the investment that is going on in this country, the people of Bugabula South are condemned to poverty, everlasting poverty.  They are condemned to backwardness because the Ministry of Education and its planning unit will not consider a single input of money to that constituency, yet I am aware there are districts, there are constituents that are overloaded with Government input.

MR. KIVEJINJA:  Point of information.  I would like to inform hon. Salaama Musumba that the question of education requires a lot of more planning because my statistics show that in Iganga, with 1.1 million people, have only 17 Government aided schools and the whole of Busoga region, with about 2.5-3 million has got only 44 Government aided Senior Secondary schools, while Bushenyi with half a million people have got 44 Government aided secondary schools.  

MRS. MUSUMBA: Thank you very much for that information.  I am sure if we had time, we would desegregate that information and even in that mentioned 44 Secondary Schools, Bugabula South has zero.  Mr. Speaker, I have walked the stairs of the Ministry of Education using formal and informal channels of communication and still there is no plan whatsoever to redress this imbalance.  I am beginning to wonder whether this is not Government policy to keep my people poor.  I think the people of Bugabula are being condemned by this Government which they vote for all the time to poverty. I think the people of Bugabula South should be advised by the Minister whether they are part of this country or whether they are part of the investment that they are all paying taxes for.  

I would like to move on to the East African Community.  Everybody has talked about the East African Community but what has not been said is that the people who are affected by this non-payment, the people who are affected most are the people of Eastern Uganda, starting from the bridge at Jinja because most of the railway workers were from Busoga, were from Budama and were from the East.  So, whenever you fail to pay the East African workers, it means you are condemning the entire region particularly Busoga and my constituency where there are two railway lines, Busoga loop line and the other line.  It means that we have been robbed, we have been condemned to poverty.  

Our children cannot go for self-sponsorship in Makerere so we will remain poor because you have ensured that we remain poor and I think government ought to be ashamed of this.  The more government does not pay East African Community workers, it means you have condemned our people to poverty and to - in fact killed them because all they can do is lift "fasi fasi" down in Kikuubo while yours are going to school.  So, Mr. Speaker, this is not a joke.  This is not about talking good things since this is our last time to debate this budget, you must as well know that the people of Busoga and the people of Eastern Uganda are poor because Government policy has made them so and that there is no plan for making them any better and the people of Eastern Uganda had better know.  

Finally I want to talk about this disjointed budget.  I welcome the reduction of computation in the CIF value for goods that are coming in to Uganda through the airport because now the airport will be economically re-activated.  But, Mr. Speaker, I do not know who is in charge of this country or whether the Minister is fully in charge because the proposals are to reduce on the computation of taxes to make the port get used to full capacity. However, Civil Aviation Authority has quietly increased airport tax to 40 dollars and this, of course, increases the price of an air ticket.  

So, what is government trying to tell the Ugandans?  Are you giving us with one hand and robbing us with the other?  Do you have a direction where you are taking us? Government seems to be lost and is losing us along the way. While government has our trust it does not seem to have the capacity to direct us on the way forward.  So, Civil Aviation Authority, with all its incompetence, just look at the restaurants at the airport to know how incompetent they are, is being cushioned by this kind of tax.  Mr. Speaker, I thank you.

MR. KYEMBA HENRY (Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): Thank you very much indeed, Mr. Speaker, for allowing me to contribute on this debate.  Mr. Speaker, I represent Jinja industrial town in this House.  It is referred to from time to time as the former industrial town and Mr. Speaker, if that is the case, hon. Members should not be surprised from what I am going to say.  Over the last couple of months, over 150 industries in this country, many of them in Jinja, have collapsed and certainly that means that there is a lot of concern by the people I represent in this House.  The Government has, from time to time, emphasised the importance of industrialisation and the Minister of Finance is very much aware of the need for this.  

When you look on page 15; and read the Minister’s statement regarding “creating the framework for rapid economic growth  and structural transformation”, one would feel that indeed everything is being done to save these industries.  Mr. Speaker, but what is the position?  The position is that whatever Government measures have been taken, whatever incentives have been made, have not been able to reverse this trend at the moment. 

I would like to take these five minutes to really appeal to the Government and the Minister of Finance  in particular not to be glued to one line. If the incentives he has given to the industries are not working, then he should change truck. Attempts were made to ensure that industries move away from Kampala to other areas but, this has not happened. Why then, why does not the Minister of Finance think of alternative way of ensuring that these industries do move and other do not collapse? There seems to be also one worrying situation, in global economy. One would like to see that the industries in one’s country are able to supply the domestic demand, otherwise, competition will make it very difficult for them to operate.  Indeed we know that with industries based here; we benefit from employment and we are able to ensure the availability of these things in spite of our being landlocked. 

I would like, therefore, Mr. Speaker, to appeal to the Minister of Finance to look at the reasons why these industries are collapsing, why they cannot be assisted to revive.  Are you are going to replace my five minutes for me to accept the information, otherwise the Minister has got a lot of time to reply? (Interruption)

MR. AKAKI AYUMU:  Point of information.  Mr. Speaker, I wish to inform the hon. Member on the Floor and the whole House that indeed it is true that industries are negatively affected and that some are being closed.  But, what I want to inform you about is that the Ministry other than waiting for the Ministry of Finance to carry out some investigations has already done that and as we see now there is a cabinet analysing further what can be done in the circumstances. It is true that industries are collapsing and something need to be done about it; a study has been done and it is being addressed.

MR. KYEMBA:  Thank you very much, hon. Minister for giving that information, I am glad I gave you the opportunity to say so. But, I would certainly like you to move even further because some of the reasons seem to be obvious; the interest rates are killing and this has been known for a long time.  Competition from foreign imports is obvious to many of us; why has it not been addressed?  Nytil is collapsing or was collapsing basically because of foreign imports, maybe, also because of mismanagement as the UMA mentioned at one time.  These are things which we feel  the government should address and make sure that our industries are able to survive.  

I would also like to appeal, Mr. Speaker, to the Ministry to really go ahead and mention some strategic industries that this country can really call their own. Really, to move in the open without any specific strategic emphasis I do not think is correct.  

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to mention one other fact concerning currency speculation in our country.  The Uganda Shilling has bee declining from time to time and you see it even in the Minister’s address that he does recognise that there has been a lot of speculation in the foreign exchange market.  This really should not be allowed to continue. When we liberalised and opened up the forex bureaux, we cannot allow commercial banks to enter the speculation saga and just deny the funds available to our business men. The interest rates, Mr. Speaker, too have been killing, money granted or given to Uganda on minimal rates is given to Commercial banks to again exploit them further I think this too must be addressed, Mr. Speaker.  Otherwise, I have nothing to add about this.  Thank you very much indeed, Mr. Speaker.

MR. LUBEGA WAGGWA (Butambala  County, Mpigi):-  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to comment on the Budget Speech in two areas or three because of time, I would Mr. Speaker, start with the tariffs of electricity. Mr. Speaker, it is very unfortunate that when the Minister was asked this question, he said that Uganda had the lowest tariffs of electricity.  It is like that because the metres ordered from South Africa are running so fast that nobody can remain in business using the metres from South Africa.  If you compare them with the old metres which we had you will note that even what the hon. Member of Jinja was saying that those factories are collapsing because nobody can afford the rates at which those metres are running.  It is true they can be compared, you can see even the nationals are complaining. Nobody can afford those metres; they are running so fast that nobody will ever remain in business using those metres. That can be checked by the Minister responsible, but those metres from South Africa are terrible, they are running very fast yet the Ministers come here and tell us that the rates are very low when the –(Interrunption-

MR. MWANDHA: Point of procedure.  Mr. Speaker, I have observed that many Members who are contributing are making very, very, important statements on various sectors of the country and I know everybody knows that every Ministry has at least two Ministers.  But, when you look around the Ministries which are being complained about; Ministry of Education, Ministry of Mineral Resources and other Ministries these people are not here.  Honestly, although, our rules do not demand that they should be here; is it not reasonable that when we are discussing a national Budget Speech that at  least  a Ministry is represented so that Members can be guided because the questions being raised are very, very, serious questions.  So, Sir, I need your guidance.

MS. KADAGA: Mr. Speaker, I would like to assure the Members that the matters being raised have been taken into account and that the office of a Leader of Government Business is represented here.  We shall take care of the issues being raised, they will be passed on and they will be responded to at the appropriate time.  Thank you.

MR. LUBEGA WAGGWA :  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Another issue which I want to raise is on page 30, paragraph 94.  It is about the 29 billion shillings which will be disbursed to Local Governments in the next financial year.  I appreciate this, but looking at the budgets of the districts and sub-counties, those districts have neglected agriculture.  I would appeal to the Minister responsible for Finance to advise the districts which have neglected agriculture to take this money and have at least 60 per cent of the 29 billion shillings to be sent to the districts mainly for agriculture; because the districts when you look at their budgets, they have not considered agriculture as an important thing.  Yet, this is an agricultural country.  I would appeal to the Minister very humbly to advise the districts where they are going to send this money to include or to allocate about 50 or 60 of this 29 billion to agriculture.  

Another thing is about coffee wilt disease.  This is on page 24, UCDA charges about 1 percent less, yet the cost of coffee seedling has become so expensive that the coffee which they want our farmers to up-root and be replaced with clonal cannot be afforded by an ordinary farmer in my constituency, Butambala.  So, I am appealing to the Minister to consider this charge of 1 percent that it gives free or subsidised seedlings to the farmers so that they can be able to replace the coffee which is dying.  The charge which is 1 percent  is quite a lot.  It could really assist farmers to get the coffee seedlings at a lower rate, now they are paying 500 shillings, but if this money can be utilised well, I am sure farmers may be able to replace the coffee which is being up-rooted because of the coffee wilt disease. 

Another point which I want to raise Mr. Speaker, is the excise duty as indicated on page 35.  They say they have reduced it, but up to now, the Ministry just said it was disappointed by the manufacturer that they do not realise that an excise duty has been reduced. They continue charging the same amount which they used to charge before the reduction was made and the point raised by the Minister is that he was disappointed.  

I am appealing to government, they got disappointment, disappointed, disappointed, but this statement must be clarified by asking the people responsible to reduce especially the soft drinks which was stated there.  The cost of soda has remained the same, yet the Minister said the cost is going to go down.  Up to now, Mr. Minister, the cost of soda has remained the same.  So, the ordinary person did not feel that there was a reduction on that.  

Because of time, let me talk about the equalisation fund.  When you look at the equalisation fund, I think when this money is being allocated for this purpose, I think this must be considered according to the population.  You see some districts are getting less per capita.  If you divide the amount allocated by Central Government, by the population, you will see that some districts really need this equalisation fund; but here when you look at this statement, surely some districts have been left out.  As the figure was increased to 6 billion, I think the equalisation system must cover most of the districts which are affected based on the population of each district.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. BUTELE ANTHONY (Madi-Okollo County, Arua):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for giving me this chance to make a few remarks.  I support the motion because it is in No. 5 of the Ten Point Programme which says building an independent, integrated and self-sustaining national economy.  

Before I make my remarks in connection with the budget speech here, I would like to state that today 27th of July, some Ugandans are remembering some dark days in the history of this country.  That was when some terrorists gunmen on 27th of July 1985 over threw an elected government.  Thank you for the National Resistance Movement, they also came and over threw that government, and made it possible for us now to have an elected government.  So, I thought this should be noted.  

I am going to make my remarks on paragraph 61, secondary education.  Each sub-county is supposed to have at least one.  You go to the Ministry of Education, you write  letters and what not, they refer you to the Ministry of Finance.  Up to now, there are two sub-counties in Madi, Okol with no secondary schools, There are Rigbo, and Ogoko in Pawor. I am also glad that in the speech at least some token figure is going to be made for the poor students. 

I would like to state here that Dr. Martin Aliker, who has been recently appointed one of the Special Advisers, was paying school fees for a person in my constituency. This boy now is in Makerere doing medicine.  That is consolidating national unity, number three of the Fifteen Point Programme.  I think Mr. Speaker, more people should do that.  Dr. Aliker is an Acholi, he is supporting somebody from the West Nile.  He is a Christian, he is supporting a Moslem, this boy is a Moslem, very, very clever, he is now doing medicine in Makerere.  

Another thing, Mr. Speaker, is paragraph 74 of the Ministers speech which says, Sir, our water  and transport have not be considered among other priorities in recent year.  I am now proposing to provide 5.4 billion this financial year.  Mr. Speaker, this money if the Minister of Finance will use it, should benefit the people from Bunyoro, West Nile, Madi, up to Nimule, because we used to have a river transport and people in that area have made a proposal already to the Ministry of Transport and Communications; they were very positive.  

The problem here, is with the Ministry of Finance. You telephone them, you write a letter, they have got a habit of not replying any letter from anybody; no reply whatsoever, especially the Aid Co-ordination Department.   So, Mr. Speaker, out of this 4 or 5 billion, we only require one billion to save that area.  So, we are keeping a very close eye on this paragraph 74.   The other thing, Mr. Speaker, is telecommunication in West Nile region and Karamoja. My colleague here was complaining about communication, but there is a Belgian grant of 5 million to do this in West Nile, Karamoja and others and also NORDIC Development funds US $11 million is still there.  

When there is something about West Nile, I do not know why the Minister of Finance always drags his feet.  Maybe this confirms that we are A.O.B. District.  This is confirmed now, it is confirmed Mr. Speaker, this Ministry of Finance should help us in that region so that we can benefit.  Mr. Speaker, I am not going to talk about the roads, I am not going to talk about the roads, but I am talking about river transport which has been finally funded.  So, I appeal to the Minister, through you, Sir, this should be implemented, so that we people in West Nile can also get our Entandiikwa.   Mr. Speaker, I thank you.

THE SPEAKER:   Hon. Members, we have been here for quite some time and we are supposed to come back in the afternoon.   So, I will suspend the proceedings until 3 o’clock. 3 O’clock we are here and let us be on time and I wish to indicate the following people who are going to start us off in the afternoon, because they caught my eye. We have hon. Ilukori, are you there, the hon. Okumu Ringa, the hon. Margaret Zziwa and the hon. Chebet Maikut.  If you do not show up, if you are not here, you will forfeit your time and you will not get it back. 

(The House was suspended until 3.00 p.m the same day)

(On resumption_)
                                                                                 
MR. ILUKORI:   Dodoth County, Kotido):  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I would like to say that I initially support the motion and would like to make the following comments.  I would like on behalf of the people of Dodoth whom I represent here to commend the National Resistance Government for the work well done in respect of the UPE classroom construction programme, that indeed has clearly been observed by the people of Dodoth. I do think that the same appreciation is country wide.   But Mr. Speaker, whereas the structures are being put up, we have a problem of those who are going to make use of those classroom structures and more so, the teachers – (Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Byanyima, will you refrain from disturbing the hon. Member for Bushenyi District?  (Laughter).

MR. ILUKORI:  Mr. Speaker, I wish to appreciate  the deliberate effort and aim of Government to recruit qualified teachers who will immediately be made to access the pay role.  But Mr. Speaker, whereas that is a very fertile and workable solution to the overwhelming enrolment, we have a problem in Karamoja, because we do not have enough of this trained teachers not out of our choice.  We therefore hope that there will be a deliberate policy to ensure that these trained Ugandans are enabled to go to Karamoja as well.  

On secondary education, Mr. Speaker, I would like to appreciate the recognition by Government of the existence of unable, but well intentioned and bright students in this country who are incapacitated by lack of funds to pursue their education. We, in the region look forward to the realisation of this deliberate aim of enabling them to continue with their education by way of the award of scholarships.  I also would like to say that before I take leave of this hon. House, Mr. Speaker, I would like to see secondary schools in nine Sub-Counties that constitute the county of Dodoth, this being a policy that has been sung for quite long now. 

Vocational education and training institutions, Mr. Speaker, is yet one area that we so badly need.  We have very many ‘O’ and ‘A’ Level leavers in Karamoja that are really just there for any fate.  We therefore will hope and do hope that the four centres to be established this financial year will equally benefit the people of Karamoja.

On health, Mr. Speaker, I do appreciate the effort Government is making to tackle HIV/AIDS but would like to say whereas we have a structure in Kaabong, i.e. Kaabong Hospital, I would like to appeal to the country, the Government to make sure this institution is effectively used by enabling it to effectively perform through the required personnel being availed there. And because it has a large coverage, may I therefore appeal that the large catchment which this institution serves  being at the Sub-District of health status, that other health units be promoted to the grades of II and IV accordingly for the sake of effective health service delivery to the people.

On water and sanitation, the borehole drilling, dam and valley tank construction should be continued. However, four dams that are being talked of in this policy statement and in the budget speech will never suffice.  We would like to see dam/valley tank construction taking place.  Otherwise Mr. Speaker, the dry season is setting in and we would not like another inconvenience to the neighbours. 

On urban water, the Republic of Sudan and Kenya indeed which normally usher in the occurrences of serious attacks of cholera and meningitis dictates urgent need for clean piped water. We hope we shall equally under the NRM administration harvest the good will by having pumped water especially in Kabong Township.  

On agriculture, it is not our choice that we have continued to depend on relief, but the problem is the erratic rain pattern. Now, we appeal to the Government of the Republic of Uganda to pick the 1968 irrigation plan and implement it so that we can end this relief dependence syndrome. The DFIs and Agricultural Development Centres should be deliberately built in that part of the country to facilitate an effective sensitisation and mobilisation of the peasants of Karamoja to produce their own food. Mr. Speaker, the recruitment and deployment of -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Your time is up, you have been warned three times.  You have broken the contract between you and me.  Okay, your last sentence.

MR. ILUKORI:  Okay, thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The recruitment and deployment of the Vet and Agricultural graduates in Karamoja has not picked up well.  So, there is need for the State to adopt another method so that these fellow Ugandans get to the region to render services to the masses there as well 

On rural electrification Mr. Speaker, we have been promised and promised and yet implementation schedules continue shifting.  Mr. Speaker, we are told it is going to be implemented tomorrow, the next day Mr. Speaker, you find you are taken to the last stage of whatever schedule is in place. This is disappointing to us, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Your time is up, please resume your seat.

MR. OKUMU RINGA ( Padyere Country, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to join my colleagues to thank the Minister responsible for Finance for his Budget speech.  However, allow me to highlight three points in the Budget speech.  Mr. Speaker, on page three and four, the scenario regarding the exchange rate, the depreciation of the Uganda Shilling is very worrying.  Mr. Speaker, when you look at that page and also look at what that effect has on the balance of payment of this country, you find that Uganda has a gross negative balance of payment of over 200 percent.  These translate in the following terms.  Our export as projected is only 450 million and our import is 1,350,000,000.  This is a very large gap.  So we must come up with a constructive policy to address this gap.  This is a negative gap.  

Secondly, we have negative terms of trade.  Absolutely negative.  Negative in a sense that when you look at our industrial production, we have our industries which are high cost producers and as such we cannot compete favourably even within the East African common market and this is a serious problem.  And I would like to state that the Minister responsible for Finance has not given adequate prescription to this problem.  We need adequate prescription.  

And this will lead me to this question, Mr. Speaker; what is our economic base as a country?  What do we pride ourselves in as a country.  If we say Uganda is an agricultural country, what effort, how much are we putting in to ensure that the agricultural base of this country is fully exploited?  We are lucky as a nation that the drought we talk of does not lead to serious famine; the drought we talk of does not lead to massive starvation.  But if we were so unlucky as some countries, we would be in serious problems Mr. Speaker.  So the Minister should help this country through Parliament, through the Local Council, up to Council (I) for us to address our economic problem.  We should not dilly-dally ourselves that we are doing very well.  We shall be kidding; we shall be wasting our time.  When the Minister finally responds, I would like him to respond on this aspect.

The issue of creating productive sectors at the lower level, that is small-scale industries.  That is business, must be looked into.  If you look at the UN statistics on economic development, you would find that about two thirds of the economic base of most countries, even the industrialised countries are small businesses, family businesses.  But for us, Government indeed has come up with poverty alleviation plans, this is still quite broad, it has not taken root.  It is a very good policy, if it could take root and then we shall create entrepreneurial capacity, production will be increased, but still this policy is at infancy stage.  I would like to thank Government that we are looking at the Poverty Eradication Policy twinkling down money which we are getting from particularly the heifer process.  

On hydro power generation, I note with a lot of concern and sadness that the Nyagang Power Project which you have talked of many, many times – in fact in this House I have always whenever we are talking about Budget, I have been mentioning Nyagang Power Project.  It appears in the estimate, but I have been told by the Minister responsible for energy that Nyagang is not going to be constructed by Government, and that Government is privatising it allowing it to be an IPP Project.  

This is a breach of contract between Government and the people of West Nile.  It is a breach of contract.  And if it is a breach of contract, I would like the Minister responsible for Finance when he is winding up or the Minister responsible for Energy to highlight on this matter because we cannot be deceived, we are not children.  We are part of this country we have on many occasions given support to this Government in a massive way, whether it is voting, whether it is keeping security, we have.  So for that matter I am requesting the Ministers both for Finance to look at this.

As I wind up Mr. Speaker - you have not given us enough time - I would like to appreciate the decentralisation policy of Government.  Government has decentralised management of this country, resources are twinkling down.  But I would like to call on the Minister responsible for Local Government to include in the Amendment process, which is coming to Parliament that, we tight up controls, we tighten up monitoring process or projects.  This is very important Mr. Speaker, because a lot of money is going down to the Local Government.  And this will enable us also to bring in the other Amendment which I thought when we were passing the Local Government Act, that Members of Parliament must have some direct relationship with the working of Local Governments  At that time there were maybe, problems in other Local Governments in this country and that was used as a sample to bar Members of Parliament for having direct relationship with Local Government and this must be looked into so that Members of Parliament also have input at local government level so that the resources that we are sending down does take cognitions of the input of Members of Parliament.

My last point Mr. Speaker, is with regard to law level of tax base of most districts.  We the crease in this Parliament and in this country to create more districts.  This is with due respect to this one counties which are clamouring to become district.

Most of these districts do not have the tax base enough to make them sustainable.  It would be necessary Mr. Speaker, that when we create these districts, we do not use just politics for creating them.  We must look at the viability of these districts so that at the end of the day, service is going down does go and help the population.  For example, even we are too many in this House Mr. Speaker, we are over 270 and look at us; how many are we right now?  In fact, if somebody were to rise an issue of quorum we would not be proceeding with Business.  So as we look at decentralisation, we should look at efficient way of managing our human resources both from Parliament down to local council one.  I thank you Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okumu, I hope you are not going to do this because you have already contributed.  I hope you are not going to carry your threat because you have already contributed.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Speaker, it was not a threat.  It was a just contribution.  I thank you Mr. Speaker.

MRS. ZZIWA NANTONGO (Women Representative, Kampala) Thank you very much Mr. Speaker.  I also support the motion and I want to congratulate the government upon all the efforts it has put in place.  At least to make this kind of Budget which is normally, I think for the last three or four years, it has been consistent in that it has been progressive and it has always been recording progress and the growth.

I am actually concerned about this growth not being translated into the micro aspects of our people.  We have just gone through the vote, Kampala District performed very well in the Referendum.  It gave all the votes to the Movement but the question still stands that the livelihood of the people, what people normally translate as poverty is still very pinching.  I think it is high time the government translates this macro growth into the micro aspects.  I appreciate the policies put into place, particularly translating the HIPC benefits into the social service sectors, like health, like primary education and so on and so forth but these look to be long term.  I would like to suggest very very vehemently that the government comes up with middle term programmes which are going to support what we normally call the middle class which is going to assist in the development or the poverty alleviation processes.

Also in that respect I would like to echo the pinch of the fuel prices which is really pinching in our economy.  Currently the fuel pump prices are at 1,460 plus.  I appreciate there is a lot of foreign forces and factors which affect this fuel prices. But I want some kind of commitment both from the Minister of Finance and Minister of Energy to see to it that they would look at what should be the actual cost vis-à-vis the actual profit to these oil companies. Have they not formed a curtail of monopolistic tendencies to really oppress our people, what I would call the citizenry and in effect the escalating prices of all the food stuffs and the very inflation the hon. Minister talked about in the Budget is actually a resultant of this.

That notwithstanding I would like to welcome the idea or the proposal of limiting the fuel vehicles that move at night.  Mr. Speaker, you remember the recent accident which took place around Kampiringisa and all the people died and they were burnt to ashes.  I think this one took place around six in the morning.  I would like to say that the minister should move fast to make sure that these regulations are enforced.  

I want also to add my voice to those who have appreciated the decentralisation process and I am looking at this decentralisation with the districts as those very areas which are going to effect the efforts of government or to actualise the efforts of government into alleviating poverty. I want also to appreciate  the grants which is normally extended to these districts.  

However, Mr. Speaker, I worried about the capacity in the districts.  I do not know what efforts have been put in place or what efforts have been made to actually establish the capacities in the districts.  You realise that in most of these districts, they are just continuing with routine old ways of management of districts.  They have not kept up with the new methods of new government programmes.  I would quote the program of PMA, which is now towards the poverty eradication program which is a very fundamental program of agriculture.  I want to find out how many of those districts have organized themselves in order to embrace this program and have maybe, translated the promises of the government of recruiting graduates at the level of sub-county levels and so and so forth.  When most of them are still galloping even with having just what I would call space at that level. So I think Mr. Speaker, we need some more thinking around this area so that we can be able to settle this very big question which is still looking at us.

Mr. Speaker, I want also to talk about one other issue of  -(Dr Byaruhanga rose_) Maybe, if it is not going to hitch on my time, I can take it, Mr. Speaker. 

DR. BYARUHANGA FABIUS: Point of information. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  The information I wanted to give the hon. Member on the Floor is that up to day 43, out of the 45 districts in Uganda have tried to recruit the graduate extension officers. To date the districts have recruited 531 graduates but this falls short of the expected number of slightly above 800 because it would appear there are not enough graduates, especially of the veterinary science qualification in the country.  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker.  

MS. BABIHUGA W: Point of information. Thank you Mr. Speaker and hon. Zziwa for giving way.  I would like to inform the hon. Member of the Floor that I highly dispute the statistics of the hon. Minister, affirming that 43 districts out of 45 have got the adequacy staffing for sub-counties because the committee on local government visited five districts in the southern part of Uganda.  And of those five districts, all of them complained to the committee that they could not access the personnel first of all, and the people the graduates were unwilling to work in the flimsy arrangements of the sub-count.  I thank you.  

MRS. ZZIWA MARGARET: I thank the hon. Member and actually I wanted to inform the Minister that I have  made recent consultation with the chairpersons of the district and this is a very big worry they have.    And in addition anyway, what training arrangements are in place?  May I beg for one minute, hon. Mr. Speaker – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  Yes, one minute.

MRS. ZIIWA:  I would appreciate the comment on page 33 of the duty draw back, which is mainly intended to have a more user-friendly scheme of promoting the exporters and I think this would come a very long way into promoting what we normally call the middle class.  I would like to raise one very important aspect that this excise duty as it is put here or may be as it is translated in  the schedules of draft estimates, s not yet translated on the ground.    Importers are still complaining, they are still having this very big problem, so I would beg the hon. Minister because I know this one should have been effected from 1st July 2000.

As I wind up I would like to call upon the hon. Minister in-charge of salaries and pensions.  Last year I had lots of hope.  I would like to congratulate her that some people have really got their salaries and pensions.  But I would like to call upon her to look into the harmonisation of pension and update us on the proposal to look at those people who were retired some few years ago and those who were being retired almost in the recent past.  Some of them who were at the same level but retired some time ago were getting what I may call peanut.  You imagine some of the retired teachers getting as low as 450/=  - you know which is nothing.  So I would like to call upon her to expedite this policy so that we can find that the people who are getting their pensions get a reasonable package.  I thank you hon. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: We shall have the hon. Chebet Maikut, followed by hon. Rwabita and then we will see how we proceed from there.

MR. CHEBET MAIKUT (Kween County, Kapchorwa): I would like to thank you very much – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  Yes I forgot to mention your name, the hon. Member for UPDF, hon. Otoa.  Then after that we will see how things develop.  Five minutes please.

MR. CHEBET MAIKUT:  I thank you very much Mr. Speaker, Chebet Maikut is my name.  Mr. Speaker I rise to support this motion with some few remarks.  In the first instance Mr. Speaker, the hon. colleagues, I would like to specifically in this budget to comment on areas that touch on agriculture vis viz. the food security and increased household incomes.  

I want to observe that at this point in time when we are contributing to this debate, I have a big worry Mr. Speaker that many families who are married and facing starvation in the whole country are likely to have their families broken up, Their marriages are broken up because of this looming famine.  One time I did point out in another forum elsewhere of a good example in my constituency where a man who was always going to beg food from the neighbours had his wife after some time elope with a man where the food was coming from. This is a clear example of problems associated with poverty at household level, which are compounded together with food insecurity.  

I would like also further to say that I think it is high time government considers urgently reviewing our priority programs in our economy.  I know for sure that UPE ranks number one, followed by health and so on and so on.  I think agriculture in my simple understanding is ranked to be number four or five within our priority programs, i.e.government priority programs.  I would therefore like to appeal to government Mr. Speaker and hon. colleagues that agriculture should be given that due recognition and importance that it deserves in our economy.  

I would like to suggest very strongly that government places agriculture at the same priority level as UPE.  In that way it may help so that the only scarce resources may be allocated to this crucial sector, which is sustaining our economy and the majority of our population.  Of course I did not want to mention about what people always say such as the good climate, abundant water resources.  Some of these natural resources like water is being donated to some countries before flowing eventually to the Mediterranean as we helplessly watch. This is very unfortunate when we are now thinking of how to get resources, to feed a large part of the population and my guess is that government is likely to spend not less than 20 million dollars alone on disaster food relief this Financial Year.  Mr. Speaker, I do not want to under-estimate a simple economic sense, which says that in order to reap, in order to harvest something, you need to plough and sow in something.  You can not harvest from where you have done nothing.  

This is a point where I would like to appeal to government again to consider using our little scarce resources and putting this money in key sectors that can be able to generate more income.  And here I want to site one example namely the Fisheries sub-sector.  We were told when the fish was still being exported to the European Union; Uganda was earning an average of 60 million dollar per year.  We were further told that in order to construct the fish landing sites government needs to inject in a figure of not more than 6 billion shillings.  Only 6o billion shillings and my concern is that can government not really get this money from within our resources in order to get this 6 million dollars per year?  Can we not really spend money if we have to get money?  

In summary, since I am constrained with time I would like to observe that agriculture is not like any other sector as people always assume.  There has been a talk that the private sector needs to drill themselves.  But I want to submit that the private sector alone can not drive agriculture rapidly as people will wish to think without some direct government support in some key sectors.  I would like therefore to say that conducive environment alone in order for agriculture to thrive is not adequate if any thing resources are required. Resources must be injected in order to develop the sector.  And Mr. Speaker, since that is the second bell I would like to stop here.  I thank you very much for your assistance.

MR. RWABITA DEO (Ibanda South, Mbarara):  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker.  Rwabita Ibanda South.  Mr. Speaker I will speak about three items.  Poverty, budgeting and education.  Mr. Speaker, this big problem of poverty needs to be looked into more seriously.  Government has had a lot of funds put in this poverty eradication or poverty alleviation programmes.  But my question is, are these projects pilot projects?  If they are, what are their successes?  On page 14, the Minister of Finance gives us statistics.  But I would love to know where these pilot projects are. Then indicate what per cent of success there is and inform us if this program will be extended to the whole Country, because if you make a pilot project for three years, you should have had the results so that you expand it to other districts.  

So, I would like the Minister of Finance to particularly tell us the achievements of this.  You have got for example P.E.F., Poverty Eradication Fund, we want to know exactly what achievement that has been recorded in those various pilot projects.

When we talk of budgeting on page 13, we find that our local resources can only raise 47 per cent; the grants and debt relief is 31 per cent; donor loans are 22 per cent.  That makes 100 per cent of our budget.  Now, this is a serious situation, Mr. Speaker.  What if the donors stopped giving us money?  The economy would collapse.  So, I call upon Government, not only Central, but even local governments, to use these grants and debt relief to create more wealth for our Country, one, by increasing production; two, by increasing markets.  Here, Mr. Speaker, I sometimes do not agree with the Ministry of Finance when they talk of privatisation, liberalisation of markets.  Yes, but as a Government we have the responsibility to look for some of the markets for the major products so that when a farmer produces, he is able to sell his produce.

Take the question of milk.  We can sell milk now because there is a draught.  You wait when September comes, farmers will start pouring milk.  Can the government not foresee that?  Why can’t we have a powder milk plant?  Can’t we get market from outside people who want milk?  You leave it to the farmers and to the business men and at the end of the day, it is the peasant to suffer.  Therefore, the Government must take the responsibility to lead the farmers and the business men to get external markets for our products.  

On education.  The success of UPE is definitely obvious; to have increased the number of children from 2.6 to 6.5 in primary schools is no mean success.  But, Mr. Speaker, I call upon the Ministry of Education, especially, the Minister in charge of UPE, that some of this money used at the primary schools, for the last three years does not indicate much change.  There is lack of supervision of this money.  It ends between the hands of the headmaster, the Management Committee and that is all; you do not see much change.

In some areas where there has been good management, yes, the schools have been built, there are more books and the place is vibrant.  But in many schools, this money is not supervised and I would suggest that you request the L.C.3 Executives to take charge and make sure that this money is utilised for our children.  You find the headmaster buying chalk every month, a gross of chalk every month.  Do they eat this chalk?  So, there is a big problem there.  That money, although it is supposed to reduce poverty, but in the end it ends in wrong hands.

Secondary education, Mr. Speaker. I know Government cannot raise enough money to build secondary schools that will absorb the children from UPE Section.  Now, there is  short cut to the problem. Let the Government take over community and parents secondary schools, staff them, give them books and equipment. That will be the shortest way of creating secondary education rather than waiting to get money to build new schools.  You cannot have these resources.  So, the shortest way is to take over the schools which are already built by parents, by communities so that children leaving UPE level can get secondary education.

Otherwise, within the next two years, there is going to be a big number of children failing to get secondary education because there are no facilities.  But if Government took over these secondary schools belonging to communities and parents, definitely that will be a big relief; only that ministry will have to put in teachers and scholastic materials.  Mr. Speaker, thank you very much for giving me this chance to speak.

MAJ .OTOA TONNY (Army Representative): Mr. Speaker, I rise to support the motion.  I have a few remarks to make, Mr. Speaker.  First of all, I want to thank you to permit me to talk on this Budget.  This is the 5th Session of the 6th Parliament and the last one.  I know to many of us, it is a farewell Budget; we may not make it back.  But it would be very unfair if I did not mention some of the things which my Constituency feel so bad about.  It is the pension.  

Pension appears on page 26 of the Budget Speech of the Minister.  Nothing actually, is mentioned about people in the armed Forces.  This one is specifically for the traditional civil servants.  But Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask a few questions here.  What is pension?  Who earns pension?  Is pension earned or is it a favour?

I want to inform this hon. House that pensions, as a vocabulary, does not appear in UPDF presently. My colleagues who retired in 1992, officially, were recognised as men and officers who have served.  But up to now none of them has received what we call, “Pensions”.  We have Brig. Ogwang, who died commuting from Kumi to Kampala every month to ask for his pension. He died without getting it.  We have presently Maj. Gen. Maruru, who is alive, but commuting between Kampala and Bombo to look for his pensions.  I do not know when he will get it.  We have Maj. Mwabaze, who also retired in 1992, he is still walking on the road for his pensions.  We have Brig. Opolot who did not retire, but he got out of the service not because of his fault, but because of the political situation by that time.  The old man is still walking from Soroti to Bombo once in a month.  So, you can see the dilemma of my Constituency.  

I am 60 years old, really ready for retirement, I do not know for how long I will walk for my pensions.  So, Mr. Speaker, even the Ministry of Defence –(Interruption)

MR. MURULI MUKASA: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker and hon. Member for giving way.  As far as paying gratuity for the retired officers is concerned, Mr. Speaker, something has been done. I think about a month or two months ago, if you recall properly, Government paid one billion shillings to Officers and men who retired - (Interruption)

MR. MWANDHA:  Point of order.  Mr. Speaker, is it really in order - I withdraw (Laughter)

MR. MURULI:  Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, one billion shillings was paid to retired Officers in West Nile just about one and a half months ago. Government is due to pay about 44 billion shillings to these retired Officers. To date, 22 billion has been paid to retired Officers and the rest of the 22 is likely to be paid this year and next year. Mr. Speaker, something is being done. Definitely these retired Officers are going to be paid.  This year there is something in the budget.

MAJ. OTOA:  I would like to thank the Minister for the information he has given. But it looks like his briefing was not very accurate.  I am talking about pensions not gratuities and packages. (Applause)  Mr. Speaker, this is an issue which I think sometimes becomes part of our insecurity.  When you throw somebody on the streets officially, and he deserves to be paid, you leave him to live on the promises.  'It will be paid next year, we have budgeted for next year, next financial year'; Mr. Speaker, this is an issue that I think this Nation should take very seriously.

I had wanted to talk on the PMA.  PMA appears on page 25.  I know PMA is a component in the Poverty Eradication Action Plan.  On page 25 the Minister is proposing that he will introduce a new non sectoral PMA grant that will go to LC III and he continues to say 'in principle this money can be spent on any anti poverty problem decided upon by the LC III'.  A word of caution Mr. Speaker, to the Minister.  I do not know what type of Government in LC III he is talking about.  

I have done my research covering about five LC IIIs in this Country.  I have randomly picked them, one from the East, West, Central and  North and then one from an urban area.  Mr. Speaker, LC III is a problem.  LC III financial management is very poor.  There have been a lot of diversion of funds, which are sent by the centre to LC III, and instead it has turned into subsistence allowance.  We have Laws governing how many times the LC III should meet but to say the truth, LC III stay permanently in the sub county headquarters everyday in order to earn a living and that has become part of their work.  They are fully employed people of the LC III - all members.  So, when we are taking this little money down there to these people, there must be a safe guard for it.   

Lastly, Mr. Speaker, UPE.  UPE is a very good thing but the teachers and the headmasters have found a way out of it to eat this money. I am happy the hon. Minister of Primary Education is here and listening.  I am a chairman of one of the management committees of a primary school.  What I have found out, they have set themselves some examination boards covering either a sub county or covering an urban area and about 40 per cent of this UPE fund which we send every month - I think it is quarterly, 40 per cent of it goes for this examination boards.  They talk about marking, setting exams and reports.  I think this thing must be stopped, hon. Minister.  Mr. Speaker, as I said before it could be my farewell speech.  Thank you.

MR. KATWIREMU (Sheema South, Bushenyi): Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I stand to support the motion.  Mr. Speaker I am a survivor of two wars, which have come to this Country.  One of them, the soldiers nearly took my wife in a car and she survived narrowly.  And I want to congratulate this Government on that note that at least now we have some peace and some reasonable amount of order ushered in by this Government and some amount of rule of law to the extent Mr. Speaker that I am a product of a judiciary that I think is now credible because I challenged the result out of the elections and if it was not a judiciary that was working, possibly I would not be here Mr. Speaker.  And therefore I want to refer on page 38 of the budget where the Minister refers to the Referendum and congratulate Ugandans for having upheld the Constitutional order and went through the Referendum successfully.  

But I hasten to add Mr. Speaker, that winning a referendum is not necessarily solving the political problems of this Country.  It is not that because we have gone through a Referendum that we have resolved all the conflicts and the tensions that do exist within our political system.  We therefore, need to find the way forward; dialogue or otherwise but a way forward Mr. Speaker, that will not take me through the two wars that I have referred to which I survived narrowly, thank God.  

Secondly, I want to appreciate some performance of government one in the health services for containing aids but, I wish to point out, Mr. Speaker, in my area Bushenyi we have had very severe incidences of malaria, and we need a solution because now we have gone through about two cycles of malaria and I wish the minister for health could find a way of dealing with this thing before it kills a lot of people.  Last year we lost a lot of people and I am sure there are some measures we can take well ahead in time to make sure that this calamity does not befall our areas again.  

The minister for health should come out and advise what is the first line of defence for example?  What method or medicine should we use first?  Is Chroloquine still as effective as it was last year, because in some other countries surrounding us they are trying Fancida and other combinations.  But what is it that we should be using as a first line of attack in our circumstances?  

I want to appreciate some work , Mr. Speaker, on roads and communications except that the people of Bushenyi and constituency still ask what happened to the study of the Ishaka /Kagamba road which was done many years ago and the internal rate of return was found to be good enough for this road to be tarmacked.  

Mr. Speaker, the President came to Bushenyi recently and promised power from Kabwohe to Bugongi and Kitagata in order to stimulate the industrial growth in that area and we would want to know what has happened to this pledge.  Mr. Speaker, one of the ways of expanding our tax base is to expand our industrial base.  But in a place like Bushenyi where there is not even enough water for people to drink, how do you talk of industries when you can not supply for drinking in homes.  Mr. Speaker, we need to address these issues before we can talk about industrialising this country.  In some areas you just can not even start industries at all.

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I note in the budget that we can only manage to raise about 50 per cent of our budget from our own resources our own taxes.  We compound the problem, Mr. Speaker, by extravagance and corruption.  Extravagance, Mr. Speaker, in buying vehicles which even those manufacture them their governments do not use.  Mr. Speaker, if you gave me the equivalent of one vehicle for 80 million, and you gave me 80 million for Sheema South constituency, and I spent that money on buying seedlings for coffee because coffee wilt has wiped out our plantations, I would make very huge impact on that constituency.  But, Mr. Speaker, I said this last year how long can we go on being extravagant when we can not afford it?  Is it really necessary for us to drive 4000 cc , 5000 cc vehicles of 80 million, 60 million, 70 million, and our minister has told us this morning that others are on the way coming into the country.  Mr. Speaker, I do not think we can afford.

THE SPEAKER:  Your time is up. (Laughter)
 
MR. KATWIREMU:  Mr. Speaker, can I just beg for one minute?

SPEAKER:  Finish your sentence.

MR. KATWIREMU:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I was coming to – Mr. Speaker, there is some – on the ministerial statement of finance on page 23, I see something to do with procurement system.  One of the biggest problems, Mr. Speaker, in which we are losing money is a procurement system of government.  I welcome some statement in the minister for finance’s policy statement that they are going to strengthen the Central tender board, because one of the problems we are having in this Central tender board is that we are having contracts which people are complaining about roads here.  

Contracts we have issued, Mr. Speaker, hardly before they executed they are increased by 30 per cent, by 40 per cent;  and when you talk to people who sit on Central tender board they will tell you that they have almost given up because things are revised in other ministries and they are brought to the tender board just like a budget is brought to Parliament just, sometimes may be just to rubber stamp. So, I welcome the Cabinet’s decision that strengthen the Central tender board make it autonomous and staff it properly.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MRS. ABU DOMINICA(Woman Representative, Moyo):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise to support the motion, Mr. Speaker, and I would like to commend government for the measures that are being taken to improve the quality of the life of our people as analysed by the minister on pages 20 to 25.  But I would like to appeal to government to realise that, the good things are normally taken for granted.  It is the things which are pinching which people normally dwell so much about. 

For this reason I would like to observe that when Members cry about issues in their constituencies government not only listens but acts.  I am talking about the west Nile region, Mr. Speaker.  The roads, we have cried blood about the trunk road in the West Nile region for the last 14 years. In fact there are no roads there, Karuma/Pakwach has become part of history.  Mr. Speaker, the stones are so many that you have to choose which one to knock, there is no way you can avoid them.  What can be done about this stat of affairs?  

In this respect I would like to liken the government to a mother who feeds her hungry children on promises.  If your children are hungry and waiting for food, what is the point of saying, you have already fetched water, food is soon coming. Stay put now I have ground the millet ,food will soon come.  You know, I am now lighting the fire.  We are being fed on reports of progress with no action -(Interruption)

MR. AWUZU:  Thank you hon. Dominica Abu for giving way, thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise only to say that this government is not feeding its children on promises.  In fact this government is doing what it says it is doing on roads, especially in West Nile.  I want to inform you that, your particular road, the road from Atiak up to Moyo is going to be worked on-(Laughter)- Parliament approved the loan and we have already given out the consultancy services which means it is not a promise we are actually and soon after that the work will be done physically; and then the Karuma/Pakwach road which you are talking about if you have seen in the papers, it is not promises anymore, because we have already asked for tenders, we have selected the contractors short listed and by the end of  September they will have handed in their quotations and we shall proceed to evaluate them and then choose the contractor who will actually go to do the work;  and then one year later on, the Karuma/Pakwach section will follow in the same way.  So we are not giving promises only, we are actually delivering.  Thank you very much.

MRS ABU DOMINICA:    I thank the hon. Minister for that information which is not the first of its type in this House.  But in church we sing that we stand on the promises of the Lord.  So we are here standing on the promises of the Minister and government.  But on a more serious note Mr. Speaker, I would like to request that these studies and volumes and volumes of studies be put to an end.  We want to see things rolling there.  I was there just two weeks ago and the road is no more.  So please Mr. Minister, instead of months and  years and all those promises, act so that we can appreciate and feel that we are part of the country.  

West Nile is a region of total darkness.  I think it is the only region in this country where you get electricity from 7 to 9.  Mr. Speaker, when I was young, we used to help, when my mother was cooking late at night, I would hold a grass torch for her to mingle.  This was just for a specific purpose.  When the mingling was over, you were back into darkness because even in darkness you could find your mouth.  (Laughter).

MR. ILUKORI:  Point of information.  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker and I sincerely thank the hon. Member for giving way.  The information I am going to give is to the effect that if there is any area in this country which is in total darkness, it is Karamoja. 
 
MRS ABU DOMINICA:   I thank the hon. Member for that information.  In fact I had started with West Nile but I was going to mention Karamoja as another region which is really not part of Uganda.  

MRS SYDA BUMBA :  Point of information.  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I wish to thank the hon. Member for giving way. I want to inform the hon. Member that this government has gone ahead to fulfil the promises it has made to the people of West Nile.  Only two months ago, this House approved a loan from the Swedish Development Agency and the bigger part of this loan is going for the electrification of West Nile.  A request has already been made to the Agency to release funds and we hope that within a few months, we shall start on the procurement process. 

In the meantime Mr. Speaker, the Nyagak hydro project has been advertised for development and we have started receiving bids and we are going to start on the evaluation in the middle of next month.  We hope to start construction of the Nyagak hydro project by the end of the year.  I thank you Mr. Speaker.

MRS ABU DOMINICA:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I would like to thank the hon. Minister for that information.  All that I am begging is that these promises become reality.  That is all and let it be expedited.  That is all that I am asking.  Otherwise Mr. Speaker, in this computer age,  when offices in other parts are being given computers, the computers we have in West Nile, some of them are just monuments and some of them are being run on very expensive generators which we cannot afford Mr. Speaker.  

Another issue I would like to bring to government attention in connection with this –

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, your time is up.

MRS ABU DOMINICA:  Okay let me finish hon. Member.  My time is up.  Mr. Speaker, we are often told in the West Nile region that for you, you are okay.  You have so many NGOs.  I would like to inform this House that those NGOs that are being talked of have gone there specifically to serve the refugees community and Mr. Speaker, the presence of the refugees is having an impact on the region in that we are having to share the little that we have.  Mr. Speaker, when you have cooked food for five people and then 30 more arrive, you know how difficult it will be to share that food for the now 35 people.  So government should not abdicate its responsibility to the region because of the presence of NGOs in the West Nile region.  

Finally Mr. Speaker, I would like to appeal to the Ministers that they should really find out and watch what goes on about the releases that are being given out to districts.  We have reason to believe and we shall inform some of them in camera that some of these releases are not reaching the districts.  They are being made to evaporate somewhere in the Ministry headquarters and if they do trickle down to the districts, they are being mismanaged.  So please, I would like to appeal to them to take note.  Thank you Mr. Speaker.

MR. OKUMU RINGA:  Point of order.  Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of order.  The Minister responsible for Energy gave information with regard to loan which was received and processed by this Parliament for transmission of electric power supply in West Nile region.  Mr. Speaker, when you gave me the Floor this afternoon –

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Okumu Ringa, if you are going to contribute, I am going to ask you to resume  your seat.

MR. OKUMU RINGA:  No, I am just developing the point Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  What is the point of order?  There is no Minister on the Floor.  

MR. OKUMU RINGA:  Mr. Speaker, we received wrong information from the Minister.  That is what I want to correct if you would allow me Mr. Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Okumu Ringa, I am not allowing you.  I will give you an opportunity to say what you want to say later on.  You have made your contribution and I am still worried that you intend to carry your threat which I will regard as an act of mischief.

MR. KITYO MUTEBI (Mawokota South, Mpigi):  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker.  I rise to support  the motion and thank the NRM government for removing the stigma which used to come with budget days.  You remember the prices had to change at midnight but I think now that one is no longer holding.  We thank the movement government for that change in budget presentation.  The people of South Mawokota have asked me also to thank two ministries in particular;  the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Works, because they have made an impact in my constituency.  We thank them.  

My debate is going to concentrate on agriculture and rural development, and I would like to say that the top leadership of this government , from the presidency down to Members of Parliament, most of us are farmers. But what is disturbing me  - those top government officials, we have failed to transform agriculture and finding practical solutions to agriculture.  Many of us have run farms and we have burnt our fingers.  Many of the politicians can now run their farms because they are using political money to run farms, and it is possible that these farms can collapse immediately you lose your political office.  

The living example is the late hon. Dr. Kisekka’s farm.  It had become a pilgrimage site, all of us we had gone to see Temangalo, but immediately he left the Vice Presidency, the bank started to run on his neck and part of the farm was sold.  Since we are still in power, we should make sure that we have practical solutions to agriculture, so that we prepare our safe landing when we leave politics, and these practical solutions I am talking about are about marketing, rural credit, empowering the farmers, farmer’s organizations and advisory service.  

The marketing function is the final activity of all the farm works, the internal market is virtually not there, because 90 per cent are producers and only ten per cent are consumers.  In Europe, five per cent are producers and 95 per cent are consumers.  You can say that in Europe there is ready internal market.  We farm all of us throughout Uganda, and when we produce we end up in Owino, in Nakawa, in Kalerwe, and that is where we go;  and you know the law of demand and supply.  When the supply is too much, of course, the prices are depressed.  Since the internal market is not available, we have to think of external market.  

The Government must have a deliberate programme to enter an export market with full force;  and this is possible.  Our balance of trade – somebody has said it is over 200 per cent;  the usual story of getting dollars is by marketing what we have, agricultural products.  But there are no good plans for Uganda to enter expart market.  Some countries which are nearing us like Kenya, they buy our products and export them and then they say this is a product of Kenya.  Uganda cannot even try to exhibit what they produce – because I have been going throughout the international exhibitions, Uganda cannot feature there, because we say do not have money.  When you do not exhibit you cannot market!  It is a simple law.  So, we hope that people responsible in Government will target these external exhibitions so that we can exhibit what we are producing. 

About food security;  the European countries have got six months of winter, but within the six months of winter they can eat and their animals can feed.  For us in Uganda we get a draught of two months and we are off balance;  and every year there is famine and relief.  Can we not plan for these two months only and have enough food so that we can feed our people during famine?  Why can we not do that?  

All our silos are empty  -  what is the problem? You can find areas with surplus food and other areas with deficit food.  Now we have a debt relief, and we have the poverty eradication fund, can we not put all this money into food security so that we make sure that we can feed our people in the only two months –(Interruption).

DR. NKUUHE:  Point of information.  I thank hon. Kityo, and I would like to inform him that, in spite of what he is contributing, the Government, actually, does not have a food security policy;  therefore, it is impossible to even plan or to anticipate when there is no policy.  When you look at the plan for modernization of agriculture, there is about a paragraph saying that food security will be based on market forces, and not self sufficiency.  Therefore, we can only prepare for the worst.

MR. KITYO:  I thank the Member for his information.  Mr. Speaker, personally I have no confidence in the plan of modernisation of agriculture;  because the plan of modernisation of agriculture is a collection of speeches and whatever, which they have been always telling us here.  There is no practical solutions in the plan for modernisation of agriculture, and very important issues like irrigation, soil mapping, soil planning, farm planning, are not in the modernisation of agriculture.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR.  ABURA KENE (Moroto County, Lira):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, let me start by thanking the Minister for coming up with a Budget speech which apparently seems to show us that there is now a direction which we are going through;  but most of this appear to be theoretical.  I hope in future as time goes on most of it will be translated into practical and we can see proper development.  

I want to make few comments and I want to start with the pension.  The former East African Community employees.  Mr. Speaker, you have spoken a lot on this issue;  so many people!  It is after 20 years since the former East African Community collapsed, and people are on the street, they are coming to Kampala every now and then.  Now I have seen the Minister’s speech, he said he has got money which he is going to pay them.  But I am appealing to him, if he does not have the money, at least, pay them something little and then change that bit to Treasury Bill so that they can use that to go to the bank and get something which can assist them.  If he can change it to Treasury Bills, I think, it will help the former – at least the relatives of the surviving former employees.  

On secondary education, the Government has a plan that we should have secondary schools in each sub-county.  I have climbed Crested Tower during those days;  several times about two subcounties in Moroto County, which do not have secondary schools – this is Amugo and Abako;  I have again climbed the Embassy House and I have not seen anything yet.  I hoped, at least the Minister is listening so it can now be – they are not working properly. At least the Minister should now think seriously about the people of Moroto.  They have really remained behind.  At least allow them to have, particularly these two sub-counties, so that they can at least send their children.  Maybe some of those will reach Makerere one day so Mr. Speaker, I am appealing to the Minister to think seriously about these two sub-counties.  

The other issue, which I want to touch on, is agriculture. Agriculture as my other colleagues have said, is something which is not taken seriously as say, you also feel it is theoretical, it is just paper work, it is research paper.  No, we are not dealing with research.  We want development, we want to find a way of improving the standard of living of our people and it is only agriculture which can help us to do that.  80% of our population live in rural areas and they live on agriculture and the only way to do that is to help them.  Give them farm implements, give them cheaper seeds, give them money which they can use for planting their crops.  

Take for example, we are talking of coffee wilt disease. This Minister’s speech says the production has fallen mainly because of coffee wilt disease.  I am saying, it would be better if some money was allocated.  We have started planting coffee in the North.  Why do you not put money aside to take it to the North, buying seedlings to give people to plant those coffee seedlings?  So, I think that would be the best way of improving the standard of living of those people.  

The other thing which I want to touch on, is non-traditional crops.  Mr. Speaker, we had simsim seeds and we had people who brought them.  There is no proper market for them.  Can the Minister - as we have said all along, the market is a problem for some of these non-traditional crops.  If we can find a way of looking for those markets, I think it will help this area to develop very fast.  Mr. Speaker, there are so many things I want to touch on but let me first go further and say, I have seen in the budget is talking about sub-counties –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: One more minute.

MR. ABURA KENE: Thank you.  Sub-counties going to be given some money.  I was going to suggest that the budget for sub-counties should originate from the headquarters here.  If you can get at least one sub-county getting not, at least, a maximum about 300 million shillings for each sub-county.  I think that will help to bring development in those areas.  Mr. Speaker, although I have not seen any Minister of Communication and Transport visiting Moroto, I have three bridges I have appealed to the Government because these bridges are too wide.  The district cannot manage to raise enough money for building them.  Some of them run into a figure of three hundred million shillings to construct them.  Which district can get that money?  Mr. Speaker, okay I will get the information sir.

DR. NKUUHE: Point of information.  Thank you for giving way.  Government is not abdicating its duty of building bridges in this country.  In fact, if you look at our policy statement, we now have got a special division for bridges and you will remember that we have secured a loan which Parliament approved under El-Nino for dealing with roads which were damaged during El-Nino and bridges particularly, and the information which we are going to use for whatever we deal with came from the districts so the bridges in your area, which we are going to deal with, are those which we got the information from the engineers from your area.  So, if your engineers did a good job, then we are going to deal with all the bridges which you are worried about.  Thank you very much.  

MR. ABURA KENE: Thank you Mr. Minister for your information.  What I am saying, these bridges are also useful to you.  You will take them as security road to transport the troops, if you want to approach the area where the Karimojong are or where the rebels are coming through –(Laughter)- This will help you –(Interruption)- Mr. Speaker, let me continue because you said I have very little time.  Mr. Speaker, the other thing I want to touch on is security.

THE SPEAKER: Your time is up.  Conclude.

MR. ABURA KENE: Can I conclude? Two sentences only.  The Karimojong issue is a big problem.  It needs a massive approach, not only water, not only taking away the guns.  We need all the Ministries to get involved, Health, Education, Water or Mineral Energy.

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the Government for liberalising the press.  We now have several press, several newspapers, we have several radio stations but I am going to appeal because we have so many people who are going around with rumours.  If the Government can allocate one corner in the town which they could call, maybe Freedom Square where somebody goes, like they have it in London, Hyde Park, where you can shout your head off, it would be good to allow our people also to go and talk there.  There, we may get good information.  The Government will get good information.  It may even reduce the expenditure on ISO or whatever the case is.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Thank you very much.

MS. KABAKUMBA MASIKO (Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to add my voice to the others who have thanked the Minister for coming up with this speech but there are a few comments I would like to make. First is the problem which has been mentioned excluding Masindi, maybe because the planners do not know much about Masindi but I am very surprised.  This is the issue of water for animals.  People normally forget that Masindi district is part of the cattle corridor coming from down up to Karamoja, but when they reach Masindi, they take it for granted that we do not keep animals yet we have them in plenty and they lack water.  

For example, on page 22, we are talking of designing new dams for those districts which did not benefit and they are mentioning Mbarara, which has benefited already.  They are talking of Hoima and Kumi districts.  Masindi is left out completely. Even the little natural source we had, that is River Kafu, was fenced off by Uganda Livestock Industries, that is Kiryana and Kimpisi ranches which the Ministry of Finance is planning to privatise.  As such the people of Masindi district in general and Kimengo sub-county in particular cannot access water from Kafu River yet it should be our resource but Government has denied us that opportunity of feeding and watering our animals on River Kafu water. What option is there for us! Government should consider seriously including Masindi District on the program of water for animals. 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I am very happy there is a provision for the improvement of inland water  transport and I hope as they were planning they took Masindi District into consideration especially on Lake Albert.  You have heard several accidents  on that lake, and we have talked  about this issue several times but the Minister or the Ministry of Works Transport and communication  seems not to be bothered as if the lives of people which perish on that lake are not so important or they do not pay tax to this country.  I would like to request the Ministry to at least spend some of the 5.4 billion in the budget on clearing Lake Albert of the pillars and demarcating the borders.  That not withstanding I would like to thank Government for the ferry –(Interruption)

MR. LUKUMU : Point of information.  Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform the speaker on the Floor that as for lake Albert stretching all the way from Toroko which is in Bundibugyo District up to Butyaba this is a distance of nearly 200 miles along the shores of lake Albert, this area is not accessible.  You can only see a vehicle at Toroko, at the southern end of  lake Albert and also when you come to Butyaba.  So, this area covers 3 districts; Bundibugyo, Kibale and Hoima District;  the areas along the shores of lake Albert in these three districts are not accessible.  Therefore, the water transport program should not leave out Lake Albert.  I thank you.

MRS. KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much for that useful information, I hope the Ministry officials have noted with concern the people’s views.  I was thanking the Government for the ferry at Waseko, which goes across to Panyimur.  It has greatly relieved our people and those across in Nebi district and eased their movements.  

Thirdly, Mr. Speaker, I am intrigued about the accountability of UPE funds, on page 20; paragraph 60 the Government is putting in place a school performance award to primary schools making the greatest improvement  in accounting and record keeping.  Mr. Speaker, I will tell you some of these headmasters do not know how to interpret the guidelines of UPE.  Now, how are they going to improve on accounting procedures?  I think what the Government should do is to train   these people and the management committees on how to account before they just start giving awards.  I know these awards may go only to urban schools, which are very, enlighten and that will leave out our rural schools which would otherwise have competed favourably for the awards if they are given the skills.  

Lastly, Mr. Speaker, the Government is planning to privatise the Uganda Seed project, but at the same time I have received documents, seeking a loan to support a similar Seed Project in West Nile. I do not understand. There seems to be some uncoordinated actions in government. Because as government tries to privatise Uganda Seed Project it is setting up another similar project! Why don’t you not facilitate the private sector to set up these projects and own them other than seeking loans from outside, then our people have to pay and government eventually sell it off at a give away price. I think it is a very wrong way of doing things.  On colonal coffee, Mr. Speaker, as I finalise, coronal coffee is a very good plant and I think the project which has been mentioned is very noble, but the way these funds are managed leaves a lot to be desired because people do not know how to access the colonal coffee; from where and when.  -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, your time is up, make your last sentence.

MRS. KABAKUMBA:  I am finalising, Mr. Speaker, my last sentence is; the government should give us a clear statement and guidelines on how people who have been affected by the coffee wilt disease can access the funds meant to replace their affected plants.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

DR. MATOVU BYATIKE (Entebbe Municipality, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker and Hon. Members. First of all, I would like to thank the Government for improving on the plight of the pensioners.  In fact, I would like to remind the House that these ladies and gentlemen do not want to be called pensioners, but senior citizens, which I think is a more befitting description.  

I like the objectives as outlined in the speech on page 26.  Those were very, very, nice, and I would call them sweet songs for the senior citizens, and I would appeal to the government to make 28th be pay day for all pensioners whether in Kampala, in Kapchorwa or anywhere - let that be the day so that they do not have to walk to Kampala or to Wandegeya to get their cheques.  Let the cheques for upcountry be sent well in time for the senior citizens to get their money on the 28th, that is my appeal.  The UNSSF has been doing a good job if only they could work more on some of the conditions; it is a good idea to liberalise what the NSSF has been doing. They could review some of their conditionalities, for example that one which stipulates that the money is given out only when somebody is 55 years old or above.  Now, with the life expectancy going down to 42 years, that might be a bit of a problem, so I think we better consider that scenario. 

I would like to touch on something hon. Maj. Otoa talked about and that is the pension arrangement for the armed forces. I would like us to look into this issue very, very, seriously indeed.  The business of having a special pension program for the armed forces is disturbing to some of us who have seen these ladies and gentlemen when they retire. I would like us to have a uniform pension program so that everybody, whether in the armed forces or in the traditional civil service gets the same amount of money at the equivalent levels.  

It is really sad when a captain comes to you, Mr. Speaker, and says, “I have been working for 28 years”, and his take home cheque is going to be 120,000 Shillings! Whether that is gratuity or what ever , it is quite absurd for somebody of that rank to be given that amount of money on retiring. These are the people who are risking their lives for the rest of us.   Some civilians are given millions and therefore a captain to go home with only 120,000 Shillings is absurd and this is something we have to critically look into. 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to touch on the education bit of it, -(Interruption)

MR. MURULI MUKASA : Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Really, no Captain will go away or has gone away with only 120,000/=.  –(Interjection)- For example recently in Arua, the least that one got was 1.2 million. Nobody is going to get 120,000! Not even a private will go away with 120,000, 130,000 Shillings or 200,000= shillings. Each will get a good sum of money, Mr. Speaker.

DR. MATOVU:  Mr. Speaker, I hope we are not confusing gratuity and pension - this is something we have to be clear about. Is it gratuity or pension? The 7,000,000=, this is something we have to look into, if I may appeal to the minister. Now, Mr. Speaker, I was touching on the education bit in the budget speech.  It had some good news on UPE, on secondary schools and vocational institutions. But I would like to appeal to the Government that we should not close our eyes on the universities and tertiary institutions. These are also as important. 

A figure of 2000 students to be catered for by the government is getting more and more absurd when one looks at the figure of 22,000 people who qualify for admission into the university. Let us work faster on the loan scheme so that people who qualify get the loans and not only to public universities but also to private universities so that we really get this shortcoming sorted out because I think it is very, very important indeed. In fact, the other day His Excellency, the President was talking about the lack of specialists in this country.  It is very important to have specialists in all spheres of life; e.g. in health, in the Judiciary, etc. Mr. Speaker going by the standards of this present House, educated politicians are an asset to this country.  

Lastly, Mr. Speaker, I am going to talk about roads.  Mr. Speaker -(An Hon Member rose_)- Mr. Speaker, I think I am running out of time, I am Sorry about that, honourable! -(Interruption)- You will negotiate for more time later.  I am talking about roads.  Mr. Speaker, practically every debate in this House is on roads.  Whether its on health, if there is a health centre, there is no road going to it, if there is a school, there is no road going to it; I am just wondering whether we can put aside a specific percentage of the revenue collected from road licences, registration of vehicles, and from areas in that category, to be put on the construction and maintenance of roads?!  I think that would help us.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Matovu, I would like to thank you for your capacity time management.  Thank you.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA (Kibaale County, Kabarole):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to support the motion but with some observations particularly on areas affecting the people of my constituency.  

The first observation is on agriculture.  Mr. Speaker, I think 75 percent of the people I represent if not nearly in all parts of the country, depend on subsistence agriculture.  Mr. Speaker, in the President's Manifesto in the last Presidential elections, talked of modernisation of agriculture; and every year in our budgeting we have been talking modernisation of agriculture.  Mr. Speaker, the people of Kibaale are worried that this modernisation of agriculture has remained on paper.  It is not practical on the ground.  There has been drought of recent and basically all the crops are non existent. The assessment of graduated tax was based on gardens and the worry is that people might even fail to raise the money to pay the graduated tax, in addition to the hunger they will face. Even local governments will not function because there will be no money from taxes because they will be having nothing to sell. So, what is happening?  

The Minister's speech has not addressed the real issues of where the people of Kibaale will get a valley dam for their few animals; He has not mentioned of any irrigation scheme either in Kibaale or in Karamoja, if that money was voted, and it is not mentioned in this financial year budget as to whether they are going to put any irrigation scheme in either West Nile, Kabarole or in Kotido, should we would say they are moving towards modernisation of agriculture? 

As of now in this budget speech, I really see nothing that will modernise agriculture. Okay there has been some attempt to recruit extension workers at the sub-counties but Mr. Speaker, the worry the local people have is that these extension workers, the graduates we have recruited at the sub-counties are not adequately facilitated by the government.  In some other areas they are becoming a burden to the peasants.  I was visiting one sub-county where there is a veterinary extension officer. To invite him to diagonise and treat your animals, you have to pay 2000 shillings consultation fee and 3000 shillings for transport which is 5000 shillings. This figure is difficult to raise for a peasant. Information from my neighbour is accepted.

DR. BYARUHANGA FABIUS:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would wish to inform hon. Capt. Byaruhanga that the extension workers are actually employees of the district local government; and we expect that the district local government to earn the sub-county local government contribute to the sustenance of their programmes in the respective sub-counties.  As we talk today, the centre is specifically facilitating these extension workers, but should not be taken to mean that we are responsible for them.  It is actually the district local government and the sub-county local government which from the tax payers money should facilitate these extension workers.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have really got the information of the Minister. It compounds my worry, because the few crops where they get the money to pay graduated tax have all wilted.  The tax collection will be very low.  Where will the local governments get the money to facilitate these extension workers?  It compounds the worry and it is still the peasants to suffer the burden.  

On UPE.  It is good they increased the number of teachers on the pay roll, primary school teachers; but still the number is not adequate due to the fact that the number of entrants in the primary schools on UPE programme, the teacher pupil ratio is still very low.  But, Mr. Speaker, as  more pupils join primary education, the same number joins the secondary education.  This budget has not addressed the issue of removing the ban on recruitment of secondary school teachers, the number is still not adequate to handle the pupil coming from primary schools, from the UPE scheme.  So, the secondary school education should also be given priority and to increase the number of teachers.

Lastly, Mr. Speaker, the hon. Minister mentions Uganda Railways Corporation and that they are seeking some assistance to commercialise it.  Mr. Speaker, people of my constituency depended on the Kampala-Kasese line and its closure in the past years has really affected their income.  I hope the Minister will put in place a faster scheme to ensure that that railway line is opened and the people benefit.  

Lastly, on environment,  we have been talking – (Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. member, you have said 'lastly' twice.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA:  The last statement, Mr. Speaker.  On tree planting, the Minister mentions NEMA and they mention wetlands.  NEMA is emphasising on wetlands, which wetlands are non existent in most areas.  They are already cleared but they have not addressed the issue of tree planting.   You talk of people planting trees but there has been no provision of seedlings to these up country areas for them to get enough seedlings to plant.  Thank you Mr. Speaker.

MS. BAKOKO BAKORU    (Woman Representative, Arua):   Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I also rise to support this motion and I want to say that every year we debate the Minister’s budget speech and the actual Budget but we make very little or no alterations to the Budget.  So, I hope in future, that is the 7th Parliament, will have an impact on altering the Budget as well. 

I have a few observations to make and the first one is  on access to credit; if we talking about poverty reduction, Mr. Speaker, in Arua district, we now have several micro-finance institutions, for example PRIDE Africa, FINCA and others.  But all these institutions are concentrated in the town and do not go out to the rural areas yet we know that access to micro finance credit is very crucial if we have got to reduce poverty among our population in this country.  My appeal to Government is that, instead of these Micro Finance institutions remaining in the towns, they should get out to access the rural poor because that is where the problem is.  And also another problem I have seen is the methods they use for recovering their monies, Mr. Speaker.   

Recently, I had an opportunity to go to Bangladesh and I was overwhelmed by the method which the Grameen Bank uses to recover money.  They do not make the clients feel insecure, like it is in our case.  Most of our people after they default, they actually run away and hide. I do not think our institutions help the clients to be able to realise and prevent the situations where losses are incurred but rather they force clients to go into hiding. In Bangladesh they help them to be able to recover and see how they can generate money and return or recover these funds back to the people who lend it to them, even after defaulting, or prevent the situation of losses.

 I would like to appreciate the efforts of the Ministry of Health and the Local Government.  In the health sector, Mr. Speaker, in the speech we were told that the prevalence of HIV/AIDS has reduced from 18.5 per cent to 9.5.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate the people of this country for having been able to change their behaviour towards that trend, but I think we need to sustain what we have achieved.  

Recently, Mr. Speaker, I also learnt that the age group above 35 or 40 seem to be very difficult in changing their behaviour and I think all of us here have to become advocates to help our own age groups to change that behaviour, because the young ones have to learn from us.

I want to say that I can attribute some of this success to the increased access to funds for AIDS programmes.  HIV/AIDS   Programme was given a lot of priority in terms of funding and these funds have been given to Community Based Organisations right down at the low levels.  So, Mr. Speaker, I think if we really want to make a lot of impact, that is what I am coming to now in relation to Local Government Projects in Arua District, the capacity building and the District Development Projects.  

We should start giving money to the Sub-Counties.   This business of leaving money at the District level is not having much impact and I can testify here that in Arua District where we are having the District Development Projects and Capacity Building where plans are evolved by the villages and the parishes and the money is taken to the Sub-Counties, we are seeing impact in the education sector, we are seeing impact on the roads, we are seeing impact in several areas.  So, I think instead of holding money at the District level and the Central level, we should give more money to the Sub-Counties from all the programmes including agriculture.

Many people have been contributing here and giving their  feelings that agriculture is not performing very well.  Mr. Speaker, I can remember from 1992, I think several officers from the agricultural sector over 1,000 were retrenched. I do not know if these retrenched people can be re-employment but if they cannot and the Minister is telling us that they do not have the extension workers on the ground and only 200 were left to work in the Service or Agricultural Sector. That is where the gist of the matter is.  I think the Ministry of Agriculture must also develop a surveillance system.  Ten years ago in Arua we had a hunger situation where people even stored mangoes in the granaries and it is exactly 10 years today, when there is a hunger situation again and a sack of cassava, five months ago which was less than 20,000/= is now 70,000/=.  

Over the weekend I was in Arua and people were carrying cassava in plastic bags to take to a funeral.  I think that is very disastrous, Mr. Speaker.  We cannot go on always nursing disaster, we should be able to monitor and see how we can come out with or – be able to project that we are going to have a problem and be prepared for it.  

Finally, Mr. Speaker, we heard that import duty and VAT on mosquito nets were waved.  But Mr. Speaker, has the cost of mosquito nets come down?  I think they are still more than 8,000/= and I think some years back they were 7,000/=.   So, I would really like to see that when Government says we have waved off the taxes, that the cost of these mosquito nets are reduced and that people can also access them and buy them.

My recommendation is that more money should go to the sub-counties and that way, the people will feel the impact of funding in this country, but not to leave the money at the national or the central level.  If it means decentralising corruption at the sub-counties, let it go down to the sub-counties.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I call upon the Minister of Finance to wind up.  But before he does so, the hon. Okumu Ringa has a burning issue relating to information about Nyagang.  I would like him to make his point so that the Minister for Energy can respond before the Minister of Finance comes on the Floor.

MISS. BABIHUGA:  Point of procedure. Mr. Speaker, in accordance to our Rules of Procedure, a Member is allowed to contribute only once on a topic that is being debated in the House.  And the hon. Okumu Ringa has had more than his share in contributing to this debate, while some of us have not contributed Mr. Speaker.  Is it procedurally right for him to have yet another chance to contribute to this debate Sir?

THE SPEAKER: It is procedurally correct after a Member has contributed to seek clarification subsequent to his contribution.  Hon. Okumu indeed did contribute, but like other Members, who had contributed, they were seeking clarifications from Ministers or from other Members of Parliament who were making contributions.  He is not contributing, but he had a point in respect of which he wanted a clarification from the Minister of Energy.  That is my recollection.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Point of clarification.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to thank you because you gave me an opportunity to contribute, and in my contribution I made remarks regarding Nyagang Power Station.  Unfortunately, the Minister responsible for the sector was not in the House that time, so there was no response.  So when hon. Abu was contributing on the same subject, I sought clarification, and this is the clarification I am seeking Mr. Minister.  

According to our Draft Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure, Recurrent and Development, particularly Development the last page, the last page provides 14.6 billion shillings for the construction of Nyagang Power Project.  Now, about two weeks ago the Ministry responsible for this sector advertised the development of Nyagang as independent power producer.  Now the clarification I am seeking is, if Nyagang is to be developed as IPP, why has Government provided this money?  Is this just window dressing or what is it?  Can the Minister explain?  Because as far as the procedure is concerned, if it is IPP, then Government would not necessarily provide this money.    So if that is the case, why was this money provided, is it for window dressing?  That is the clarification I am seeking.  Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF ENERGY(Mrs. Syda Bbumba): Clarification.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank my hon. colleague for getting me this opportunity to give further clarification on the subject. Mr. Speaker, according to the Electricity Act, all new generation capacities are going to be developed by the private sector.  Government is going to be involved in transmission, and to a limited extent distribution.  So Mr. Speaker, the money which is provided for in the development budget for Nyagak power project is not for development of the plan, but it is for the extension of the transmission and distribution wires.  And this is the money we are going to use to extend power all the way from Nyagak through Bondo, Okollo, and Arube up to Arua, Mr. Speaker.   That money is for distribution lines.  I thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PRIVATISATION)(Mr. Manzi Tumubweinee): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I want to thank all my colleagues for the contributions, I want to assure them that all the Contributions have been recorded and whatever can be accommodated will be accommodated and what cannot, of course will not.   Mr. Speaker, one thing that has been common in all the contributions is that we need capacity building at lower levels of Government, and indeed when we were asking for funds recently of 80 million dollars, specifically we wanted those funds to help us build capacity at the lower level.  

I remember one question being raised was, why do you need this money for the Auditor General?  Why do you need capacity?  It is becoming clear after this general discussion that, unless we build capacity at the Auditor General’s level, we have a problem of managing funds at the lower levels.  Because we have now 817 sub-counties and they need to be audited.  We have currently 45 districts and most likely we shall go up with a number of districts.  And then we have got other course centres at the Ministries and other institutions and organisations.  That means that we must now ensure that the capacity of the Auditor General is strengthened, we must build capacity at the Local Government level especially LC III who are going to be handling a lot more funds at levels which require understanding of financial management. 

I also see the need to build capacity at the accounting level and the IGG level to be able to monitor what actually we are sending downstairs.  And these I think are good recommendations and I can assure you where it is possible, we shall do everything possible to ensure that this capacity is built.  

However, there is something that we need to appreciate.  We have all been contributing and actually sometimes at some levels we have been lamenting as to what should be done.  The issue is what are the solutions?  The Ministry of Finance alone cannot look for solutions.  We must share in the provision of solutions for this economy.  

Yesterday when I was seconding the motion I said, we have now reached a stage where 47 percent of the budget is being funded by our local resources and 53 is being funded by donors.  That cannot be said to be the best, because we should be moving towards having 100 percent funding of our budget, and having donors to help us in terms of some levels of development and capacity building, but not the other way round.  Therefore hon. Members, we must appreciate that we still have some problems, which we must share and find solutions together.  Because the economy cannot be run by one individual, but it can only be run by all of us at the leadership level and each must contribute in seeking for a solution.

Another issue that has been brought up -(Interruption)

MR. AKENY: Point of clarification. Mr. Speaker, although the Minister is saying there is not enough to cover the whole area, the clarification I am seeking is, there some areas which used to have electricity up to now they have not been rehabilitated. When will such people get a line like Lira to allow - thank you.

MR. ILUKORI: Point of clarification. Thank you very much Mr. Speaker and I thank the hon. Minister for giving way.  Mr. Speaker, whereas the resource envelope is so small, there are areas which have at least had something done and yet there are areas which have none for even the Energy Minister when she was clarifying hon. Okumu Ringa, she did not even make mention of Karamoja why should this envelope continue to be small and continue to deny us this vital resource, Mr. Speaker.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Mr. Speaker, I am not very clear about the first clarification because I do not seem to have talked about electricity and electricity lines. However, be that as it may, I think that one will be answered in the Policy Statements on Energy as to why some areas have not got power and what does Electricity Act now say on how electricity lines can go to new places.

On the question raised by my colleague from Karamoja, I think I will cover it under PAF (Poverty Action Fund) and Poverty Eradication Action Plan.  

I will just briefly pass through some areas which were raised.  But one thing that came up very clear was that, there is a complaint as to why should the Minister of Finance will use taxes on commodities and then prices of those commodities. There is no contradiction.  A reduction of 5 per cent tax on soda or soft drinks, when the depreciation of the currency is 3 per cent the end result is that you come back at the same price.  If that reduction had not been there, the price would have been up but because there was a tax reduction then you remain in the same position, at least you are better off at being at zero.

I want to thank the hon. Nkuuhe for raising the issue of information technology, it is quite academically intriguing but in terms of practice, I think, we have to sit down with him and see how really we can have information technology throughout the whole country at the way he talks about it.  It is a good idea, we all love it and I think he will help us by properly providing more information to those that are not informed to be able to raise that one.

Dr. Pen'Mogi was very worried about the lack of micro finance institution in the whole country - yes, we agree, they are not there but these can be started at local levels and I am sure each Member of Parliament can encourage a starting of micro finance institution at his level because that is the way it should be.

However, on the law, there is no contradiction when we say, it is being drafted because after Cabinet has passed it the Attorney General's Office have got to draft that law and that law will come here.

Nevertheless, it is not quite correct to say that there is no micro finance provision in the whole country because PAF actually provides that micro finance you are talking about and we have recently - or we are going to get some more money so that each district can benefit from PAF funds. It is - (Interruption)

MS. KABAKUMBA: Point of information. Thank you  Mr. Speaker and I would like to thank the Minister for giving way and I would like to inform him that PAP Project Phase I ended. There is the rural micro finance project which is going to take over.  But I would like to tell the minister that PAP operated in Masindi District but there is nothing to show for it just because there were no micro finance institutions which were willing to act as intermediary agencies.  So you should not just brush it off that you are going to get money to put in that project, if we do not have the institutions to channel this monies down to the grassroots or the beneficiaries in place, it will not work. Thank you Mr. Speaker.

MR. CHEBET MAIKUT: Point of information. Towards the end of last year, some Members of this House got a copy of communication from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to the effect that by 31st of January, 2000, the law dealing with micro finance institutions will be in place and now the Minister up to this point in time is still non-committal on when this law will be brought to this House.  So can we get a clear commitment from government now as to when a law on micro finance institutions will be put in place.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister is wondering whether he ever talked about that law but he looks surprised.  Did he actually say something about such law?

MR. CHEBET MAIKUT:  I said some Members of this hon. House did got a copy of communication from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to the effect that, a law on micro finance institutions will be put in place by end of January, 2000 and now we are about to reach August and this law is not yet in place.  So can we get commitment now from government, maybe, from the Minister of Finance when this law will put into place? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Proceed.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: The only comment I made, Mr. Speaker, was that the draft bill is already in the Ministry of Finance and we are waiting for the first Parliamentary Counsel to finalise the drafting of that part and send it here.

THE SPEAKER: Is that the one you are talking about?

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Mr. Speaker, it is clear and I want to appreciate the statistical analysis of hon. Baku that where you have 450 million dollars as exports and 1.39 billion dollars as import then the economy has a problem and that the problem we are trying to look at all over us and that is why we got some problems in managing the economy because we have got very little resource and we have got large needs.  

Our demand for foreign imported goods is increasing faster than our capacity to produce for those needs.  We either therefore work out how we can consume local and avoid imports but in liberalised economy that is very complicated because people are allowed to consume what they want and as in a globalised economy, that makes matters even worse. So hon. Members, we need to go down and see, how do we increase production, how do we change taste and consumption behaviour in order to suit our resources? That cannot be the work of the Ministry of Finance alone, it must be the work of all of us and we must all start thinking now because there is no country that depends on imports and develops.  None I know of and probably none that will be.

The question of university bursaries is still being handled and I am sure the Ministry of Education will come up with a properly worked out plan on how to distribute 2000 students.  We all agree that a block figure is there but how should it be distributed to the districts? That will be done by the Ministry of Education.  

I do not seem to have clearly  grasped what hon. Mwaka was talking about when she says inflation is self-controlling.  Inflation can not be self-controlling. It must be controlled.  You must have some discipline in expenditure, you must avoid borrowing from the Central Bank, you must avoid issuing deficit financing, you must have macro-economic stability programs in order for you to control inflation.  If you do not do that then the  inflation will have to move up.   You must intervene in the market when there are  problems and instabilities and shocks.  Otherwise inflation is not so good and although you can not avoid it completely, but you must control it.  

Small Scale Investors as hon. Pinto brought it out are necessary and they need to be facilitated.  In fact that is why we are trying to strengthen in this current budget the financial sector in order for the financial sector to be able to help and finance the Small Scale Industries.  Because if you have got a weak financial sector, if you have got unstable financial sector, then the financing of the economy becomes a problem.  Therefore, one of the measures is to make sure that banks have a strong capital base and for now banks must have two billion as a base in order for them to survive, in order for them to be able to lend because you can not lend more than your capital base.  If you do then you leave on other peoples money and therefore in the long run you actually collapse.  

What is 2 per cent of the GDP?  If you look in the background to the budget, table No. 4 you can either use GDP at factor prices or at current prices which ever when you use, you will find what 2 per cent means.  But suddenly for that because of budgeting we are using the current prices and our GDP is slightly over 8.4 trillion shillings.  So 2 per cent you can work it out which comes to about 172 billion.   

Hon. Lukyamuzi I wanted to disagree with you in that our tax rates are very high. I do not think that tax rates are very high.  In the region we have got very low tax rates. That is a fact.  You can check the Kenya taxes, you can check the Tanzania taxes.  I can off hand give you that on textiles while we charge 19 cents per running metre or 15 per cent duty, Tanzania charges 35 per cent and Kenya charges 25. These are high. However, our economy is high cost economy because of the internal inefficiencies of the economy and because of the high cost of infrastructure and other inputs in the system.  It is those that we must tackle and those that we must handle in order for us to have a low cost economy. But it is not the issue of the high tax rates.  

And hon. Lukyamuzi says that now we have got 40 mega watts of power on line, we should use the tariff and we should also persuade the urban dwellers to use power instead of charcoal.  I really welcome that and I am sure I will encourage him to make sure that people in Rubaga will use power rather than charcoal from tomorrow. 

Hon. Bakkabulindi was worried that the 10 per cent increase on salaries was very little.  We all know and agree that it was very little but was something.  It is better than actually doing nothing.  Because if somebody has 70,000/= and you do not even give him 10 per cent, he remains at 70,000/=.  And if inflation is 5 per cent you are eroding his income by negative 5 per cent. So if you give him 10 you are making better off by 5 per cent given the inflation rate.  So it is a question of calculation. 

Hon. Musumba was worried that – (Interruption)

MR. MWANDHA: Can the Minister educate this House on how he foresees this 70,000 – 80,000/= being spent by a family? Can he explain how a family can live on 70,000/= in the police, or among the teachers?  I want to be educated.  Thank you.

MR. MANZI:  Mr. Speaker, since we are short of time, I will not go into all these details but I will request hon. Mwandha to look at the statistical appendix of the background to budget  2000/2001 and look at the household expenditure survey and see how this money is distributed.    

Hon. Salaamu Musumba was concerned that the Minister of Finance never printed the approved estimates.  I was worried that, that was right but I knew it was not. Because Mr. Speaker we have this document printed.  I t was printed long ago, it has been available for the year 1999/2000 and if you did not get a copy, you can really access this copy from Uganda Printing and Publishing Corporation.  But for purposes of our records, I will lay it on the table for the House.  

Hon. Kyemba was concerned there are structural issues in the economy, I agree with him and that Jinja is becoming a former industrial area, a ghost town well investment is a very hard job and you need to increase your international rating in order for you to attract investors.  There are so many things that we do that actually reduce our international rating.  One of them is even the speeches you make here.  If for instance we make speeches in Parliament and pass motions, which are actually detrimental to the whole economic system our international rating goes down.  That is the fact of life. If for instance we passed a motion here as an example and said the whole country is corrupt, tomorrow our international rating may fall from 40 to 60 because if the whole country is corrupt, no investor will want to come in and invest in this country.  

So whatever we say as leaders, whatever we do as leaders affects and impinges on our international rating. And investors are very careful and very particular.  Those who are interested I can always pass on these document to you and you see how our rating is actually going down.  So the moment some of the motions – I think the last one was – for instance yesterday we literally threw out the deployment of troops.  What does that mean to the investor?  The investor will have to interpret what we did yesterday.  For us we were doing our job as politicians and as parliamentarians.  But the investor will be doing his job if he thinks that you do not have a policy on deployment of troops and therefore, you have thrown out that bill, should he come to that country which has no way they can not deploy troops?  I am only giving an example. (Mr Mwandha rose_) Hon. Mwandha please let me finish this sentence –

MR. MWANDHA: No. I seek clarification because I think the Minister is really portraying us in a bad light.

THE SPEAKER:  That matter was disposed of but I think the Minister is merely giving an example that any decision, that one or any other the investor is going to analyse it.  How you should take the next step that is what he is really saying.  He is not opening a debate.

MR MWANDHA: But Mr. Speaker if the investor hears us – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Mwandha, what does that mean now?

MR. MWANDHA: There is a serious implication in the statement made by the Minister because we did not throw out the bill.  We just requested the government to improve on the Bill, and this is what the investor should be told, Mr. Speaker.  

MR. TUMUBWEINEE: Thank you, Sir.  I will not go beyond that one.  Mr. Speaker, there is a contradiction.  We have the liberal economy and open economy, but the  Members are saying that we should now provide seedlings, provide inputs to the people.  Now, that is going back to social economic management.  We have again to change the policy.  Should we have a liberal economy which requires the Government to facilitate and create an enabling environment, and then let private sector do their job, or should we go back to not only create environment but also provide the input?  

If we do that, that means that we have got now to rearrange the budget and create a situation where we have to provide hoes, provide seedlings because what I know, for instance, UCDA subsidises  people who have nurseries for coffee; give some subsidy and extension service. UCDA cannot – I know that for sure and for a fact because I know their expenditure – be expected to provide seedlings country-wide.  But if that is what the Members are thinking of, then we need to rethink about our policy.

Hon. Butele was worried about the telecommunication in the North.  The draft Resolution is with the Members of Parliament.  As soon as we get a slot, we shall put it in and then might be if it is approved, we can access the shs.8b./= to ensure that the North is provided with the communication system.

Hon. Chebet Maikut, I was not very clear about what he saying because he said, “When there is a drought, families may be broken down and the wives will run away”.  Now, if they will run away and there is drought in the Country, where do they run?  If they run in the neighbouring countries, I think the only thing we can do as men is to liberate ourselves and follow them and run with them.

Hon. Rwabita was raising the issue that the Government should look for markets.  The Government actually keeps looking for markets.  The problem in the economy at present is that we are not able to produce for the international market yet.  That is a fact that we must live with at present.  We are not able to produce for the international market.  The market for oranges exists, the market for mangoes exists, the market for beef exists, but who is there to produce those mangoes for that market?  

I have had the opportunity to be the Chairman of National Chamber of Commerce, we went to Djibouti and got a market for 21 tons per week of fruits.  We came back and failed to raise 21 tons of fruits per week.  We even called them here and they wanted eggs and we failed to raise the eggs.  Now, the issue is, which begins?  I can assure you that there is a market in Libya for fresh mangoes and they are willing to bring their own Aircraft and pick them.  Now, the question is, who is producing them?  I think we have to go back to the production table and see, what do we produce and how can we produce them.

Hon. Kityo, there is no difference between debt relief and PAF.  In fact what happens, the amount of money we are given under HIPIC as debt relief is the money we put in PAF, which is Poverty Action Fund.  That money is tied to doing certain specific actions in the economy.  You cannot just turn it around and say, “Now, I want to do food security, I am going to buy food and put in the silos because this is a debt you would have paid, but someone has said “Do not pay me; use it for UPE.  Do not pay me, use it for Primary Health Care”.  Now, in fact if you are to say, in that case if they cannot allow me to use it for food security, then I do not want, I must pay your debt.  But if you do not have the money, then you cannot even pay the debt.  Here basically HIPIC means, Highly Indebted Poor Countries.  

Hon. Byaruhanga was worried about UPE and the number – of course for us to have enough teachers, you first train them, and there must be always the time lag between when you want to increase the number of teachers and when you get the number of teachers that you want.  Even when you have decided you want 124,000 teachers, you cannot get them over night; they have to be trained over time.

Finally, hon. Bakoko, thinks that we can alter the Budget and allocate the funds.  In Ministry of Finance, there is a problem because you cannot alter the fund upwards because we do not have enough resources.  You do not have enough resources, so you cannot increase what you do not have.  But you cannot reduce it downwards because even what you have given is not enough.  So, if you cut it off, it will be worse.  So, hon. Bakoko, we are in a vicious cycle which we cannot solve immediately, but which we are tackling over time through the Poverty Action Plan and Fund and through other programmes.

MRS. AKWERO ODWONG: Point of clarification.  Mr. Speaker, thank you.  I just wanted to seek some clarification from the Minister, because mention had made by several Contributors on the Floor today about the plight of the retired Army Officers about their pension and I have not heard him say anything about it and I believe he is making his concluding remarks.  I just wanted make him also know by way of clarification that there are certain Army Officers, say in the North, who have not accessed the so-called gratuity.  There are certain Lt. Cols. Who have to sell old bottles in the market place, and there are others who have to scavenge rubbish hips in order to get metal to make a sigiri per week to survive.  

I have heard that the retired officers of West Nile have been given their gratuity.  I do not know whether the money is given by Region, I do not know which is going to be the second one, and which is going to be the last.  Since the Minister of Finance is in the know, he could let us know so that the other retired officers can stay in waiting and know when their turn will come.  Thank you.

MS. KIRASO: Point of clarification.  Mr. Speaker, as the Minister concludes, I would like to seek clarification from him, bearing in mind that he will be appearing before the Committee on Finance to answer some questions on the Policy Statement.  There has been continued mention of the National Planning Authority.  May be it would be the appropriate time, Mr. Speaker, for the Minister to tell this House when he thinks the legislative material will come to this House to allow us make the law to put in place the National Planning Authority.

MR. TUMUBWEINEE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, actually, hon. Akwero Odwong, the National Planning Authority Documentation is at Cabinet level and soon when we come to that Policy Statement analysis, we shall show you the details we have done.  But coming back to my last point which was in this Budget Speech, if you look on Table 8, Item 305, compensation of former East African Employees, we have provided shs.25b./=  for the year 2000/2001, and you will notice that there was a Provision of only shs.2b./= for year 1999/2000, which was significantly very small.  The reason for the two billion was that there was a court case and we wanted first to establish how much do we actually owe them.  That case has taken a long time.  

It has been resolved that we owe the East African Community employees approximately 46 billion.  This year we are paying 25 billion and we shall pay it.  For the army, look at Item 321 the same table (8) Annex 9; this year we are providing for pensions 2.8 billion, which will be paid.  You notice that last year 1990-2000 we paid 2.8 billion and I have got records to show that this money was released and  disbursed from finance.  If there was any other problem, then it is something we can look at to see whether there are some people who should have got who did not get but the money was released.  

Finally, Mr. Speaker, payment to the demobilised soldiers - I do not know whether that is what she really meant.  Last year we provided for and paid 15 billion, it is on the same page and this year we are providing for and we shall pay 11.5 billion.  In the budget speech we indicated that the total arrears to be paid this year are 108 billion.  Last year we paid slightly over 124 billion for domestic arrears.  The idea is that  by next year we should complete the domestic arrears so that we are up-to-date.  Mr. Speaker, I thank you and  I thank the hon. Members for the support they have given to this motion.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you will recall this morning the hon. Nkuuhe made a statement which raised some eyebrows and he offered to lay a document on this table to support his point and I am now inviting him to do that.

DR.NKUUHE (Isingiro South, Mbarara):  Mr. Speaker, I would to lay this document on the Table - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You said you were going to lay it on the Table. I suppose you can either do that or read the names and lay it on the Table.

DR. NKUUHE: Mr. Speaker, these are the successful applicants for the allocation of Indian Irrigation Pumps.  And it shows districts, beneficiaries, number of pumps taken and the total taken by the districts.

Alphabetical order:
Adjumani: Hon Moses Ali - two pumps, MR. Okia - one pump. Adjumani total - three.
Apac:	Mr. Angella Jeoffrey (Akokoro) one pump, J.J Aman - one pump, hon. Ojovino Akaki Ayumu Egugye - one pump. Total for Apac, three pumps.
Bugiri:  Mr. D. Onyango - one pump, Bugiri district administration headquarters - one pump. Total for Bugiri, two pumps.
Bundibugyo: Mr. Sika Rusoke Rwebusengo - one pump. Total for Bundibugyo, one pump
Bushenyi: Hon. Bigirwa Nyamufura - one pump, Mr. V. Rubingo - one pump, Mrs Besigye one pump. Total for Bushenyi - three pumps.
Busia:  Hon. Opio Gabriel (Majanji) one pump.  Total for Busia - one pump
Gulu: Col. J. Okeeta (Fukapawa) three pumps, Gangatula Atyaka one pump.  Total for Gulu - three pumps.
Hoima: Mr. D. Kizza, Mr. J. Mukiidi and Kirego, Mr. Kasaija, Mr. Baruhanga, Mr. Kimera, Hon. Kajura.  Total for Hoima - six pumps.
Iganga: Hon. Abudalltif. Total for Iganga - one pump
Kabale: Mr. Zeirwe, Mr. Tibihika. Total for Kabale - two pumps
Kabarole: Hon. Byaruhanga ,Mahoro rice growers, Mr. E. Baguma - total for Kabarole - three pumps. Sub total so far - 28 
Kamuli district: district team took one pump, hon. Kaizi - one pump, Mr. D. Matovu - one pump.  Total for Kamuli - three pumps.
Katakwi: Mr. Benedict Odongol - one pump, Ben Omodoi - one pump, Mr. Osege - one pump.  Total for Katakwi - three pumps
Kiboga: D. Tembatya Muwanga - one pump.  Total for Kiboga - one pump
Kitgum:  Mrs. Lillian Omonyo Ogaba - one pump.  Total for Kitgum - one pump
Kotido:  Peter Lokiru - one pump, Ngerecha J. - one pump,  Willian Luodoki Kotido - one pump.  Total for Kotido - three pumps.
Kumi: Hon. F. Egunyu Kapiri - one pump, Mr. P. Olemukan - one pump.  Total for Kumi - two pumps.
Lira: Mr. Elesani Oleke - one pump, Mr. Okodi Levi - one pump, Mr. Ongom Charles - one pump.  Total for Lira - three pumps.
Luweero: Wachato sub county headquarters - one pump, Kapeka sub county headquarters - one pump, hon Syda Bumba (Kiwoko) - one pump, Dr. Ronald Bata (Bombo) - one pump. Total for Luweero - four pumps.
Masaka: Hon Kezimbira Miyingo - one pump, hon G. Ssendaula - one pump, Ndeeba horticultural farmers (Kitanda) - one pump.  Total for Masaka - three pumps.
Masindi: Christopher Geriga Kiryandongo - one pump, Ochiba Banadet - one pump, A.S. Okello - one pump, A.M.A Okino - one pump.  Total for Masindi - four pumps.
Mbale: Bunabutye sub county headquarters - one pump.  Total for Mbale - one pump.
Mbarara: Keshilling - one pump, Mr. Makuru - one pump, Mbarara stock farm - one pump.  Total for Mbarara - two pumps.
Moroto: Hon. Peter Lokeris Namalu - one pump, Mr. Jimmy Lomako - one pump, Piyani farmers - one pump, Mr. Achiya Tereche - one pump.  Total for Moroto - four pumps.
Moyo: Mr. Ewadura M., Rev Vura Maria - two pumps.  Total for Moyo - two pumps
The sub total so far, 36.
This district is Mpigi I think. Mr. Tonda, Mr. Kakuba, Mr. Mugisi, Mr. Bakonja. Total for Mpigi - four.
Mubende: Mr. Sebuliba, Mr. Banasula, Mr. Kasirye Gwanga. Total for Mubende - three pumps.
Mukono: Mr. Blick, Mr. Seedipa, Mr. Kiwanuka J.B, (one took two pumps) but total for Mukono - four pumps.
Nakasongola: Mr. Kizito, Mr. Barufu and LCV headquarters - total four pumps.
Nebbi: Hon Ali Gabe - four pumps.
Ntungamo: hon. E. Rwakakoko - one pump
Pallisa: District administration - one pump. Total for Pallisa - one
Rakai: Hon Pinto - one pump
Rukungiri: Mr. Byabakama, Mr. Katumweesi, Mr. Birakwate.  Three pumps for Rukungiri.
Sembabule: Haji Bumba Kalisubuga - one pump
Soroti: Obo Emogu, Opio Paul, Bigimba investment Yali Obuku, Kadungulu - four pumps. 
So of total 100 pumps, 20 pumps went to Members of Parliament and ministers, 20 per cent.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.  So I lay this on the table.

MR.MWANDHA:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Nkuuhe because I am the one who prompted him to give us this information.  But I was wondering whether hon. Nkuuhe has more information than what he has given.  Whether he can educate the House as to the criteria for allocating these pumps and the terms for these pumps, and if he can not, whether the minister for agriculture –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Mwandha please; the challenge to the hon. Member was to substantiate and he has done so.  Now, you want to involve him in making inquiries into other matters, that is not his job.  Now I will put the question.

MR. MWANDHA:  Can I  re-phrase, Mr. Speaker Sir?

THE SPEAKER:  I have already ruled hon. Member.  I will put the question.  The motion is that, Parliament do resolve itself into a committee of supply for consideration and approval of, one; the revised revenue and expenditure for the year 1999/2000 and two; the budgetary proposal for the estimates of revenue and expenditure for the fiscal year 2000/2001.  That is the motion.  I now put the question.
                            
(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, this brings us to the end of today’s proceedings, but before we adjourn, I would like to make one or two announcements. The members of the Parliamentary Sports Association are required to proceed to Nakivubo Stadium tomorrow the 28th of July,2000 at 11. a.m. to meet the she cobs who are going to have an encounter with their sisters from the Democratic Republic of Congo.  You see sporting activities are unifying a very strategic unifying factor in spite of what is going on between us and the Congo, sports go as usual.  The sports activities go on as usual.  

The second announcement is that, at the insistence of the Young Parliamentarians Association, the Speaker of the National Assembly of Kenya with a team of 10 Members of Parliament were invited for tomorrow’s anniversary party organised by the Young Parliamentarians Association.  But unfortunately the Speaker has informed me that he will not be able to make it himself personally, but he will send in someone to deputise for him.  So it is really by way of information that if you do attend tomorrow’s function you will be able to meet your Friends from Kenyan Parliament.  

With these announcements, I will adjourn the House to Monday 2.00 O’Clock in the afternoon.

(The House rose at 6.00 p.m and adjourned until Monday 31st July,2000)

    



     

         

   






























