	1


Thursday 22nd July,1999

(Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala).

PRAYERS.

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair).

The House was called to order.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER.

MR. AGGREY AWORI (Samia Bugwe North, Busia):  Mr. Speaker, I am seeking clarification and at the same time guidance from the Chair in form of a request.  At this material time, the Commission which you Chair, the Parliamentary Commission is in the process of acquiring additional office accommodation for Committees, for Members of Parliament and other ancillary services.  On behalf of the Members of Parliament who believe in the national motto, 'For God and my Country', I sincerely put a request to you as a Chairman of the Commission that among other things that you are going to be considering for accommodation, you also consider two small rooms for worship and meditation. I am putting this to you because in the past, we have heard some Christians who have been meeting upstairs on the third Floor, but this facility is being renovated, so they have no place to meet. 

Since independence, this Parliament has never recognised that some of the Members are of the Moslem faith, and have never been provided with accommodation for their known prayers, what we call 'Masijidhi'.  Mr. Speaker, I am putting this to you as a request. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I think hon. Members, we know the motto of this country, and actually what you said is correct.  But at the same time, you know the plight under which we are currently in Parliament; that trees are the Committee rooms and when it rains, many people have to run away from these Committee rooms which are the trees.  In certain vernacular in this country, we have a proverb which deals with expectations.  You see, you go hunting and then you say, the tail will be for the home. Before you have even killed the animal you start giving parts to this and the other.  Currently, we even do not know whether we are going to get the premises we are talking about, and the work of Parliament is really being done under trees. When we get this extra space which I believe we may get, then I think the appropriate authorities will consider this request and find a solution to it.  But otherwise, the request is a noble one and it is only circumstances that force us not to meet it currently.  

MR. NYAI:  Seeking clarification on that guidance, Mr. Speaker. Whereas matters pertaining to God are very holy and noble,  I am quite sure if hon. Members can arrive at this House in the morning for prayer and meditation, they can also arrive at the numerous churches and mosques which are within the confines of this city.  I think let us give to Caesar what is Caesar's and to God what is God's; the churches are there and the mosques.  Thank you Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Well, as I have said, there is no commitment, but if the space which we shall get will allow us to address this issue, we shall do so.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER.

MR. OKUMU RINGA (Padyere County, Nebbi):  I would like to thank you, Mr. Speaker, and the Minister responsible for Parliamentary Affairs for putting on the Order Paper these questions for oral answer addressed to the hon. Minister responsible for Health. 

The policy of Government with regard to the provision of medical services to the population is that in successive annual budgets, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development does not levy any tax whatsoever on human and veterinary medicines whether imported or manufactured locally.  

However, a general price survey reveals that the cost of basic human drugs, for example, for the cure of malaria are not affordable to the common people in the countryside. This situation, may be found in urban and semi-urban areas of this country.  

Some of the basic drugs are usually not available in Government Hospitals, Health Centres, but are however available in clinics which are more often run by medical personnel from such Government institutions.  

Could the Minister explain to the House:

  Why most hospitals and health units in some districts or counties and sub-counties in this country 
         lack basic drugs for treatment of common ailments?  

(b) 	Why the cost of human drugs is high and beyond the reach of ordinary citizens when in actual fact the Government does not levy any tax on imported or locally manufactured drugs?

(c) 	How does the Minister intend to reconcile the apparent contradiction in policy implementation on health without rationalising procurement and distribution policies on drugs?  

(d) 	The Government Policy in place for licensing and supervision of clinics, drug shops and the general distribution of drugs to the district hospitals and health centres to ensure that they conform with ethical standards and also affordable to the population both in urban, the peri-urban and rural areas?  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr. Crispus Kiyonga):  I thank you, Mr. Speaker, and also I thank my Colleague hon. Okumu Ringa for these questions.  Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, there are definitely guidelines; there is a policy on how drugs are procured and availed in the country.  I therefore want to use this opportunity, as I answer this question, to clarify on that part of our work.  

In order to ensure that in Uganda we have reasonable access to what we call basic human drugs, the National Drug Authority maintains a list of essential drugs that may be imported into the country. In this country there are three categories of agencies that import human drugs.  One, the public sector using the National Medical Stores - a government parastatal.  Two, the NGO sector using the Joint Medical Stores; and three, the private pharmacies. So, from the point of view of a mechanism to avail drugs in the country, it is our view, that there is no serious bottle-neck at that level.  In fact in addition to importation, a few industries now do produce drugs in our country.  

Following the noble policy of decentralisation, the district hospitals that my colleague, the Member who asked the question referred to, and health units below hospital level, are now by law the responsibility of the districts.  This among other things, Mr. Speaker, means that as far as management of those units is concerned, and also availing them their supplies, including drugs, the first responsibility falls on the district administration.  The Central Government as far as the health sector is concerned is basically to give support in terms of policies and support supervision.  So, the first point I want to make is that hospitals and health centres are basically the responsibility of Local Governments.  However, the central Government as we know, does give financial support to the districts through block grants, and where appropriate, equalisation and conditional grants.  

In the case of the health sector, adequate money - in our judgement - is regularly sent by the Treasury to the district hospitals for current supplies, including drugs.  Over and above this money, hospitals also get drug kits free of charge from the National Medical Stores.  In our opinion therefore, there should be no recurrent or serious drug shortages at the district hospital level.  Where there is a drug shortage at district hospital level, the explanation can only be inadequate management at that level.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, during our recent supervision, we have found cases where on the one hand the public are crying out because of shortage of drugs only to find that stores in some hospitals have drugs about to expire.  

Hon. Members will have read in the Press a recent story whereby the DISO administration in Masindi have had to interdict the hospital manager and this was part of the problem. So, as far as the hospitals owned by the Government are concerned, there should be no serious shortages of drugs except where there is mismanagement. However, when we go to lower health units like health centres and dispensaries, the situation is different and not as favourable.  

Once again, I wish to remind colleagues that even long before decentralisation, health centres and dispensaries were the responsibilities of districts and sub-counties.  But three years ago, Government did realise that the local authorities were either unwilling or unable to allocate sufficient money to the health sector for purchase of drugs.  Therefore, Government set up conditional grants for primary health care; and I am glad to say, Mr. Speaker that with the support of Members of Parliament, this conditional grant has been growing over the past three years. In the first year it was 1.7 billion, in the financial year ended, it was 6.3 billion and this year we proposed to Parliament that we should spend Shs. 12.86 billion on primary health care. Part of this money is supposed to be allocated to purchase drugs at that level, and this is in addition to sending drug kits from the NMS. Despite this improvement in allocation of funds for primary health care, I must concede that we are still far from availing sufficient funds to ensure that there will be drugs all the time in all health centres and units in the country.  So, a solution must be found; and in our view, we think we need to take four actions.
	
One, that we must continue this journey of increasing primary health care conditional grant, because 
part of this money is used for purchase of the basic drugs.  

Two, we are calling for stronger commitments by local authorities to health care so that more resources 
are allocated to this important sector from the district and sub-county levels.  

Three, we have called and Parliament has supported us that there should be further decentralisation of 
health care management, that the matter should not just be left at the district level, that is why we have 
called for health sub-districts and we have also proposed that we should move towards as having at least 
a health centre in each parish.  We think if these health centres can be created at this level, universal 
access to health care will be available.  
	
The fourth point is that there should be stronger supervision of health services by the local authorities 
themselves.  So, Mr. Speaker, that is the brief answer that we have to give to the first question that hon. 
Okumu raised.  
 
Regarding the second question, it is true that there are no taxes, no direct taxes on human drugs; and therefore, the cost of drugs either in town or in the countryside do not reflect the cost of taxation.  But as we know, besides taxation, there are other costs that have to come in play when drugs are being procured; and I wanted to take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, just to give some examples of the cost of the drugs, particularly at the National Medical Stores level.  Aspirin which is a common pain killer drug at the National Medical Stores one tablet of aspirin should cost no more than 3 shillings.  When we come to chloroquine, a tablet again at the level of the National Medical Stores should cost no more than 10 shillings, and a course of chloroquine for malaria for an adult person is a total of 10 tablets, so that should be no more than 100 shillings.  Tetracycline which is one of the basic antibiotics that are used in health units, a course for about four days, should cost no more than 240 shillings. Fansidar which is an alternative drug if chloroquine fails, a course of 3 tablets at the level of the National Medical Stores should cost no more than 123 shillings.  The tablets of penicillin V, (Interruption)- Mr. Speaker, I am giving the information and I do believe that my Colleagues who will like to give additional information will help me later on.  A course of penicillin tablets should cost no more than about 400 shillings, while a full course of penicillin, proccaine penicillin for injection, should cost no more than 3,000 shillings. I must concede that these prices are at the level of the National Medical Stores.  As you come to the town centre and go further in the countryside, these prices become higher; and this is a reflection of a number of factors.  
that the deeper you go in the country side, the availability of drugs become more scarce because the economy is being run on the rules of the market forces, so those who are handling the drugs particularly in the private sector tend to put up the forces - that is one fact, the shortage of drugs as you go deeper in the countryside. True, there is shortage of drugs in the Public Health Unit as I explained before, so that people who do normally go to the Public Health Centre where either they are paying minimal or not paying, when they return from that health centre, they also go to 
the shops, and therefore, exacerbate the competition for these drugs. 

We are trying to handle this in two main ways, Mr. Speaker.  One is we are decentralising the national medical stores so that it should have branches particularly in the main towns of the country.  That will make it easy for people dealing in drugs to procure them at lower costs and we hope that through that mechanism, the Ugandans will be able to access the drugs at cheaper prices.  The other mechanism which should be even more dependable given the levels of income of our population is to ensure that we vote more money so that the conditions of grants are bigger and then Government can send or buy drugs for as many as possible of our health units where services should be much cheaper.  

The last consideration in the question of affordability, is the income of the population itself.  All of us are aware that in some parts of this country, 100/= is no mean amount of money.  I said that a course of chloroquine would cost 100/=.  I know that in many parts, it is not easy for many people to find 100/= to go and pay for drugs.  So, the other explanation for lack of affordability and the low level of incomes of the population is not just merely an issue of taxation. Mr. Speaker, again, I would end that part of the question at that stage. 

The third question has brought into play other questions which had been asked before, therefore, I will not repeat those parts of the question which have already been answered.  I will therefore, only address those parts which I thought we had not addressed.  

Drug procurement, apart from the abuses we have been uncovering and punishing appropriately as I said before, is on course.  The issue of distribution is being addressed by decentralisation of NMS and also availing more money for drug purchases.  We also think we should work for greater understanding between the Central Health sector and the districts as to our different roles, because it is clear to me, Mr. Speaker, that up to now, some of the districts have not realised that they are the ones in charge of some services.  I have sat in meetings with District Chairpersons and when the District Chairperson stands up to speak, he says, 'You minister, your sector is having a problem', and I have always answered them that 'Sir, Mr. Chairman, the health sector in your district is under your authority and your counsel, I can only come in to supplement.'  So,  I think as we get greater appreciation by the local authorities that these services are also under them, this will make them more sensitive to availing more resources to this particular sector, and I am hopeful that with time, the situation will continue to improve.  

On the last question, Mr. Speaker, I have already answered many parts of that question; I am only answering those two parts which I have not touched.  
(i)  the issue of licensing and supervision of private clinics.
The supervision and licensing of private clinics, is by law a job carried out by the medical practitioners and the Dental Surgeons Council.  This was a law made by our Parliament and hon. Members of Parliament will have read in the public press medical practitioners who have been removed from the register because of not following this law and being found wanting. Recently, the national papers carried stories about the closure of clinics which belong to an NGO called Marie Stopes Clinic.  These stories in the press are merely the tip of the iceberg of very bold actions that the professional councils are carrying out in order to ensure safe health care for our population.  A lot of work remains to be done, however, and I want to assure hon. Members of Parliament that the Health sector leadership and the Government are committed to improving health care delivery both by public and the private sector by implementing the appropriate laws.  So, in summary, yes, there are weaknesses in licensing, there are weaknesses in the implementation of the law, but actions are being taken to remove these short comings.  

As far as licensing of drug shops is concerned, there is a policy in the right direction, it is a policy to diversify service delivery coming from Government monopolising the health care delivery. So, Government considered it appropriate that we should license other private people who can sell drugs, provided they handle them according to the law and the drugs are broadly classified in three groups.  
Group I is called the drugs class A, what we call narcotics.  These can be very dangerous drugs.  They include drugs like morphine, pethadine, codeine, etc.  These drugs can only be dispensed by very senior health professionals and therefore, are not ordinarily found in any drug shop unless someone breaking the law.

Then there is class B, which includes the anti-biotic and drugs for heart diseases diabetes and high blood pressure.  These are classified as category B. These two can only be dispensed on the prescription of the doctor.  Even if they are in the appropriate pharmacy, the pharmacist cannot dispense them unless he has received a prescription from a qualified physician. 

Then there is class C which one could call simple drugs like aspirin, panadol, which can be found in drug shops even deep in the villages. Now, what is true is that there has been gross violation of the law in regard to the classification of these drugs. You will find that a shop deep in the village, perhaps even being run by someone who is not a health worker, is selling antibiotics. This is dangerous and a violation of the law, and we are doing everything possible to ensure that this violation of the law stops.  In order to strengthen this process, we put in place a procedure for the registration of clinics, even in the villages, which involves the LCs.  So, when person X wishes to own a drug shop in the village, he is supposed to fill a form and that form should be endorsed by the Chairman LC I, by the Chairman LC II up to the district before it comes up to the National Drug Authority through the District Director of Health Services for consideration by the NDA. Through this mechanism, we hope that we will be able to know that people are not making false claims as to their qualifications and the type of drugs that they are handling.  Now, when it comes to the supervision of the drug shops, this is by law a function of the National Drug Authority which has tried to put in place officers, even at a district level in order to strengthen this work of supervising drug shops and Pharmacies.  But as I said, Mr. Speaker, there are still short comings and we are doing everything possible to strengthen the NDA, and we are very hopeful that the situation will improve. So, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members,  these are the brief answers to the questions raised by hon. Members of Parliament.

MR. OKUMU RINGA:  (Padyere County, Nebbi):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to thank the Minister for his exhaustive answers to the questions.  I would also like to thank him for acquiring the new headquarters.  I hope their new place will make him more efficient.  The Minister did not mention the support Government is giving to NGO hospitals.  I would like to take this opportunity to thank him that Government is supporting some NGOs, hospitals, and in my district there are two hospitals which are receiving support from Government.  Thank you.  Now, my supplementary question is with regard to the very many abuses which Government should address in terms of procurement of drugs and distribution of drugs.  The newspapers for the last three days have been full of nothing but glossaries of abuse of people, actually committing criminal acts using expired drugs which can be harmful to our people.  What is the Ministry going to do and the law enforcement authorities to ensure that this is stamped out? The last point is the sale of drugs in market places, in places which are not even hygienic.  Can this be enforced so that our people buy drugs where they feel the drugs are safe?  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

DR. KAKUNGULU:  Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I seek some clarification from the Minister regarding the National Drug Authority saga.  A few years back, there was a scandal about the mad cow disease in Europe. The Government of England had to sacrifice up to one million herd of cattle just to protect its market of beeff in Europe and America.  Recently, there was an outbreak of a virus in chicken in Hong Kong and they slaughtered no less than 2 million chicken to prevent further spread of that virus and even to prevent possible infection of human beings in Hong Kong.  Even nearer  to-date, there was a problem in the Coca Cola drink in Europe in Belgium specifically, and the Government ordered the withdrawal of all Coca Cola drinks off the shelves in Belgium.  Mr. Speaker, that shows you how serious anything to do with the health of the nation is taken by serious governments.  

The importation of substandard Paracetamol in this country has been completely mishandled.  They say out of a consignment of about 14,000 tins or boxes, only about 4,000 have yet to be sold. How shall we tell which is the good Panadol, which is the bad Panadol?  What the Ministry or the National Drug Authority should have done by now is to recall all Paracetamol imported from a certain period of time to-date and have it destroyed.  This would have been the heaviest penalty and a lesson to all importers and even to us, the doctors who prescribe these to the patients that you must be very careful about where you buy the drugs from and whom you buy from. 

What has the Minister done regarding the importation of Paracetamol in this country and I feel, as a professional, he has not done enough to protect the lives of the people of Uganda.  The Belgium Prime Minister was voted out just because of the Coca Cola saga in Belgium.  Has the Minister disbanded the entire National Drug Authority as yet; because he should have done that by now, he should not have waited for even these investigations. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  So, what is the question?

DR. KAKUNGULU:  The question is, the hon. Minister, what have you done to protect the lives of the people of Uganda despite the fact that you have the powers to either disband the whole NDA or even to resign.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. AWORI:  Point of clarification.  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I would like to know from the hon. Minister on the matter of the number one killer in this country called Malaria. About two years ago, I put the same question to the hon. Member and I doubt whether he has implemented the answer he gave to me in this House.  Three years ago, a renown Chilean doctor came up with an anti-malaria vaccine which has been successfully tried elsewhere in the world and it is working extremely well. It saves on the costs of curative measures against Malaria, and as I said at the beginning, Malaria I think is still number one killer disease in this country.  What has the Ministry done to acquire this vaccine for this country?

MR. MOHAMMED MAYANJA:  Point of clarification.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to ask the Minister to tell the House whether Uganda is moving well towards the acquisition of the WHO recommended funding per capita for Sub-Saharan Africa.  I know that health care delivery in Uganda, and indeed in Africa, is difficult partly because of the low levels of funding; and I understand Uganda spends about US $3 per capita against the recommended US $11 per capita for Sub-Saharan Africa.  I would like to know where we stand now as far as funding for health is concerned.

Secondly, realising the deplorable nature of our funding, how steadily are we moving towards the realisation of the Alta Ama Declaration of 1987 of Health for all by the year 2000?   Thank you very much.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I want to thank the hon. Member for raising this very important question.   I was looking at today's paper, the Monitor, with a screaming headlines which has been quoted all over the world now on the Internet, 700,000 at risk from fake drugs.  This country has hired at a very high cost and paid for services of an Inspectorate Company.  We have got ITS and SGS and some other companies which have been doing  - that is the second part.  So, these companies are earning a lot of money for inspecting imports into our country and they have even been insured against the risk.  

When close to one million people in this country have their lives at risk for services we have paid for which have not been implemented, what punishment, what recourse do we get against these companies, the Inspection Companies?  Are they just here as tourists and only receive money from us as a package for holiday making in Uganda?  Do we have any recourse, do they have any legal liability that we can resort to and get adequate compensation of one million lives of Uganda from these Companies?

(ii)  On SWIPCO which Members were talking about.  It has contracted with Uganda Government to look at the tendering system for imports by Government.  How come it never ever looks at the contracts and the tenders for the Ministry of Health?  Why is the Ministry of Health outside the SWIPCO eye?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, you are making this question because you know you are asking information whether SWIPCO looks at -(Interruption)
 
MR. KARUHANGA:  Thank you. I am asking for information whether SWIPCO is looking at these contracts, and if it is, whether it has approved these fake things and it is being paid?  And if it has, whether it is going to be punished or not?  
This morning when this paper came out, I happened to have been in a company of some people, so they started saying, now Mr. Kiyonga must resign.  That is what they were saying, they did not add the word 'honourable'.  They said, 'Now, Mr. Kiyonga must resign'.  Of course I want to assure the hon. Minister of Health that I was there trying my best to defend his efficiency.  But would the Minister now assure me, that he is going to bring all these people who have neglected to do their work.  

It was amazing to see that the Uganda Police had a very serious case with the National Drug Authority, where the National Drug Authority was refusing to behave and the Police in charge of security were the ones who identified the problem of these fake drugs.  Now, I would like to know what steps the Minister has taken to firmly get the people under him to be disciplined, instead of the population which is now asking for Mr. Kiyonga's head.

Lastly, I would like to know, because according to the papers today including the New Vision's editorial, these drugs have come from a specific named country called India.  Are we having any diplomatic protest notes to the Indian Government for actively encouraging or neglecting to deal with their pharmaceutical plants from off loading, and dumping dangerous drugs which have expired on a friendly country Uganda which is keeping a lot of its nationals?  What protest note, if any, has been given?  This House would like to know whether steps are being taken to talk to the Indian Government on this question.  I thank you.

MR. ETIANG:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do not subscribe to the idea of calling the Minister to resign on an issue which is very basic.  I think life is everybody's individual responsibility first, and then one's neighbour before it become's the Minister's and all that.  I am very satisfied with the explanation given by the Minister on the questions paused by the hon. Okumu Ringa.  However, I would like to emphasise on the basis that I subscribe that everybody's life lies in their hands primarily.  

Arising from that, I wonder whether the Minister could consider deliberately encouraging vigilante groups, like consumer associations to go to the markets of this country, to the unlicensed stores, to unauthorised medical practitioners to protect their own lives by pointing out the unexpired drugs and the illicit drugs in the country. The population must be sensitised, the same way as the Minister has been sensitising on the six killer diseases, that the medicines they consume, must first of all be checked before they consume them.  And the only way of kick starting this trend is to encourage by deliberate policy, consumer associations.  These have worked very well in all European countries, they have worked on very well in the United States, they should work here.  And that is the only way we can get at this monumental task we have.  

Specifically, can the Minister kick start a vigilante group by encouraging formulation of consumer associations as a private sector contribution to the lives of the people in the country?

MR. LUYKYAMUZI:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  As one of the Members of Parliament from Kampala, I am getting very worried about the uncontrollable emergence of drug stores and clinics.  And I know that a number of hon. Members including your wives and children do not go to Mulago or Lubaga Hospital or Namirembe.  Is the Minister aware that the Management and supervision of small clinics and drug stores in Kampala is so relaxed, that drug abuse goes on unabated? What is he doing to ensure that the situation is rectified?  Can he not use LCs and expert doctors to do something in Kampala?  We are in trouble.  

As a spokesperson of Members of Parliament for Kampala, since I am the last questioner, I am getting worried. Mr. Speaker, is the Minister aware that lack of basic drugs for the treatment of common ailments is as a result of negligence and the corrupt tendencies in the National Drug Authority?  I have got a very acute case in point of one of the biggest private hospitals which happens to exist in a constituency I speak for in this Parliament.  Lubaga Hospital with all the expertise in medical science attached to it has had a lot of problems in clearing its drugs.  At one time, the management of the hospital when it came to me said, 'Do not be surprised, hon. Member, if our workers go on strike; because all the medical facilities we used to get from Germany have been curtailed due to the corrupt characteristics of officers in the National Drug Authority.'  They asked me to tell the Minister, that even when he went to visit Lubaga Hospital last year, they mentioned the same but since then nothing has been done.  They asked me to find out whether he are still interested in the Ministry, because they have alternative medical managers whom they could second for promotion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Please, make your point.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Lastly, what steps has the Minister taken to promote local research towards the treatment of HIV patients?  Every time a local expert emerges, namely, Dr. Ssali, the Minister is always on his neck.  Why does he discourage local research people with capacity to do some work in research, when the entire globe is getting worried about HIV atrocities?  What is he doing to encourage our local research medical people like Dr. Ssali?  Why does he sabotage their work and their interest?  Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr. Kiyonga Crispus):  I would like to thank the hon. Members of Parliament for the supplementary questions that they have asked.  First on the issue of what appeared in the Press today, and I think over last week, the matter is not as we are reading in the newspapers and I feel really constrained on how to present the situation. As you have seen in the newspapers, the Police, using the law, using the Authority, are of the impression that there is an error at the National Drug Authority offices.   They have arrested a number of officers in the National Drug Authority and have brought them before court.  So, the matter is before court to establish the facts. And although I know some facts about the case, I am not sure whether I will not be breaking the law if I stood on the Floor of this House, and gave the information as I have it before the court has finalised its side of the issue.  So I do hope that Members will bear with me, that we just need to wait a little while, let the court process finish and perhaps I will return here and give a more elaborate statement. But suffice it to say, Mr. Speaker, that although there is some error which was committed in respect to the drugs which are being discussed in the newspapers, within this case there are some personnel conflicts between personalities in the Police Force and also personalities in the National Drug Authority.  I have had occasion to discuss this with the hon. Minister of Internal Affairs and the position we have taken is that we should allow the law to take its course and not interfere at any stage.  

The clarifications which were given in the papers this morning are definitely exaggerated, and coming from quarters of people really who do not have the competence to make the comments that they did make in the newspapers.  So I would like to ask hon. Members, that you give us time and I think the court is proceeding quite fast on this case, and we will make an exhaustive statement regarding this particular case of panadol which was imported into this country.   

I also want to assure hon. Kakungulu that this is a serious Government, we are also serious leaders and we would not allow a serious omission like this to pass without being redressed.  We do realise that we have an opportunity and a duty to protect the population, but we have to do so within the laws that this country follows.  

I want to assure the country that this particular importation of panadol is not going to cause the effects that the papers have been projecting. The action we have taken so far is to order for the withdrawal of the drugs which are under suspicion. And I want to say 'under suspicion', because even those same drugs must be tested so as to verify the claims on one side.  The Police are saying the drugs are defective, the NDA have a different story.  I do not think we can yet stand up and make a judgement before the technical check has been done.  But I want to assure Parliament that we cannot allow our people to be abused in anyway; if necessary, we will take very serious steps to ensure that this is not repeated, if we find that indeed there is a serious breach of the law and practice.

Regarding hon. Aggrey Awori, I would like to observe that the things we say on the Floor are serious statements and should be issued to protect the people we represent, not to issue statements for  populist purposes. I did state that as I speak now on the Floor of this House, there is no totally proven vaccine against malaria that is being given anywhere in the world on a public health scale. So for my colleague to come here and say that there was a vaccine and impute that we have not procured this vaccine and therefore we are negligent, is to be really grossly unfair.  And I want to challenge him to produce any journal or even information on the internet which shows where this vaccine is and where it is being used.  

MR. AWORI:  Point of information.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to challenge the hon. Minister of Health of the Republic of Uganda, also at the same time I would like to inform him, let him check with WHO.  Because it authorised this particular doctor to issue this particular medicine to various pharmaceutical manufacturers.  And the question was, should it be sold or should it be given free through WHO?  I would like to inform the hon. Minister to check with WHO if he is indeed working with WHO.

DR. KIYONGA CRISPUS:  Well, I think Mr. Speaker, we will have to carry the debate forward.  But I detect a change of direction on the part of hon. Awori.  Now he is saying the vaccine was availed and the debate was whether WHO should give it free or it should be sold.  And the question he is asking me is, why have I not bought the vaccine?  I want to assure hon. Members that, yes, a lot of research is going on to try and find a vaccine against malaria, and our local researchers are also involved in this exercise.  But as of now, there is no vaccine yet released for public health usage, either by WHO or any other authority.

Hon. Mayanja has asked how far we are in reaching some reasonable level of funding for our health care in this country.  In the Policy Statement issued, Mr. Speaker, we have indicated that this year we reached a level of over 11 dollars per capita.  It is also true that the recommendation by WHO is that, at a minimum level we should be at 12 dollars and optimum at 20 dollars.  So we are moving, because now this year we are at 11, last year we were at a much lower level, and the year before we were at even a much, much lower level.  So we are moving there, and with your support, we think we should be able to be within the bracket recommended by the WHO.  The Alma Ata declaration of 1987 which was intended to encourage all countries to achieve health for all was obviously a noble declaration and many countries tried to achieve the goals of the Alma Ata declaration.  Unfortunately for countries like ours because of instability, the progress was not as anticipated in situations of war, in situations of instability, in situations of low incomes in the societies that we are serving.  Our country, among many others, is not the only country that has not been able to achieve health for all by 1999.  And the year 2000 is at the door steps.  At the WHO, we have changed the slogan.  It is no longer health for all by the year 2000, but that each country should continue to show that they are moving in adequate steps to achieve health for all their citizens. And the policy of this Government, as I will have occasion to tell the House, is to ensure that the health infrastructure is spread up to the parish level, is to ensure that we decentralise health care management so that in the not too distant future, all our citizens could be within easy reach of a health facility that could help them overcome their health problems.

Hon. Elly Karuhanga has also made reference to the matter which I have partially answered, the issue of the alleged drugs which were imported when they were of improper quality.  It is true that this country has mechanisms which are supposed to check against importation of improper goods including drugs such as SGS as hon. Karuhanga has mentioned, and SWIPCO of late, and perhaps other organisations.  

Yes, I have heard you clearly, hon. Karuhanga. I think the point is that, there organisations that are supposed to protect us against abuses by exporting countries.  In practical terms, it would be inadequate  for us to rely wholly either on SWIPCO or SGS or the company that hon. Karuhanga is mentioning, particularly when it comes to specialised drugs. It is for that reason that although there is SWIPCO and SGS that this country and this parliament maintains the National Drug Authority because of the specialised area.  It is an area that we cannot leave to general handling.  Of course, hon. Karuhanga is correct in the sense that if SGS clears a certain good as okay, and subsequently it is found to be wanting then, I think, within the agreements between us, the government and these companies, those companies should be brought to book, but as I said, as far as this particular case is concerned, we are still checking out the facts and it would be too early for me to say, we are going to punish the company or we are not going to punish the particular company.

Hon. Karuhanga has also asked whether the Ministry of Health does use SWIPCO or some government approved companies when drugs are being imported.  At the beginning of answering hon. Okumu's question, I did indicate that there are three routes through which drugs come to this country. There is the public sector which is through the National Medical Stores, and if there is a government policy that SWIPCO must get involved, obviously the National Medical Stores would be breaching government procedure if they did not use SWIPCO.  

On the other hand, the private companies have no obligation to go through SWIPCO; for them perhaps they would use SGS or some other re-inspection  company.  So some of the drugs come through this country, through private hands, through the NGOs, and there is no obligation for them to use government approved companies for procuring goods and services for government services.  So if some of the companies which are importing drugs are not going through SWIPCO and they are private, they would not be breaching any procedure.

Have we considered issuing a protest note to the Government of India?  In India, as you will imagine, there are many companies there which produce drugs and other goods. If one company has exported drugs to country which are considered to be inferior, I think, we would need to  do more work before we condemn India because this may not be a policy on the part of that government.  We would have to check whether they have mechanisms which check out these drugs to supplement our own and therefore, we have not yet found it necessary to issue a protest note to the Indian Government in respect to this situation which is still under investigation. 

Hon. Etiang has made a proposal, and I would like to inform him that actually now there has emerged, particularly in the urban areas, a strong civil society for protection of consumers. This organisation has already met the Second Deputy Prime Minister, and the Prime Minister, on behalf of government, has promised support to this organisation  so that it can help to increase public awareness and will also take the advice in order to take advantage of this emergence of a civil organisation to protect consumers.

Hon. Lukyamuzi has said we - me and him - were at Lubaga last year which is true. It is not however true that while we were there, that the authorities in Lubaga complained that they were  having problems with the National Drug Authority.  So I would like to discount that part of his question.  I am also not aware that Lubaga Hospital is having problems with importation of drugs or clearance of drugs. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, I do not see hon. Lukyamuzi.  I do hope that he will be able to get the answers. 

Lubaga Hospital, like many of the missionary hospitals get their drugs through the Joint Medical Stores, and up to now, I have no complaint from the Joint Medical Stores that they are having problems in clearing their drugs. I think hon. Lukyamuzi is also being inaccurate to say, that clinics and drug shops in Kampala are operating without supervision.  In my opening statement, Mr. Speaker, I did quote the case of Marie Stopcs who have been having multiplets of clinics all over the country, including in Kampala, which were closed because of detected malpractice.  So, it is not true that there is relaxation, that there is no supervision of clinics and the drugs shops in hon. Lukyamuzi's constituency.

Lastly, on the issue of research, Ugandan researchers are actually involved at very good levels in the research in the area of HIV AIDS. Two weeks ago, we made a public announcement that a drug had been found which has the capacity to reduce the transmission of HIV AIDS from mother to child by a factor of 50 per cent.  One of the leading researchers in this area is Prof. Milo of Makerere Medical School.  

On the other hand, as I said before, Prof. Ssali had been violating the laws of this country and finally he has been handled by the laws of the country, and if he comes back to the fold and follows the law, there will be no obstruction to his effort to find some solution to HIV AIDS.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Dr. Kisamba Mugerwa) Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to brief the parliament on the plan for modernisation of agriculture. The plan for modernisation of agriculture in Uganda begun with His Excellency President's campaign manifesto launched in March 1996 in which he promised to alleviate poverty by modernising agriculture.  

During the opening of the first Sitting of Parliament on 8th July, 1996, His Excellency the President further challenged the parliamentarians to work closely with and help the Ministry of Agriculture Animal Industry and Fisheries develop strategies that will assist the country's small holder farmers use their land optimally through agricultural modernisation. Pursuant to this challenge and to initiate the agricultural modernisation process, the Ministry of Agriculture Animal Industry and Fisheries conducted wide consultations with various stake holders.  

An agricultural sector retreat was consequently held in Tororo in August 1996 to brainstorm and reflect on the sector and develop a way forward to modernise it. Participants in the retreat included a broad representation of Government Ministers, Members of Parliament, Government Officials, farmers organisations, training institutions and the district officials. The retreat identified and categorised the constraints in the sector under the three broad areas of poor infrastructure, poor marketing and low investment in agriculture.  

Major intervention areas for achieving agriculture modernisation were also subsequently identified.  Also identified were stake holder roles in the modernisation process. A workshop was subsequently held in Kampala in September 1996 to consider the recommendation of the Tororo retreat. Consultations were later held with the districts in April and May 1997 to solicit their views on the Tororo and Kampala recommendations.  There was general consensus by all fora on the findings of the Tororo retreat.

Arising from the consultation, a medium term agricultural sector modernisation plan was prepared by government in 1997.  Focusing on the following five key priority areas earlier identified by the retreat for intervention; one: improving research extension farmer linkages; two: developing of marketing infrastructure; three  - (Interruption)

MR. ONGOM: Point of order. Thank you Mr. Speaker. I am getting a bit surprised about the Ministerial Statement; the Minister is engaging us on a matter which is a long term policy of the government, something that should actually come in his Ministerial Statement in the Budget, and other areas. I thought that ministerial statements are restricted to things of emergency that must be done immediately and that must also require immediate attention of Parliament or the nation. I am getting a bit confused.  What is so urgent about this modernisation now that the Minister wants to engage us in as a matter from his ministerial statement? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, unfortunately I just received the copy of the Ministerial Statement when we were in the Session here. I did not know the contents, but I have just been following Statement.  I quite I appreciate the points which you have made.  In fact, following the statement, at the end of the day, I was not going to allow a debate under Rule 38(2) which allows a debate for 30 minutes, because I saw this is a very involved matter which we shall consider while we are debating the Budget and while we are debating the report of the appropriate Session's committee. But he was given the opportunity to present his statement earlier when, I think, the order paper was being made. Let him make the statement; we shall not debate it but we shall know it and then take it as it is.  I agree with you.  I agree with the measure but I cannot really now say, 'I stop you'.  There is no way I can really stop him, but maybe, what can be done is that he may just highlight the statement since copies will be given to Members, then we consider it some other time.

DR. KISAMBA MUGERWA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I was saying, the third was targeting commercial agricultural production; fourth: improving access and availability of credit in rural areas; fifth: improving the development of agro-based enterprises. When presented to our development partners, the donors had reservations about the plan. Major concerns hinged on inconsistencies in this vision, the planned public investments with the governments medium term expenditure frame work and the lack of clarity of the roles of various stakeholders. This short-coming stalled the sector development planning process. To propel the process forward, a new initiative was launched. 

This is a revised plan for the modernisation of agriculture on the basis of the following three key steps. One: the development of a coherent policy for sector development at the December 1998 consultative group; the definition of the medium term expenditure frame work; and the revised operation strategies for implementing sector policy in the form of an agreed revised plan for modernisation of agriculture document. 

Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, having given the introductory remarks above, I now wish to turn to the progress made so far in developing of the plan for modernisation of agriculture.  (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now hon. Minister, you must be reading the reaction of Members to this Statement, and I think they were trying to say that I should stop you and I declined to do so.  Therefore, what can be done, is just to highlight, instead of reading verbatim the report, then we shall consider it in future.

DR. KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr. Speaker,  the issue is that, having all gone through that, I wanted to bring the attention of the Members of Parliament to the process which is going on and on which they are going to be called upon to debate before the plan for modernisation of agriculture is finally presented here. The urgency about it is the very fact that, having interacted with Members of Parliament, there have been a diversity of views on the process of formulating a plan for modernisation. Some members complained that they were not involved. 

I have specifically given all this background to show that at one stage or another the Members of Parliament were involved and I wish them to be on board in the rest of the process which has to be terminated by November 1999. The process of modernising agriculture is so involving, the stakeholders, including this House - because all the problems now we are facing in this country, including the drought, shortage of food, poor yields, poor soil management all have to be eventually answered by putting this plan in place. 

Secondly, it involves a lot of funds and investment which will have to come to Parliament from time to time in the course of this financial year and unless that the Members of parliament are clearly informed and we go together, it will be very difficult  for the Minister of Finance. This therefore, has created the urgency for bringing aboard all Members of Parliament on the steps being undertaken to get this plan, which has taken us the last three years in the planning process.  

Having said that, I wish to bring to your attention that now there eleven areas which have been identified on which consultation is going on so that the Members when they are approached, I appeal to them to give their full co-operation and effective contribution.  One of them, is to finance extension services for small holders.  

Another one, to finance agricultural research for small holders, to finance control epidemic diseases and pests; to finance capacity building for reproduction or foundation seed; to provide regulatory service and enforcing policies, collection of agricultural statistics, production and marketing information; to finance the implementation of land reform; to finance capacity building of agricultural institutions, including districts and lower levels of local government; to set policies and regulations to foster the expansion to provide sector involvement in modernisation of agriculture; to construct fish landing sites and finance development of irrigation information and capacity building of small holders in water harvesting soil and water conservation.  

In this I have found that the role of the Ministry of Agriculture has terribly changed due to its changed mandate which essentially confines itself  to support, promote and give guidance for production of crops, livestock and fisheries. There are distinguished roles which the Ministry has to implement but the rest are for the private sector and as I am interacting with the public, and of course Members of Parliament, they are still insisting on certain roles which the Ministry now is no longer -(Interruption)   

MR. BAKKABULINDI: Point of clarification.  Mr. Speaker, I am a bit confused.  In brief, I wanted to know from the hon. Minister, what does he want to inform us?  What does he want us to do for him?  As brief as that.  We are a bit confused with whatever he is telling us.

MRS. AKWERO ODONG: Point of clarification.  Mr. Speaker, right now the whole country is almost sitting on a time bomb.  I just wanted to know what the modernisation of agriculture that the Minister wants to inform us about, has in relation to the current drought that is facing the country.  I thought that was the most crucial issue that he should highlight the issue of modernisation in regard to the drought.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: My reading of the mood here is that they are expecting the Sessional Committee sometime, not very far from now, to report on this matter, including the modernisation of agriculture.  I would rather suggest that instead of going in details, just highlight the few points.

DR. KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr. Chairman, it may look light at this stage, but this is a package programme -(Interruptions)

MR. AWORI: Point of order.  Mr. Speaker, is it in order for the hon. Minister to consistently refer to you as Chairman when you are not in a committee?  He does not address you as a Speaker?  I find this one objectionable. I would like to move that we apply Rule 61, that the Minister may not be heard any more.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, this Rule which you are using is about a Member using objectionable words.  But I realise a problem now, the Minister is now confusing the House with a Committee, that is the only problem.  But I think you will bear with him so that he summarises his statement and then we move to the next item on the agenda.  

DR. KISAMBA MUGERWA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since morning, I have been with a Sessional Committee and my mind is still there - that is why I have been addressing you as Chairman.  But I am sorry.  

What is important in this now is that, this is a development package which will be required at a certain stage, and it is quite involving for the Parliament to approve. There is a statement which was made to the CG in December, 1998 which I have brought for the Parliament and I wish to lay it on the Table for Members of Parliament also to internalise because this is going to be the basis of the discussion. 

I did not like at any one stage to say that this House has not been informed on the process.  However, I will leave the details and only appeal for the Members' continued participation in the whole process.

Secondly, the hon. Members of Parliament are key partners to foster the modernisation process through legislation and mobilisation of their constituents and directly participating as farmers.

Thirdly, I am requesting the hon. Members to support the plan for Agricultural Modernisation when the motion is tabled for discussion.  I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.  As I said, this statement would have attracted debate for not more than 30 minutes.  But you have received the it, at an appropriate time we shall have a full debate over this matter.  

DEBATE IN REPLY TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT'S ADDRESS TO PARLIAMENT ON THE STATE OF THE NATION

MRS. BAKOKO BAKORU (Woman Representative, Arua): Mr. Speaker, I want to support the motion and thank the President for his State of the Nation Address to Parliament. I will just make observations on a few points.  

The first one is on security.  Mr. Speaker, I think it is important to recognise that the President was able to visit terrorist attacked sites, and I from the time he visited those sites, we have not heard of any other attacks in the city.  

I want to recognise the role of the UPDF in bringing peace and the fact that the President has accepted to grant amnesty to rebels; I hope that the people of this Country will not misuse this opportunity, so that we can have peace.  With due respect, I want to register my disappointment, especially with the intelligence sector, because sometimes people get arrested after mistaken identities. I would like to appeal that the intelligence network cross check information before they arrest people.  

On security again, Mr. Speaker, I would like to draw the attention of the House on the issue of abuse of children's rights.  Mr. Speaker, traditional healers are supposed or are partners in provision of service delivery in this Country.  I do not know where to draw a line between the traditional healers and witch craft or witch doctors.

MR. EKANYA: Point of clarification. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Some of us who represent the youth in this House find it quite disturbing if something happens that concerns our constituencies.  I would like to seek clarification from the hon. Member; when she is talking of intelligence arresting people after mistaken identity, she is referring to one headmaster of Yumbe Secondary School in Arua District who has been arrested and he has stayed in Police detention for one and a half months, and students have been striking.  Is that the kind of people whom you are talking of being arrested after mistaken identity?

MRS. BAKOKO BAKORU: Mr. Speaker, I think I am capable of talking what I want in this House.  So, I do not want the hon. Member to put words into my mouth.  I have already got two people released due to mistaken identity and I was referring to those two people.

I was on witchcraft and traditional healers.  As I said earlier, traditional healers are partners in provision of health service delivery.  I was just seeking and saying that I would like to know whether there are guidelines which draw a line between witch doctors and traditional healers.  We know witch craft is criminal and most of these people who are witch doctors are known in the villages as traditional healers. I also want to know whether there is an inventory of these witch doctors or traditional healers so that we would be able to know who is providing a health service as a traditional healer and who is a criminal as a witch doctor.  

The President talked about mangoes; mangoes as a cash crop or mangoes as a source of income for Arua District. I want to say that if we had hydro electric power or a good road, we would transport our mangoes to where they could be processed. I am only grateful that he also mentioned that by March, next year - I hope that it is not the usual business - we are going to have our road tarmacked, the Arua-Pakwach road.  Otherwise, I want to say that Government which has benefited so much from tobacco this year may as well start counting negatively as it was the case with the fish industry because most of the tobacco was luckily or unluckily destroyed by heavy storms and the drought. For us in Arua, we take it as luckily because we benefit very little from the tobacco income.  

I would also like to talk about the restocking.  Mr. Speaker, -(Interruptions)

MR. ONGOM: Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank the hon. Member for allowing me to ask for this clarification.  The Member has just informed us that heavy storms have destroyed tobacco in Arua and then she says, may be that is lucky.  Can she tell us why it is lucky for farmers to have their crops destroyed?

MRS. BAKOKO BAKORU: Mr. Speaker, I said, luckily or unluckily that Government should negatively begin to realise that they will raise very little money for this nation.  But for Arua it is lucky because we have never benefited from the tobacco money.  I hope you have understood what I am saying.  How much has the farmer been benefiting? (Interjections)  Mr. Speaker, I want to be protected.  If the President said the farmers get less than 250,000/= shillings in a year and that money cannot pay for more than three or four children in Secondary Schools, I do not see the benefit for the farmers. Our farmers are being cheated.  If H.E rightly observed that mangoes are the best for us as Arua District, I think what we need is a road and power so that we can process those mangoes in Arua.

I want to talk on restocking.  I also want to thank the President for saying that there is going to be a restocking programme.  Arua District and West Nile as a whole is one of the areas which have suffered most because of insecurity.  For us, it started during Amin's times. People have lost lives; people have lost property, but it seems we have never, as West Nile, benefited a lot from recovery programmes.  I hope that the restocking is also going to be extended to West Nile. We, the people of Arua also know how to look after cows and we also want to drink milk.

On the Youth Councils, last year we were informed that there was a 'YES' programme - the Youth Entrepreneur Scheme, and Mr. Speaker, I hope that this is a programme which will take off and I hope it is not also going to be another programme which is going to be sung every year, because our youth get easily diverted, therefore the youth deserve special attention. I would really be grateful if they can get that money and we -(Interruptions

MS. NANKABIRWA: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the hon. Member of Arua District for giving way.  I just wanted to inform her that in the YES scheme, modalities are being worked out to operationalise the scheme and it is not going to be lost in the pipe-line.  That is why I am there.  Thank you.

MR. ADOME LOKWI: Point of information.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the hon. Member for Arua District for giving way.  I just wanted to help the hon. Member that the shs.500m/= we passed last year is locked up in Co-operative Bank.  So, if we could work out a way of getting that money, it would help the youth.  Thank you.

MS. BAKOKO BAKORU: Thank you very much, hon. Minister, but for my colleague's information, the Co-operative Bank was locked up recently.  I would have expected that the money should have been used long ago.  I am very grateful that the hon. Minister has assured us that this money is going to benefit the youth. We shall continue to monitor, hon. Minister, and we do not doubt your skill and capacity. We hope that this money will reach the youth and that it will not end up into the drains. 

For the women councils, that is also another group of people who have not benefited a lot from the Entandiikwa scheme.  Whereas deliberate efforts have been made by law that at least a minimum of 30 per cent of Entandiikwa should benefit the women; and whereas it is known that women have never defaulted in paying their loans, very few women still benefit from the scheme. Now that the hon. Minister has come out with a lot of energy and vigilance, I hope that she is going to look into that direction because the women are the bread winners of this country.

I want to finalise on corruption.  I think in order to fight corruption, we need to have teamwork.  In my language they say that, pointing a finger at somebody while the rest point at yourself calls for self examination. (Interjections)- I will repeat that in my language if you want. Mini dri sozu ba azini ma milea, dere..  It means, if you point a finger at someone, the other three fingers are pointing at you.  So do a self analysis. We can only ably combat corruption in this country if all of us get involved.

The Bank of Uganda which is the main authority has a big role to play.  Whereas many of banks died as the President said, and were buried, I still believe that this was crisis management on the part of BOU..  As the main monitoring body, Bank of Uganda should have identified the early warning signs that these banks were degenerating, unless they have also been partners in dragging these banks to their graves.  Thank you very much. 

MR. CHARLES BAKKABULINDI(Workers Representatives):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would also like to join my colleagues in supporting this motion on mainly two grounds.  First and foremost I would like to congratulate His Excellency the President for the good governance he has exhibited so far, and for the introduction of UPE which has done a lot for the children of our workers. I cannot forget to thank His Excellency for the way he has tried his level best to balance the districts and other groups as far as ministerial appointments are concerned.  

I get a bit perturbed in the way His Excellency makes his ministerial appointments, and at the same time, dilutes the ministers' integrity in public. On many occasions, Mr. Speaker, His Excellency has been quoted in constituencies saying, 'You people, instead of development you wanted a minister and that is what you call sharing of the cake and I have given you the minister.'  I fail to understand, does he simply give the minister for the sake of balancing districts or he looks at capability of an individual? If that is the case, then to me it is diluting the presence of the ministers.  

His Excellency has been talking a lot about poverty eradication, and to me as a workers representative, I think poverty eradication can not be achieved in Uganda now as long as there is no clear policy on job creation - that is one; two, when corruption is still at a high degree, moreover in government departments.  As I talk now, we have got more than nine registered Universities and more tertiary institutions, and each year, these universities produce a lot of young graduates for the labour market.  They all end up doing nothing and become idle and disorderly, and you know what comes out after becoming idle and disorderly. A lot has been talked about the policy for the government to curb that and that is getting more investors.  

When we talk about investors creating jobs, I fail to understand what the term 'creating'.  I represent the workers, and majority of the investors we have got in this country, at least two thirds of them, for more than two years they have been retrenching; they have retrenched more than 50 per cent of the man power.  Is that what we call creating jobs in this modern country of ours?  What are we going to do with this big number of the jobless?

Looking at the address on the state of the nation, on page 9 and 10, His Excellency talked about introducing the school leavers fund; and he expects the school leavers to be job creators and not job seekers.  But my question is, how many school leavers do we have per year, and how much are we going to put as a fund, and how much is each going to get so that he can start a small enterprise and sustain himself?  If he is a doctor or he is an engineer how much are we going to give him so that he can set up something to be a job creator.  

Not only that, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about the school leavers fund, we should not also forget that we have got also the retrenchees, another army of retrenchees, what are we planning for them as a nation?  Each year, each month, we find a lot of enterprises are retrenching workers, but nothing has been said as being the programme for these retrenchees. And to make it worse, and I think hon. members will support when time comes, these retrenchees packages are being taxed like hell.  When we try to negotiate for their good package while they are going home, you find the government is interested in taxing like hell, then we wonder what will happen to this nation if we have got an army which is redundant, of job seekers, from the young graduates and at the same time the retrenchees have no programme being initiated by the government.

 We have been hearing a lot about the economy growing and it has been mentioned in this that it grew from 6.5 to about 7.8 per cent.  But I think as a workers representative, and even hon. Members who are representing voters from mostly rural areas, what do we understand by this term 'the economy is growing' when there is too much poverty on the ground??  I think to us it would be better if we can express this terminology in a physical manner.  We should show in a real sense whereby that person who is far in the village can understand it.  This business of saying the economy is growing from 6.5 to 7.8 and yet people can without food fails my understanding. 
 
PROF. KAGONYERA:  Point of information. I am sorry I should not be interrupting the hon. Member on the Floor but just in case I do not have an opportunity to participate in the debate, I would like to give this information. The other day, a very senior Member of this House, at least in age, was saying that we should stop using statistical information to establish the state of our economy; and I would like to suggest to him, Mr. Speaker, that if he could design another method of evaluating the economy of the countries of the world, maybe he might qualify for a prize.  Because really statistical information is a classical standard method of evaluating performance of an economy.

Now to go back to what hon. Bakkabulindi has been saying, it is not true to say that there are no tangible indicators of economic growth in this country.  What do I mean?  I never studied economics, but I know very well that if you go to the countryside, you find a number of things. Look in his own constituency, if he has got one. How many houses have iron sheet roofs on them instead of grass. Let him find out how much soap is consumed in his village instead of what was consumed a few months ago. Let him even find out how much soft drinks and beer were consumed in this country over Christmas.  How many tons of cloth textiles went through customs and were sold to the people of this country.  

In my humble opinion, Mr. Speaker, I think there are definite indicators; look at cars, the streets of Kampala clogged with cars.  Let him find out how many bicycles have come from Roadmaster factory and have been sold to the people of this country; let him go where I was the other day, I could hardly drive because there were so many bicycles on the road. Only yesterday, you could not find anywhere to buy a tube for a bicycle.  So, I would like to convince my colleague, hon. Bakkabulindi, that yes there are even tangible indicators for economic growth in this country. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MISS. KIRASO:  Hon. Kagonyera says he is not an economist, what hon. Bakkabulindi is talking about actually is not economic growth, he wants to see economic development. In other words, economic growth. Yes, hon. Bakkabulindi wants to see it transformed into equitable distribution of this growth that hon. Kagonyera is talking about.  It is true that there is economic growth.  He is saying it is not being felt by the Wananchi which is true. In other words, government should come up with deliberate policies in which this growth can be equitably, or at least very close to equitably, distributed so that we do not have a class of very, very rich people and a class of very, very poor people.  Thank you.

MR. BAKKABULINDI:  I thank you, hon. Members, for that good information. In fact, hon. Beatrice got it clearly that much as the theory is talking about the economic growth, in the villages we want to see the human development, the economic development;  and hon. Kagonyera was talking about how much beer we drink at Christmas, Christmas of once in a year; and hon. Members, I would like you to take this seriously. When a question is posed of how many houses have been developed in Kampala or built in Kampala, and how many cars are being driven on the streets, another question also should follow; who are the owners?  Are they 10 cars for one person, or for 10 people?  We have to be sincere. This business of saying we are assessing how many houses have come up on Naguru hill, for how many people?  They could be for two people, the lucky ones.  We want to balance the situation.

Back on the same issue of the economic growth, when we talk about development let us try to be serious and look backward towards 60s.  In those years of the 60s, I would call them in the good years.  We had a lot of houses like the Bugolobi flats, the Naguru flats, the Nakawa flats, the Nakawa estates and Kamwokya which were doing a lot in housing a lot of urban workers.  But assuming those houses were not built in those good years, what would happen now in this population we are having in Kampala?  And I think when we are talking about development, we should also not forget such factors that what have we done?

Before I come to the conclusion, I happened to be among the Members of Parliament who visited the Uganda Air Cargo we wanted to verify a lot of questions which have been raised;  and we were given the opportunity even to enter into that plane and to be told what it is doing of recent.  Now, assuming that Air Cargo was not bought by Amin in 1975, and if it was sold last year as the government had wanted, how would we be achieving our current operations in Congo now?  

Much as we are selling the enterprises, I think it is high time also we need to re-think to say that we need to reserve some for our own purposes.  This business of sell, sell, sell everything, we are going to end up without having any property for this nation; and I think we have already got good examples of some ministers who have no offices, we are just relying on renting alone we can not even have our own block that is why we have been put in cartoon of hon. Members being under the tree discussing national issues under the tree simply because our interest is sell everything but do not reserve for our own.  I think we need to re-think and consider that position.  

Lastly, I was a bit perturbed when His Excellency talked about the dead banks, that they should be buried quickly.  But before you bury somebody, you should know what has been the cause of the death.  Is it the disease or he has been killed by people; and if he has been killed by people, what have you done?  We bury the banks yes, but what do we do to the killers? What steps have we taken on those ones who have contributed to the death of those banks? We should not be exited by the words 'bury the banks', but I think we should find out the cause so that it does not happen again.  I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, I want to assure you I will do my best to give you an opportunity to contribute.  But as you realise, since we started this debate, we have not had any person representing the Executive.  Therefore, this first opportunity is for the Right Prime Minister.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I do have copies of the statement which I am going to articulate, and I will be circulated to all Members of Parliament. Mr. Speaker, because of time constraints, I request you to allow me to read it quickly.

I wish to associate myself with the Members of Parliament who supported by the motion by hon. Nsubuga Mayanja, the mover of the motion, of appreciation to the President's address at the opening of the 4th session of the 6th Parliament. The Baganda have a saying that entasiima ebula agiwa.  It means that a person who does not appreciate what is given to him or her ends up with nobody giving him or her anything. While we admit that government led by His Excellency President Museveni has made some mistakes, it has done a lot of good work to move Uganda from anarchy, brutality and atrophy to a state which is taken seriously and respected locally and internationally.  

We must thank our Creator, we must thank the President, Ministers and Members of Parliament, the Judiciary, Mass Media, Religious Leaders, Universities, Public Servants and many other people and institutions for what has been achieved so far.  We wish also to thank our Donors and other financial partners, who have assisted Uganda significantly during our recovery.  
We must accept constructive criticisms in order to solve so many outstanding and intricate problems ahead of us.  The state of the nation address which the President delivered under article 101 of our constitution admits weaknesses and points out important achievements.  It also contains concrete indicators of progress. For example, whereas inflation was 240 in 1986, it is 5 percent in 1999 and I take the point that you first quantify what you have achieved and also assess the levels of distribution. So those two processes must be assessed together. But when the quantum is too little and you re-distribute, it, it may not make an impact. You first quantify before focusing on distributing. Controlling inflation is very important inter alia because when prices change daily, predictable planning becomes very difficult by individuals, groups and governments and we are all aware that many developers tend to dread visiting some of our countries because they are fraught with institutional fluidity and other forms uncertainty.  

I wish to state that it takes a disciplined government to avoid creating inflation by printing money which is not backed by production and hard resources. Uganda enjoys donor sympathy inter alia because it has taken tough but necessary steps in order to create macro-economic stability. Our decentralisation model and public service reform measures are being yearned for in Africa and beyond. I want to inform you that I had occasion to address a 1000 people in America and we were actually treated as having performed in some cases miracles and we have given lectures in universities at Cornell in America, Germany and elsewhere concerning our measures of recovery. 

We have been emulated and hailed for being creative and for being relevant to the African context. Our weakness includes the failure of us, including myself, the elite of Uganda, to agree on institutions and values for resolving political conflict. We, the Movementists, must continue bargaining with the Multipartyists outside the microphones of our Parliament until we agree on the methods of deciding who shall get what, when, how and for how long and this is very important and it is a continuous process.  We must also agree on institutions for resolving conflict. Most of the controversies - and I have been listening most carefully - have resolved around seven issues. 

The first one is the quality of leadership and followership.  If leaders are accommodative and accountable and have a clear vision and are counter veiled by reasonable and non-sycophantic followers, they are likely to overcome many intricate problems. In other words, the leaders must be accountable. Those who are following them must not merely worship them, they must make constructive criticisms and then we also improve the level of leadership.  And such leaders are likely to promote public interest of the country. 
Many of our past problems are significantly attributable to poor and autocratic leadership and poor followership. I am glad to point out that the quality of our leadership and followership is becoming more accountable to the nation, to God and to the global village.  The second issue revolves around the quest for balanced and equitable development. This point has been made by many Members of Parliament. Various Members have complained about allocation of electricity, telephones, educational opportunities, Cabinet posts and even prestige. Are these scarce resources being equitably distributed? It is a critical question.  

Let me point out that we started addressing these issues using our constitution. For example, under article 193 clause 4 of our Constitution, we offer equalisation grants and this is money paid to local governments for giving subsidies or making special provisions for the least developed districts and is based on the degree to which a local government unit is lagging behind the national average standard for a particular service.  So the equalisation formula under article 193 clause 4 was put there in the constitution to address equalisation and I am glad to mention that under the 1999/2000, government has set aside two billion shillings for the equalisation grant.

Affirmative actions for disadvantaged groups such as women, youth and the disabled are reflected in this House. They are with us. The decentralisation process has taken resources and responsibilities to the district and below. Political robbers must not be allowed to capture the district and lower levels of government because if political robbers capture these important levels of government, they are going to steal the resources and manipulate people politically. That is why I am very concerned when I learn that some teachers have not been paid their salaries and I shall be re-addressing this matter with the appropriate Ministry.  

His Excellency the President has recognised the need to fulfil minimum recovery in the conflict areas hence 18 billion shillings have been set aside for restocking 14 districts under NURP Two.  Restocking includes giving oxen, heifers and ploughs to these districts. The cattle culture under which the dowry and other norms are cherished is being restored. The restocking exercise is part of the economic package to ensure steady growth of the household income, a pre-requisite for poverty alleviation. So there is realisation that the quantum is increasing but certain areas are lagging behind. So you create avenues for household income. You are therefore addressing distribution for those who were concerned with distribution. 

Cattle rustling which undermines restocking is being assaulted by the following measures: Government has deployed more mobile troops to rustling areas. Two, armed local vigilantes are in  place.  Three, local defence units have been placed in the neighbouring districts of Kitgum, Lira, Katakwi, Soroti, Kumi, Mbale and Kapchorwa.  

BRIG. KYALINGONZA: Thank you Mr. Speaker, and I thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for allowing me to seek clarification from him. He has fortunately talked about cattle rustling and that appropriate measures are put in place to combat this activity. But I am nervously feeling slightly embarrassed when I hear the Rt. hon. Prime Minister assuring us that there is high gear to combat this cattle rustling. Of late - and we are made to believe and understand through the press that we have lost some numbers of our troops, and these were of course on the activity of fighting cattle rustling. I am only worried how prepared and seriously are you putting in place this preparedness? Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. ONAPITO:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I would also like the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to explain how different the perception of using armed force against rustling today is from the very method used by previous governments and failed. Have you analysed why armed force has failed to end rustling and why do you think it will succeed this time?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: I am very grateful for those important questions. In the next statement, I will  make it clear that the current problems to ensure that all agencies have co-ordinated movements. So we have done some work and we have realised that there are some problem of co-ordination of the various agencies. 

Secondly, I would make the point that in the past, when you were using this kind of force, it was not democratised. But when you democratise it, you enhance the capacity of the local people to take charge of their place. I remember even at Makerere, we used to be actually attacked by thugs and when I was chairman of LC 1, we democratised our capacity to control the system and some armed thugs who attacked a lady whose husband had gone on leave had to run away because they found us organised as a group and we were even more co-ordinated.  So the difference is democratisation and also more involvement so that people belong and they work together. But there is a problem of co-ordinating them. Let us also point out that even those who faced the dangers mentioned by the hon. Brigadier were in the action of preventing rustling.

MR. TOSKIN: Point of clarification. Thank you Mr Speaker and thank you, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for giving way. There is just one small clarification I wanted the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to clarify to the House.  He has mentioned other options or other steps which government is trying. I was eagerly waiting for him to talk about disarming the Karimojong. What is the policy of Government about disarming the Karimojong? Because that is the root cause of the problem.  Thank you.

MR. NDEGE: Point of clarification.  Mr. Speaker, I heard the Rt. hon. Prime Minister talking about democratisation. Really you cannot talk about democratisation of Karamoja if you have not availed the Karimojong alternative opportunities other than just looking after cattle. As long as you keep pinning down the Karimojong on looking after cattle, the rustling, I am telling you hon. Prime Minister, unless you clarify to me, without alternative opportunities which should be on the ground that move the Karimojong from only looking after cattle as the only way forward, then we can start talking about democratising Karimojong out of poverty of mind.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: There have been different levels of intervention. For example, Universal Primary Education and when you are dealing with Universal Primary Education, we have even instituted mobile schools which are pertinent to the social political environment. So the interventions are many, they are multifaceted and when they cohere, a difference will be discerned.  

Now with regard to the issue of disarming the Karimojong, I do not want to reveal all our plans because hon. Omwony Ojwok is handling many of these issues. But let me say that if you disarm one group while you are arming others, then you may also create levels of disequilibrium. So you need to create an equilibrium where there are safeguards on both sides. But it is a more intricate matter and let me say that it is not my area of specialisation. It will be dealt with by those who are more specialised.  

But there is also another problem which I should mention, that cattle raiding by Turkana and Pokot of Kenya and Tipotha from Sudan will be stopped by more effective patrol of our borders. We are also interacting with our neighbours so that they can protect their borders. But as you know, our relationship with Sudan for example, is not so good. so the levels of interface are more difficult there. It is a problem which is being handled internationally. 

I should add that the Northern Uganda Reconstruction Programme built schools, tarmacked roads in towns and gave credit to the  peasant farmers and built a district farm institute in Gulu. The Olweny Rice Project finances out growers in Lira District. The district development programme supported by the Netherlands Government injects in the northern part of Uganda special development funds. The funds have been used to build schools, rehabilitate roads and give credit to farmers. These are important interventions which should reduce economic imbalances. The Luwero Triangle is also enjoying special intervention. The task before us is to ensure that the resources reach the targeted groups.

MR. KWIZERA: Point of clarification. Thank you Mr. Speaker. I would like to be clarified the areas which are under Luwero Triangle because we hear some areas in Ibanda and some areas in Mbarara under Luwero Triangle.  Thank you.

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  What I shall say here is that we do have hon. Nankabirwa, but when you speak of Luwero Triangle you go sometimes as far as Fortportal.  So, I want to make that clear that it is not a narrow definition of the Luwero Triangle.  But the point I was making is very important, namely that the resources must not be captured by political robbers, because then they do not reach the targeted groups. 

Let me handle the issue of corruption. Corruption is a terrible political, social economic and financial cancer which must be consistently assaulted.  However, and this is a very important however, as we grapple with this deadly disease, we must avoid the holier than thou attitude. We all need to examine our conscience in our fields.  We have the issue of numbers of people who sign the attendance register being significantly different from the number of Members of Parliament in the chamber -(Interruption). 

MS. WINNIE BYANYIMA:  Point of order.  Mr. Speaker, I am rising on a point of order.  The public have for a long time had a wrong perception that when Members of Parliament come to this House they sign for sitting allowances.  Many of us have tried to clarify that, in fact, we do not sign to get sitting allowances, that our allowances are consolidated and that signing of the register is not a way to collect a financial entitlement.  

However, the public remains with this perception that we come to sign to collect allowances and go to do other things.  The public is also not aware that you may sign the register while also doing other business in committee rooms in this very House.  The public is not aware that you can be researching in this very House having signed the register.  All these facts are not sufficiently known to the public and we will continue to be seen as thieves who sign the register and go away when that is not the case.  

I am concerned and I want to raise a point of order that the Rt.  hon. Prime Minister seems to be implying that the numbers in the register book must automatically coincide with the numbers of Members in the chamber, when he knows very well that this may not be the case given that there are many other responsibilities that we pursue in this House and not necessarily in the chamber.  Is it in order then for him to continue perpetuating a wrong perception to the public to make Members of this House look like they are corrupt?  Mr. Speaker, is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Well, you very well know that it is out of order for somebody to impute an improper motive of any Member on whatever he does as a Member, and I do not think that the Prime Minister was saying so. But any person trying to impute an improper motive that Members sign to portray themselves as being corrupt or corruptly receive money or allowances, is totally out of order.  But he can proceed. 

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I was a Minister of Public Service when this matter was drawn and very well aware that the benefits were monetised, and I did not in any say that it is a way of getting the money.  I also made the point very carefully, if the hon. Member read carefully, that the register being significantly different from the number of Members of Parliament -(Interjections.)- let me please try to clarify -  allow me to clarify.  

The point I was making here is that some Members of Parliament are transacting business and there is no doubt about it;  but the point I was making is that when need here about only 93, we have a responsibility to have that quorum, otherwise under article 88 of the Constitution we have over adjourned, and therefore, we have to address this matter - I know very well that even as we speak now some Members are transacting business.  But when we come here and people transact business outside and we lack the required minimum of a third under article 88, it poses a problem which must be addressed.  That is the point I am making and I said I wish also to appeal to Front-benchers and Back-benchers to address this problem and also to -(Interruption).

MRS. IKOTE: Point of clarification.  I am seeking clarification from the speaker on the Floor;  can he clarify whether he is insisting that this is corruption? To be in the House and not in the chamber, or to be transacting other business with or without quorum?   

MR. ONYANGO: Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to seek further clarification from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister.  Because what he is talking about is under corruption and I have a copy of the statement - the response that he is giving -  and what he is talking about here is just under corruption, and I beg to read, Mr. Speaker.  He says:  "We have the issue of the numbers of people who sign the attendance register being significantly different from the number of Members of Parliament in the chambers?"  Mr. Speaker, this topic as he has put it here is glaringly under corruption.  What did he mean, if he says it is not corruption?

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The point I was making and which I must reiterate is that when we do not have the third of the Members of Parliament, and we are adjourning frequently, it causes problems of the quorum, and that must be addressed;  and I must leave it at that and continue that we must know that there are different form of corruption such as supply of air, as opposed to real goods, abuse of office and treating the state as a personal property.  Through objective research, we must determine the most persistent aspect of corruption so that we may use local and international resources to encircle and paralyse the persistent disease.  

The fourth item has to do with banking financial turbulence. Some Members -(Interruption).

MS. BYANYIMA: Point of clarification. I associate very much  with the remarks that have been made by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, but I want him to clarify. One of the ways I understand corruption works is when a development programme is, actually, diverted and made to benefit some and to discriminate others. I am hoping that before he comes to the end of this speech, as the Leader of Government Business and as a former Minister of Education, he sheds some light on the issue of the closure of PTCs, particularly in my own area, Mbarara, where there is a strong feeling that there was deliberate discrimination against one religious denomination and, therefore, corruption.  I would seek him to clarify on that.

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  I thank the hon. Member;  first of all we never closed any PTC, we merely disengaged from some of them and the owners are allowed to have them and they point was also made that should they want to use some of those for other purposes, they will even be assisted by the state.  But that topic is too large for me to indulge in when there is a Minister of Education and Sports and these matters will be handled by him.  I think, I will be diverting myself from what I am dealing with.  I thank you.

The banking financial turbulence is the fourth issue.  Some Members of Parliament have questioned the decision of Government to repay all depositors whether or not they are covered by the deposit insurance fund which currently covers, maybe, positive liabilities up to a maximum of Shs.3,000,000/- per depositor.  This arrangement excludes all share holders and related parties such as wives and associated companies who may have benefited from mismanagement of the closed bank i.e. as ICB, Greenland Bank and the Co-operative Bank.  

It must be noted that when these banks were closed, many depositors were devastated and they lost faith in the banking system.  Depositors resorted to hiding money in unsafe places, instead of taking it to the banks.  The government had to save the ordinary person who was devastated by the closure of the banks.  Meanwhile active steps have been taken to strengthen the supervision of the capacity of the Bank of Uganda;  taking into account article 162 of our Constitution which, inter alia, conferred on the bank  the necessary autonomy that all arms of the state must respect.  

These measures have included the training of staff, recruitment of new staff and the review of the financial institution Statute which will be presented to Cabinet and Parliament.  The review will strengthen the Bank of Uganda's power in the supervision of commercial banks;  improve governance of the commercial banks and enhance transparency and disclosure by commercial banks.  These measures forestall deterioration in the financial sector.  

Number five; deployment of troops outside Uganda -(Interruption).

MISS. KIRASO:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker and the Rt. hon. Prime Minister. Before you leave number four, Sir, you have talked about the steps being taken by the Government to strengthen the financial institutions and to pay the depositors who may otherwise lose their money in the closed banks. However, the concern of Members is that this money did not fly on its own out of this country and went abroad.  This money was swindled by people who are in this country and this money is in this country and assets are in this country. The clarification I want from the hon. Prime Minister is, what mechanism has been put in place to recover this money?  Because Members of Parliament would not complain if on one hand Government is paying the depositors and on the other it was checking these thieves and recovering this money from their assets.  What is the mechanism, Sir?  Thank you.

MR. WAMBUZI GAGAWALA:  Further clarification, Mr. Speaker.  I would like the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to clarify to this House, what mechanism the Government has got to make sure that the circulation of money is not getting stuck in Kampala and the other slightly bigger towns, that the circulation is being left only among the elite, particularly in the banking sector.  Really the peasants in Bulamogi and in Kamuli are generally not part of this financial circle. I would expect that the banking sector's responsibility is make sure that the riches are being got from the ground so that there is a complete circle of money in the country.  Thank you.

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  I am very grateful for those important questions. As Members may know -(Interruption).

MR. PAJOBO:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I wanted to know what arrangements are made for the workers who have been affected by this restructuring, and who is going to pay them?  Because I understand many of these workers, the depositors are asked to leave some money, and again it is said to pay the workers.  I wanted clarification on that.  Thank you. 

MR.KWIZERA:  Further clarification, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to be clarified why they are paying Greenland depositors only and they are not paying ICB.  What criteria are they using?

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  I am very grateful for those important questions;  as I speak now, some of the people who are associated with some alleged malpractice have been taken to court.  So, I would not like to prejudice these matters, but you can see clearly that the State has moved in the direction of even taking people to court.  

On the issue of money being redistributed, there many methods of doing it and it is sometime ago since I did a bit of economics for part I of my Degree.  You use the taxation process and you redistribute, but there are many other methods and I do not want to pretend that this is my area of specialisation.  With regard to workers, whatever has been stated in the way of assisting all groups it embraces workers.  It is not exclusive of any social group, and I want to assure Members that the State is very concerned with all members of its society, because they were devastated, and I would assume that workers were even more devastated, and you know, we are working even on the issue of the minimum wage, as you know we are very concerned with workers.  

But let me continue with number five, because some of the questions asked are beyond my special capacity to answer.  So, I avoid that because it is unprofessional to try to pretend to know answers to all questions. Number five;  deployment of troops outside Uganda was a major issue, and I want to mention that under article 210 of our Constitution, we know that Parliament shall make laws regulating the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces providing for the deployment of troops outside Uganda. The Bill will be tabled before Parliament and I have been actively dealing with the ministry concerned to ensure that it is brought here so that we allay any fears, because we believe in our Constitution.  Number six -(Interruption).

MR. EGWOU:  Clarification on number five, Mr. Speaker. I would like to be clarified by the Member holding the Floor about number five;  deployment of troops outside Uganda.  We are aware that the Army Chief of Staff is in charge of the administration of the Army.  I do not know if it is really good to deploy an Army Chief of Staff l000 kilometres deep in Congo and later on put him on joint military commission without replacing him!

MR. MUKASA:  Further clarification.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  About three weeks ago, His Excellency the British High Commissioner was a guest of this House where we had a series of discussions with him, and one of the items that was discussed was the Congo crisis;  and in his view he stated to us very categorically, that as far as the objectives of the adventure into Congo was to seal the border so as to forestall incursions by the ADF was concerned, that this was a total failure.  What is the view of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister on that matter?

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  You see, these matters are professional, and my view has always been and I have argued with many of these diplomats and so on, is that they must understand one problem.  When you have a neighbouring country which lacks attributes of a state,  such as having a capacity to control all its territory, a lot of its problems spill into your land.  

Secondly, when you have that kind of a country where roads are not easily available and people are flying from one country and they come and mess our country, you have to address those people from the point where they drop into that country which has no capacity to control its political system. We call that absence of territorial control. Therefore the debates which we can have, is what are the basic mechanisms of securing your state? You know, for example, that when there were problems in Kosovo, the amount of money which was spent to deal with for example, ethnic cleansing, and the amount of money which is being spent to settle those problems, are extremely large.  

So, when we are debating these things, we must be careful; because we are surrounded by, I do not like to call it a fictitious state, but a state lacking many attributes of a state, and its problems flow into Uganda.  What I have asked these diplomats, is to have people who are qualified in this area to come and address us as to the best options of handling these problems.  

MR. MUKASA PASCAL:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Just to that point, I find it odd that the hon. Member who raised the first clarification refers to Uganda versus the ADF in Congo.  The British High Commissioner should have told us why after all these years the Irish Republican Army is still a problem to the British who know how to solve this problem. (Applause).  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR. OKUMU RINGA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  The clarification I am seeking from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister is with regard to Item 5 on his paper which is deployment of the troops outside Uganda, and he referred to Article 210 of the Constitution.  I would like to request the Prime Minister to reconcile Article 210 of the Constitution with Article 124 of the Constitution; and (c), if you may allow me to quote, Mr. Speaker, Article 124(1) of the Constitution states as follows: "The President may, with the approval of Parliament, given by a resolution supported by not less than two-thirds of all Members of Parliament, declare that a state of war exists between Uganda and any other country.  

(2) Where it is impracticable to seek the approval of Parliament before declaration of a state of war, the President may declare a state of war without approval but shall seek the approval immediately after the declaration and in any case, not later than 72 hours after the declaration.  

(3) Where the President makes the declaration of a state of war under Clause (1), when Parliament is in recess, the Speaker shall, immediately sermon Parliament to an emergency session to sit within 72 hours after the declaration of a state of war.  

(4) The President may with the approval of Parliament given by a resolution revoke a declaration of a state of war made under Clause 1 or 2 of these Articles.'  

The clarification is that we are protecting our borders, our troops are in the Congo and our Chief of Staff is in the Congo, now is this the same as the deployment referred to by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister under Article 210?  That is the clarification I am seeking.  

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  First of all you wanted me to reconcile Article 210 and Article 124.  But under Article 124, you are dealing with declaration of war, and I want to put it to you squarely that we have not declared a state of war between ourselves and DRC. (Applause). What is happening is that we are having institutional fluidity of a neighbouring country flowing into our country; and we are using many methods, including hot pursuit to address these matters -(Laughter)- and when we do that, Article 124 is not relevant here. (Hear, hear!).  So, therein lies the reconciliation between Article 210 and Article 124; but let me proceed.  
The issue we are dealing with under 6, is the issue of giving high priority to social and economic infrastructure. This area has been focused on and we must sketch it as follows:  in the area of education, we are focussing our attention on universal primary education in order to increase literacy, civic competence, communication skills, train ability and we are making the human resource acquire relevant skills and become more productive.  

Gender imbalances and the marginalisation of the people with the disabilities are some of the key issues being addressed under UPE.  In the area of public health, they are making the human resource healthy more available and reliable for utilisation, and less expensive to maintain in the production process.

MR. ADOME LOKWII:  I thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for giving way. On point 6, Mr. Speaker, I wanted hon. Rt. Prime Minister to give me assurance; because when UPE programme was introduced, for us in Karamoja, because of the nature of the education system in Uganda, people have never embraced the formal education system very well; and as I explained, there is a high rate of illiteracy in that area.  But when Red Burner introduced the alternative basic education for Karamoja, that is ABEK in short, very many girls in fact entered that system, and also boys had more time in those kind of pilot schools; but the Red Burner said it would pull out within two years or something like that.  I do not know how far Government in assuring the Karimojong this better alternative because it is the one which really appeals more to them before entering into the formal one.  I do not know how far Government has gone in assuring us the alternative basic education for the Karimojong children who may not necessarily catch up with the formal system, given their mobility.  I thank you.  

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  Thank you.  That is a large area, we do have a strategic plan in the Ministry of Education, but let me say this much that there are different methods of tackling each area, and these are in our plan, and that is why every 6 months, the Ministry of Education interfaces with all the donors in order to ensure that what they are doing is incorporated into a strategic plan.  

But let me also say that when the numbers are small, you might use what we call multi-grade teaching, and in that case, you may have different small groups and teach them at the same; and of course when you are dealing with girls, we discovered that sometimes even when you do not have toilet facilities, they disappear from the classrooms, because when they are lining up with boys and sometimes boys take the upper hand and girls remain highly disadvantaged. 

So, the issues which cause young girls to actually drop out are many and in that plan we have addressed them, and we have also said that if you have got four children per family, one of them who should benefit from UPE must surely be a girl. There is also the issue of giving priority to the disabled, so the plan is very large, but let me assure you that whatever has been done by the donors or our friends and is viable, has been incorporated in that plan; and the State will fund it. 

Now, let me deal again with the infrastructure. I am saying that constructing roads has enabled us to increase mobility of human resources and goods.  Further more, we have increased access to market and opened up the hinterland for production.  This measure also enhances provision for security. Provision of clear water is essential for increasing our health. Improved communications, make life easier for local and foreign investors and they reduce costs in terms of contacts.  Improved communications also enhance exchange of goods and services between the district at a horizontal level into a district interaction; and between the district and the Central Government at a vertical level.  The increased horizontal and vertical interactions in Uganda are likely to facilitate national integration.  

The point I am making here is very simple, namely that when people are immobile, because they lack the resources, because the roads are impassable, they become localised and they do not understand what is taking place elsewhere.  But when you increase or improve communications and they also become affordable, then the levels of interaction are increased and you therefore increase national integration.  There are five interpretations of national integration which we can discuss elsewhere.  

The generation, transmission and distribution of power efficiently and cheaply attracts heavy industries and large investments. This process reduces environmental terrorism and degradation as few trees will be cut for firewood. 

MR. MIGEREKO: Thank you, Mr. Prime Minister for giving way. I am seeking clarification with regard to why Government is not showing interest in alternative energy sources. The case in point regards sugar manufacturers who can produce electricity out of bio gas. One of the sugar manufacturers in my constituency has indicated that for the last one and a half years, they have been ready to supply 30 mega watts of power, but Government and UEB are not ready to sign a power purchase agreement with them. In light of the serious inadequate power supply in the country, what could be the justification for the failure to sign a PPA?  

Two; I would also be interested in knowing how come up to now as a country we are maintaining the highest power tariffs in the region of 9 US cents per unit; it could be even the highest on the  whole continent of Africa, yet recently, Parliament was able to clearly demonstrate that if negotiators of some of these tariffs take interest, the country can be in a position to do with better tariffs as demonstrated when Parliament was scrutinising the AES Nile independent power agreement.  Thank you.

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  Thank you very much. We cannot underestimate the role of Parliament in supervising the Executive; and let me say that when we are dealing with the question of tariffs, it is a matter we address; but you must also remember that other people interested in power are coming into this country because of sobrietisation of the political process; and therefore when we get more competitors, the prices are reduced. We must have the technical expertise to be able to negotiate and we are grateful for your input and we are also appreciating it and the tariff is going down among other things because there is this supervision but also there are other people now who are willing to invest in Uganda.  

On the issue of alternative sources of energy, hon. Syda Bumba has a whole paper which has fully addressed this question, it is a question now of sequencing issues. If you go on nibbling at each matter, you may end up by not having a holistic approach and we want to ensure that we sequence our requirements carefully using again professional indicators.  

Let me finally deal with conflict resolution.  Prevention and management of conflict is being promoted by reducing economic imbalances. Those who feel historically marginalised when the state does not address that matter, ultimately resort to conflictual methods.  So, it is a very important issue when you are dealing with conflict prevention and management. That is why the earlier paper dealt with matters which we have taken such as equalisation grants to deal with the question of imbalances, the Amnesty Law is also important, and you can see that Government initially was saying that we are not going to deal with these wrong people but because of pressure and because of interfacing with so many groups, the time has come to realise that now we can use that approach. We have used different methods and His Excellency as he has made it clear and of course the rest of the Cabinet, have agreed to the suggestion that we should have the Amnesty Law and it shall be coming here for discussion.  

Furthermore, some of the former insurgents are members of the Cabinet while others have been assigned as other tasks, and that is political co-optation of the formerly alienated groups. This approach enables the state to reduce conflict regarding the allocation of scarce resources. I started with the statement that, conflict is concerned  with who shall get what, when, how and for how long?  So, when you co-opt people to get, for example, prestige or material resources, they feel that they belong and therefore you reduce conflict.  Civil society is encouraged to participate in the process of conflict prevention and management.  For example, there are many NGOs which are assisting people in the war zone areas to recover morally, psychologically and economically. The psychological element is very, very important and some of them have been to our office and we are working closely with them to address the question of recovery.  

Let me conclude -(Interruption)

MR. ONAPITO EKOMOLOIT:  Thank you the Rt. hon. Prime Minister.  On the question of conflict resolution, I would like to know from you the progress of the amnesty offer, because there have been a lot of reports which have not been denied authoritatively by Government.  One of them is to the effect that a senior presidential adviser met Joseph Kony at a very emotional meeting in which the rebel leader cried.  So, I do not know whether he has given indicators that he is coming to take advantage of this amnesty offer. The other one is Alice Lakwena has also consistently been reported to be interested in coming back.  What is the official position about her return? 

Then also there was a time when Cabinet is reported to have resolved to allow former President Milton Obote to return, then suddenly there was confusion which the country does not understand, what happened? I really want to get clarified on this issue. 

Finally, from my home in Teso, there have been reports of rebels which have not been substantiated on the ground, and many leaders in the region are not convinced that the reports are true, though Government is being vague about it.  Thank you.

MR. GAGAWALA WAMBUZI:  Point of clarification.  Mr. Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the Right Hon. Prime Minister on the issue when he said that who gets what, when and in what quantity?  On this Floor, over the last two weeks, many Members stood up here demanding that the Executive should institute a planning authority. You see, the Planning Authority helps us to start hoping that even if they have not done it today, something will be done in Kamuli, where there is no map of what we are likely to get in the next five years or ten years; you are really leaving us to grope.  

Is the Government, the Executive in particular, waking up to the fact that we must have a ten year or five year development plan really gazetted so that we are all focussed? Otherwise, we are really groping. I do not know why you say you just want power today when we do not even know what power is going to do and for whom it is going to help.  The people in Kamuli are really groping and we do not see why we should not get near the national cake at all. 

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  I am very grateful. Let me begin with that one. You see, under the new Constitution, there are many requirements to fulfil. For example, under Article 271 of our Constitution, we had to handle the Referendum Bill. Under Article 106, we had to deal with the remuneration of the President, and under Article 108, we had to deal with the remuneration of the Vice President. Now, under Article 125, you have to deal with the National Planning Authority, and what I would say to Members of Parliament is that currently there is a constitutional overload, but there is also a political overload and what we are trying to do is to work round the clock to fulfil these requirements.  Some of you may not know, sometimes, some of us sleep at 4.00 a.m; by 6.00 a.m we must be up and we must be in our offices by 8.00 a.m.  It is a hard job, but that matter is being expeditiously dealt with.

Now, with regard to whether rebels in Teso and Kony and Lakwena are coming back, I wish to say that when you are dealing with security matters, sometimes, it is injurious to the State to disclose them, especially when you are negotiating, because people may rigidify in positions when you display all cards in advance. So, I would be extremely hesitant to disclose more unless the Minister for State handling these matters, hon. Kavuma, is willing to add something. I am very cautious about security matters. With your permission, if hon. Kavuma has something to add, I would not hesitate to invite him to say it ,with your permission, Mr. Speaker.  I see him shaking his head and that suggests that probably he is also declining.  

With regard to Dr. Obote, as you know, he was allowed to come back and he was going to partake of the scarce resources for retired Heads of State, but he himself declined as you heard his response. It was a clear no and an abusive no.  But the doors are still open.

In conclusion, we must reiterate our appreciation to His Excellency the President for the state of the nation address which covered many critical areas. Some of these issues which are not contained in the address because people keep on saying, this matter was not covered, that matter was not covered. But they are available in other documents, such as 'The Background to the Budget'. In an address of this nature, he could not have covered everything, especially when they are covered elsewhere.  We entreat Parliament, the Judiciary, civil society, including the mass media and other institutions, to work closely with the Executive in order to promote the public interest of Uganda. When the public interest flourishes, personal interests are ultimately addressed.  May the Creator continue to bless Uganda.  I thank you.

MISS. TIPERU NUSURA (Female Youth Representative):  Mr. Speaker, I find it difficult to disassociate myself from this motion particularly in a country like ours whereby the Government has continued to recognise the efforts of the youth. When the youth of Uganda compare themselves to those in other countries like Kenya, Tanzania and other parts of Africa, we are blessed, because we have representation from the sub-counties up to the national level, whereby we can voice our problems.  I therefore, thank the President for giving us the political will, and for mentioning funding the Youth and Women Councils which I will not go into detail, because I will be repeating myself since most of the Members have already talked about that.  However, my humble request is that, that does not remain on paper but it is made practical, because so far we have an address. If you want to find the Chairman of Youth Mbarara, you would easily locate him, but his is an office without any facilitation and Members are aware that power without resources is actually no power. So, funding the Youth and Women Councils would help in mobilising the youth of this country so that their energies can be utilised in the rightful manner.  

I also support the motion because, the President clearly demonstrated how he is a people based President.  I was with him during the tour in the North; I must say that I am sorry that I have not been in the West particularly, because I have not been able to foot the transport costs to the West.  However, in all the trips he has  made in the North, the youth have been asking him for cattle, they have been asking him for being part of the Entandikwa and many things, and he was able to listen to their problems and to show concern by including it in the address on the state of the nation.

However, having listened attentively to the President's address, what made me feel bad was that he did not make mention of funding of Government sponsored students in Makerere University.  You are all aware that the people I represent, the majority are either entering into institutions or others are coming out of institutions and many are now on the streets. Even this time, it was through many pleas from some hon. Members here that now we think the 2,000 students that Government has only sponsored might be sponsored.  It is a 'might'.  I was praying that the President makes a concrete remark on that so that we are sure that the State, since it has an obligation to educate its citizens makes confirmation of that.  Countries like Japan have excelled because they have continued to educate their citizens, and they have even gone ahead to export their graduates so as to exploit other technologies and bring it back where it suits the environment in Japan. This is why they have been able to develop.  However, many of our graduates continue languishing on the streets. There is no clear employment policy, Mr. Speaker.  Many Ministers go abroad, but I do not see how they even market out people and see how to export these people to work in other countries.  

MR. MIGEREKO:  Point of information.  I definitely agree with the speaker on the floor, and I would like to further strengthen her submission by stating that when we were trying to prevail on the Government to support the candidature of hon. Rwendeire for the UN job, we were assured that we would be informed of the jobs that are in existence in international circles. In fact, we started getting some of the adverts, although, most of them would reach our pigeon holes after the closure deadlines.  Today, we are no longer getting anything and I hope there would be a positive advancement in regard to policy towards supporting some of our citizens in accessing some of those jobs.

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA:  Point of information.   Mr. Speaker, while I agree with hon. Members that Government should continue to support Uganda citizens for positions outside the country.  I would like to make the same appeal, not only to Members of Parliament, but even to the general populace of this country.  It is not too long ago when a Ugandan was vying to take a very senior position in a certain place, and everybody, including people who call themselves nationalists, did everything they could to make sure this candidate could not get this job.  Therefore, it is not only the Government, the trouble is that people tend to put all the responsibility on the shoulders of the executive arm of the Government and they give up their own responsibility.  Therefore, this appeal by the hon. Member should not go to the executive arm of the Government but it should go to every Ugandan that whenever a Ugandan is vying for a position, all of us must sing in unison and support that candidate. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MAJ. GEN. MUGISHA MUNTU:  Point of clarification.  I do not know whether the hon. Minister would like to qualify his statement.  Is he saying that any citizen regardless of qualifications or character, that if they are seeking for a job anywhere, that we should wholesale support that candidature?   Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I thought that the hon. Member did not need specific qualifications on my part.  First of all, I have spent the better half of my life as an educationist and the first thing I believe in is in qualifications and expertise - that is taken for granted.  I do not expect anybody who does not qualify academically, professionally and by experience to get any job. I spent four years as Chairman Appointments Board at Makerere University and my record is loud testimony for my belief in competence.  Therefore, I thought, Mr. Speaker, that we take for granted that these candidates duly qualify for the jobs they apply for. 

MISS. TIPERU NUSURA:  Thank you very much.  I hope the point has been taken and we all get concerned about that.  Mr. Speaker, I was talking about employment, for I believe employment is one of the indicators of growth and it is the only way disposable income can be obtained by the individuals.  There are very many NGOs giving Entandikwa-like poverty alleviation programmes in many districts.  In some, it is now considered poverty acceleration programme, because the money is so small that it can actually do nothing.  It is to the tune of 50,000/= in some areas. 

I also want to make mention on the issue of most of the youths who are now participating in rebel activities. Many of these people do not actually join with the intention of wanting to overthrow Government.  It is mostly because of poverty; poverty is now in people's stomachs; some decide to sleep in these parks during lunch time and yet they could be charged for being disorderly. Due to poverty, the youths mostly in Northern Uganda have been lured to go and participate in rebel activities; the majority from Moyo, Arua - now Lira is starting.  This is a clear indication that the youth are lacking direction and political mobilisation so as to be patriotic and realising that they have a cause to defend this country other than fighting it.

The Youth of Kibaale have requested me to talk to the President to put up at least regional schools that will be teaching the youth on how to be political and sensible as far as security matters are concerned so that they are not misled.  Mr. Speaker, the poverty situation is also high that some are even deceived just because of 200/= to cross over to Sudan.  The prisons like Luzira are becoming full, the number of the rebels are increasing, just like UPE, we are also hopeful that Government considers this.  Many people like hon. Max Omeda have become good people, we are praying that these people are got and made aware and also forgiven so that they can start a new life.  

I also want to thank the President for talking about the strategic national roads like  Karuma to Arua, now commonly known as the Museveni highway, Busunjju to Hoima. We are glad that he has made mention of that and that this is implemented this time, because, most people even find it hard to get services.  For instance, in Aringa from where I come, many of the youths there cross over to Sudan to get services from there, because the roads from Aringa to Arua town are very bad, and when you think of coming to Kampala, it is almost impossible.  So, the construction of these roads would go a long way to helping our youth in utilising the social services within the country, other than going to the borders.

It is fortunate that this country has adopted a policy of privatisation, liberalisation and others.  However, it is important that Government gives guidance whenever most of these foreigners come in this country.  Most of our youth are not protected, particularly, I am sorry to say, from Indians. I believe there must be a specific minimum wage for these people, because most of them pay graduates 50,000/= per month which is not even enough to rent a house in Kampala.  The construction industry which is booming is so good but the policy of employment is not proper.  A case in point is of Cranes Bank, Mr. Speaker, whereby we had Ugandans and Indians in the first place working. After some time, the Indians made their way up, brought in more Indians, trained by the Ugandans on site and slowly those on site who were Ugandans were eliminated and before the construction could be completed - (Interruption)

MR. BAKKABULINDI:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker and the hon. Member for giving way.  The information I wanted to give is that, apart from some of our colleagues the investors paying graduates 50,000/- shillings only, they do not even give identification of a person, so that when he is being terminated, there is no package he can get.  Because to them all the employees are regarded as casuals. So you can see how some of our investors are treating these citizens.

MISS. TEZIRA JAMWA:  Point of information.  Thank you for giving way.  These Indian investors when they come to this country, they do not only give Ugandans meagre wages, but they go as far as assaulting them and beating them terribly.  For example, this has happened in Tororo Uganda Cement Industry.  Thank you.

MISS. TIPERU:  I thank the hon. Members for the information.  Because you realise these Indians were expelled from Uganda and now they are back, we want to live happily with them so that there is no any other President who will come and think of also expelling them. 

I would like to thank the President on being precise and clear as far as Agriculture is concerned.  He demonstrated this, this time by even showing farmers how best they could improve on their household incomes.  Mr. Speaker, it is therefore up to this House to help the President in his effort to improve on the agricultural situation in the country.  It is an indication that he has realised that the poverty situation in the country is increasing. There are social economic and political causes of poverty, but there are those that are structural, Mr. Speaker.  One man by the names of Oscar Louis says that, there are people who may have a sub-culture of poverty.  And he describes characteristics like people who are naturally lazy, who do not want to change, who may have the land, for instance like Uganda which is referred to as a greenland, but it is surprising to find that people sometimes go hungry.  So I welcome the President in his approach to sensitise the farmers as far as household incomes are concerned. I support the motion, and I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, since this debate started, over 34 Members of Parliament, apart from the Mover and the Seconder, have made contribution to the debate. I have the list of all those who are interested to make contributions and I have also recorded those who are not on this list.  Next week, we are going to have also another kind of general debate when we are dealing with the Budget before we go to the Committee Stage. Since this will be my record, even if I am not the one presiding and it is the other, we shall ensure that those who have not been able to contribute this time will be the ones to be given priority to contribute during that general debate. I will make sure that, that is the policy that will be followed. And for this reason, I would now want to call upon the Mover to wind up and then we pronounce ourselves on this motion.

BRIG. KYALIGONZA:  Mr. Speaker, it is a fact that the Mover of this important motion is about to wind up and is going to make his important observations which he might have heard from the Members who have contributed.  And it is my earnest consideration that these Members who are not present should really listen to this important motion.  But besides that point, there is also a very queer situation now.  I can see the House is under quorum and I hope this time the register is not going to be consulted, is it in order therefore for us to allow this Member to wind up when we have got no quorum in the House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  On the issue of quorum, I do not know, but my reading is that people are tired. And because they are tired and they want to listen attentively to the winding up speech of the Mover, I adjourn the House to Tuesday, and we shall start with the Mover to winding up.  The House is adjourned.

(The House rose at 5.50 p.m and adjourned until Tuesday 27th July, 1999 at 2.00 p.m.))
