Thursday 29th July, 1999 

Parliament met at 2.20 p.m. in the International Conference Centre,, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

(The House was called to order)

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER.

MR. NABUTAALA N.P(Bubulo East, Mbale): Thank you Mr. Speaker. In her address to Parliament on 20th November, 1997 on corruption, Her Excellency the Vice-President defined nepotism as "The favouritism practice of using powerful or influential position in an organisation (public or private) or Government to give important political business positions or good (juicy) jobs, through unfair advantage, to members of one's family, clan, relatives), or ethnic group(tribalism), (where blood is thicker than water)".  There has been an outcry from sections of the that nepotistic practices are continually used in recruitment in Institutions like Uganda Revenue Authority, Civil Aviation Authority, National Social Security Fund and Uganda Investment Authority, whereby candidates from particular areas of Uganda are exclusively employed leaving other eligible candidates to roam the streets.  Could the hon. Minister allay the fears of this House using documentary proof that this is not going on?

THE MINISTER OF ETHICS AND INTERGRITY (Mrs Miria Matembe): Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, this Government is conscious of the necessity of balancing both national representation as well as performance criteria, a combination that is good for the image building of public institutions. Indeed the boards of these public institutions are conscious of the need for an ideal mix.  

While it is necessary to balance national representation in institutions of Government, more emphasis is placed on performance, particularly in Institutions where precise targets must be made.  It will therefore be difficult to run Institutions efficiently and supervise them effectively if members of staff know that their employment is intended merely to fulfil a quota of their area of origin.  

When I received this question, I got information from these Institutions to enable me verify the truth of the allegations contained in the question. In order to give a true picture on the ground, I have used regional population percentage to compare with the respective representations of employees per region in each of the mentioned corporations; and these are broken as follows: In Uganda Revenue Authority, central region the percentage of employees is 30 percent, western region is 33 percent, eastern is 26 percent, northern region is 12.

In the Civil Aviation Authority, central region is 29 percent, western is 32 percent, eastern is 19 percent, northern is 19 percent. In Uganda Investment Authority, central is 19 percent, western is 38 percent, eastern is 31 percent, northern is 12 percent.  In the National Social Security Fund, central is 28 percent, western is 42 percent, eastern is 25 percent, northern is 6 percent. (Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please allow the Minister to answer the question.

MRS MATEMBE: Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, the total of these employees is as follows: Central region the total is 30 percent, western region is 33 percent, eastern region is 26 percent and northern region is 12 percent. If you can see the total, the variance is not so much.  Now these percentages, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, are also based on the population. Central region is 29 percent of the population in this country and western region is 27 percent in this country, eastern region is 25 percent, northern region is 19 percent. Therefore I related these percentages in employment to the population of the people. 

It is evident that there are differences in the percentages of representation, but this taken on its own as evidence of nepotism would be misleading.  We are all aware that all these regions are not at the same level in terms of development both in technical and skilled manpower and this fact would definitely be reflected in the numbers of employees. (Interruptions).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, please allow the Minister to answer the question.

MRS MATEMBE: Thank you Mr. Speaker. This fact would definitely be reflected in the numbers of employees from each region. Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, we all know that these imbalances are a creation of our colonial history. In fact the NRM Government has tried its best through the policy of broadbasedness to solve this problem but it cannot be solved over night. 

I wish to appeal to political leaders to aggressively mobilise their population and guide them to take advantage of the current environment and Government policy to improve on their education skills and development, so that the situation in employment levels may improve. Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, it is detrimental for the people and the nation when leaders instigate sentiments of tribalism, ethnicity and the like because these will not advance us at all. Let each of us struggle to improve our areas, Mr. Speaker.  I thank you.

MR. DICK NYAI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just wanted to seek a simple clarification from the hon. Minister. She observed and then went ahead to say that it is a fact that the different regions of Uganda are not equally developed. As a Minister in the executive Cabinet of this country, does she want this country to accept this disparity as normal and proceed with it as if there is nothing wrong with that situation?  

MR. NABUTAALA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This question arose from the numerous unemployed people and in cementing unity of our nation; equitable distribution of resources like jobs is one method of creating unity in our nation.  Recently, the Scottish of Scotland in Great Britain were able to fight and get a Parliament of their own. Britain has been independent for many years. We claim they are civilised. So this question should not be seen as an uncivilised question. Redistribution of resources, equity, unity go together. Thank you very much.

MR. OKUMU REAGAN: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to get further clarification from the Minister about this percentage in terms of the management categories in these organisations. How does it reflect regionally at the top management level? 

Secondly, I also want to get clarification from the Minister because she talked so authoritatively. I do not know whether she has data on manpower distribution by region in all the other technical fields and manpower development. Thank you.

DR.CHEBROT: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I think what the hon. Minister has just said reaffirms actually the fears of the hon. Member who raised the question; because the figures as they stand now show a big variation in the recruitment exercise. My only worry is that the Minister is trying to justify these figures on the basis of qualifications and ability which in my view is wrong. I would have liked the Minister to give us more segmentation in each area even on the basis of a district at the district level so that we know exactly what is going on in the country side. But to just give these absolute figures as they are without verifying exactly who comes from where and what are his qualifications - because the problem that we are facing now is that there are many people who are entering into these institutions without actually sitting for the interviews in those institutions and they are being recruited through the back door. Could the Minister clarify that issue?  

MR. NDEGE: Thank you very much. I wonder whether the Minister is aware or she has gone to some of these Institutions. In some of these Institutions, English is not even spoken. The medium of communication is not even the official language. So maybe she does not have the correct figures.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But what is the question?

MR. NDEGE: Is she aware or has she been to any of these institutions and really inspected that the figures given to her were right?

MR. RWAKOOJO: Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, I was wondering if it is possible to change the application forms! A number of times when you look at an application form, it asks for religion, it asks for where you come from, it asks for your ethnicity. Would it be possible and to make it more open to get rid of these meaningless questions - because I do not see how my religion comes in on an application form - would it be fair if some of those obvious questions would be taken away from an application form so that there is some degree of blindness? 

Number two, there are also institutions that have hired professional recruiting bodies. Would it be possible for the Minister to get a sample that is coming from those professional bodies where there are colour blind or ethnically blind to see if the passing mark kind of resembles the statistics that she is giving us? Thank you very much.

MR. GAGAWALA: Thank you Mr. Speaker. I am directing this question to the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs together with the Commissioner for Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Gagawala, this question is directed to the Minister of Ethics and Integrity. You cannot combine -

MR. GAGAWALA: Sorry, what I am trying to find out is whether the Tender Committee for the Parliamentary Commission in position?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, according to our rules, you cannot combine unrelated questions..

MR. GAGAWALA; I will ask it after.

MR. MAYANJA MOHAMMED: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Equity and access to services and employment opportunities are crucial factors in the modern management of society and without deliberate policies towards equity, then some parts of the country are likely to be doomed to continued backwardness. I would therefore like to call upon our Government to correct these disparities where they exist. 

Now my question to the hon. Minister is, following the contribution by hon. Obedmoth to His Excellency's communication, hon. Obedmoth alluded to the possibility that the new criteria in the recruitment to the Uganda Revenue Authority these days is that one must be a born-again christian, and it caused  a lot of worries to the Moslem community where we do not have born-again Christians. Does it mean that Moslems are therefore doomed to not joining URA?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think maybe the question requires reframing. Maybe the questions is, is it true that the recruitment in Uganda Revenue Authority is based on born again christians?

MR. MAYANJA: Yes, let us frame it that way, Mr. Speaker. Thank you.

MR. BAMWANGA: Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I wanted to support hon.Miria Matembe in her explanation on balancing jobs. I imagine that when you come to balance jobs on regional, tribal and clan basis, then the question of merit will not hold. I would have expected the hon. Minister to have looked for statistics from Mulago Hospital to see how the doctors are regionally balanced in order to explain how, actually, academics go with merit.  I would equally have expected the hon. Minister to look at Makerere University at the number of lecturers, professors to know exactly how Ugandans are represented according to meritocracy.  I would equally have expected the hon. Minister to express her standards by looking at Makerere student intake, because Makerere University students are taken on merit and not on tribal basis.  

I would like to assure Members in this House that whenever we make an argument we should remember one thing that one time President Johnson of America said -(Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, you see, I expected you to put questions;  are you asking the Minister to give you details of staffing at Makerere, Mulago and so forth?

MR. BAMWANGA: Mr. Speaker, I was just giving a background to the question I was going to make, that in order for Members in this House to understand the position on numbers, she should be able to use the Makerere statistics, Mulago and students intake which can, actually, explain how people are being taken in these areas.  I thank you. 

MR. OLUMU.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to inquire from the Minister about the breakdown of these percentages from the top management to the drivers.  Because these figures may be misleading.  You might include a driver, a sweeper and the management at the top may not reflect the same percentages.  Could I know from the Minister whether she has got these figures to indicate the top management, middle management and also the lower cadres as far as the distributions are concerned? 

MR. AWORI:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to reintroduce the question put on the Floor by hon. Chebrot.  Number one, the hon. Minister is misleading this House by giving us such percentages.  When you talk about region, we know regions do not exist in our administrative or political vocabulary.  Even in planning, we do not have regions at all!  When she talks about the North, which district is she referring to? Is she including Karamoja? If she talks about the East is she including Karamoja or not at all?  When you talk about West, are you also including Kisoro, Masindi, Hoima?  Mr. Speaker, let the Minister come to this House with a breakdown according to accepted administrative arrangements that are called districts.  We do not want this camouflage of regions. I know if we went by districts, you will find that my district is missing in all these professions and administrative arrangements or jobs.  

Take for instance, when was the last time a Musamya was employed in State House?  Not at all!  So, Mr. Speaker, we would like to know this distribution by districts, and much more so since it is a matter pertaining to the national cake, we would like to know it right from the State House, the Cabinet and parastatal bodies.  Mr. Speaker, I beg to inform the hon. Minister, let her go back and come back with a better answer;  this one is misleading and out of place, we do not want it.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, may I take it that the question you wanted to ask is whether in the near future the Minister would be in position - is that what you are asking?

MR. AWORI:  Mr. Speaker, I am simply saying that the hon. Minister is misleading this House.  She is talking about regions which do not appear in our vocabulary administratively or politically. We want the breakdown in accordance with districts so that we reflect the true situation of the national cake as we would like to know.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I think hon. Member, by using the term 'misleading', you are imputing an improper motive on a Member, unless you can really substantiate.  But I think your interest is that you want detailed breakdown of the employment rather than saying she is misleading.  

MR. AWORI:  She is misleading and I impute such motives on her.

CAPT. GUMA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am extremely disappointed about the issues being raised on the Floor of this House.  I am not saying that the statistical information hon. Matembe has given is wrong, I am only worried about the message we are sending to the citizens of this country, when we sit here and start discussing things we could really resolve using other grounds, other for a, rather than discussing here and send very negative messages to the country. Are we discussing tribalism; what are we discussing?  If there are problems, Mr. Speaker, do you not think that there would be other relevant fora where discussion of  particular mistakes could take place?

DR. NKUUHE:  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I wanted some clarification from the Minister, because I think most of us know that if you look at figures of employed people in say Western Region, essentially you are talking of two major districts, mainly Mbarara and maybe, Kabale and Bushenyi;  because those are the one, for various reasons, with a lot of people in employment, especially in high posts.  

Similarly in the North, you might find it is mainly Gulu and Lira.  So, would the Minister liaise with the Minister in charge of Labour to really give a more detailed break down, and Minister of Public Service for instance, to give a more detailed breakdown which might help us.  Because looking at these figures I would say that the North is marginalised as it stands out clearly.  So, the question is, if it is marginalised, from these figures is there an attempt to taket affirmative action to address the matter?  That is one. 

The other; could the Minister clarify as a result of privatisation which districts have benefited most from privatisation, for instance, and in what way have they benefited.. I thank you very much.

MR. LWANGA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When I look at these figures, they bother me very, very much, because they make me feel that we are treading on very, very slippery grounds and let us pray that we do not fall.  Because look at Central Region, you are talking about a population of 29 per cent and you talk about a total average in employment in the four departments of 30 per cent.  But what does Central Region mean?  Does it mean the ethnically Central Region residents, or does it mean everybody who has registered that he resides in Central Region?  

When you look at the Uganda Revenue Authority, for example, we see that Western Region is 33 per cent;  does 33 per cent mean those who filled in their forms when they were getting employment and said they come from Mbarara;  or does it mean everybody, including those who, actually reside in the Central Region? The Minister should tell us, whether we are talking about residents or are we talking about tribes?  If we are talking about tribes, that is very slippery ground.  If we are talking about people who reside in those regions and come to work in other areas then the figures make sense. Can she please clarify?

MR. KAZIBWE MUSISI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to ask the hon. Minister whether it is possible to base the admission at Makerere and other institutions of higher learning on regions or tribes other than merit, as this is the major cause of imbalances?

MRS. MATEMBE:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to thank the hon. Members for the question raised and comments.  I will try to answer some of them, other were just comments.  Is this normal and should it continue, hon. Dick Nyai wanted to know.  No, imbalances should not continue, they should be corrected;  and I have already said these imbalances depend on a number of factors!  

The number of population, the level of education, the level of development, the skills attained, all these combined determined this fact, and therefore, the fact that we do not want such imbalances to continue is the reason we are running a broad based Government where we had to ensure that every county is represented so that those leaders can be involved in mobilising the people to make sure that they take advantage of these policies.  Therefore, it is not normal and we should certainly mobilise our people so that we can improve  and fight these imbalances.  

Hon. Okumu Reagan wanted to know about top management. I have some data here, because I wish to tell the hon. Members that I really got information from these organisation. They were able to give me information on almost all employees, and they broke them in their small tribes and all this kind of thing.  But I did not think that I could bring this whole chart - because it would need, maybe, the whole of afternoon to read to you the details of these documents, but I thought I could study them and summarise them the way I have brought them here. 

But I thought about the management - the top - I have top management of these organisations because they wanted to know management - how is it?  When you look at Uganda Revenue Authority, there is Ntungamo, there is United Kingdom, there is Kumi, there is Kabarole, Kampala, Bushenyi, Arua, Kampala;  that is now Uganda Revenue Authority;  and on top management there are about ten people from the top.  There is Commissioner General, Deputy Commissioner General, Board Secretary - those are the type of top management.  You can see it is balanced.  

If you wanted nine managers, I do not know whether you can get every district of Uganda on that team of nine managers!  Therefore, as long as you can see that they do not come from one district, in as far as I am concerned, that is good balancing.  If we go to CAA, there is Bushenyi, there is Kabale;  there is Jinja, there is Kabarole - hon. Nkuuhe was saying that Western means Bushenyi and Mbarara only, but here I have Kisoro, Kabale, Jinja, Kabarole, Rukungiri, Mbale, Mpigi, Kumi, Mbarara and Hoima. You can see the management is balanced, and Mr. Speaker, even Mukuno - there is Mukono here, Kabarole again and then we go to Kamuli.  

Then we go to NSSF, here is Hoima - hon. Nkuuhe, Hoima has the Managing Director of NSSF;  the Corporation Secretary is from Masaka, the Chief Compliance Officer is from Kalangala;  the Benefits Manager is from Kabale -(Interruption).

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Speaker, the manner in which the Minister is providing information, I believe will not enable Members to really understand what actually is on the ground.  Would it not be better for the Minister, maybe, to circulate that information; but also to go back and give the analysis as requested by Members in supplementary questions, rather than reading names of districts and so on.  I do not think that this will help a great deal. I suggest that she should circulate the information, and maybe, later on give the analysis which the Members requested.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

MRS. MATEMBE: Mr. Speaker, and hon. Members, this is an answer for an oral question and I am answering accordingly, and right now I am reading the figures -(Interjections.)- I want to finish the statement first, because there was a clarification and I am responding.  I am saying that I am answering an oral question;  if I was asked to bring a written answer I would have done that.  So, I am conforming to the procedure, and particularly I am now answering the question raised by hon. Okumu Reagan who wanted to know whether the top management is balancing. I am sure this information I am giving is for the benefit of Members, and it is clearly seen that it is balancing.  So, the hon. Members should accept that fact that it is balancing and I am giving it to them.  So, what do they want, Mr. Speaker?  So, if I may proceed -(Interruption).

DR. CHEBROT:  Point of clarification.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I just wanted to re-affirm the position which was raised by hon. Mwandha in connection with the information given by the Minister.  She is just giving us raw data which is very difficult at this stage even to analyse.  I would beg that the Minister lays on the table those figures which she has got, because it is clear to me that nobody can understand them;  she lays them on the table so that at an appropriate time, every Member can go to analyse those figures and come up with a clear format which is understandable to Members. But, as of now, the Minister is just presenting raw data which is nobody can analyze, can understand; it is confusing. I beg that the Minister stops there and she lays the Papers on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think hon. Minister, it would appear that the House would like to have written details on what you are reading so that they can analyze them, and maybe, accept your answers.  Is it possible that in future you can do that so that we move to another thing.

MRS. MATEMBE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If you could allow me, Mr. Speaker, to draw the attention of this House to item number 3 which reads: "Questions for oral answer"  I am doing exactly that as required by this House.  If this hon. House does not want an oral answer any more then they can follow another procedure where answers are written and circulated; I am very competent to supply a written answer, very clearly documented, if the House so wishes, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe, I put it to the House. Is it the wish of the House that this answer which was supposed to be oral be put in writing and be circulated to you?

(Question put and agreed to).

MR. NABUTAALA NABISI .P(Bubulo East, Mbale): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Could the House be informed about the extent to which the Administration of Parliament Act has been implemented? We as the electorate of the Commissioners would wish to have constant dialogue with them.

CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA: Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the other Commissioners of Parliament, I would like to inform the House that the Act of Parliament was passed in August 1997, but it did not come in full effect until July 1998 when Parliament started functioning independently. The Commission of Parliament is aware that -(Interruption) 

MS. KABASHARIRA: Point of procedure. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The question is being put to the Parliamentary Commissioner, Capt. Guma; I am asking how this question was asked and why it was put to hon. Guma, because the Commissioners are three, and the Chairperson of the Commission is the Speaker.  Why ask  Capt. Guma in particular? For what reason, and why not ask the Speaker who is the Chairperson?  Thank you.

MR. NABUTAALA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The arrangement that hon. Capt. Guma answers is between the Speaker and the three Commissioners; they agreed that he answers; that is how he appears on the Order Paper and he is willing and ready to answer.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, would you complete your answers.

CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA: Mr. Speaker, I was mandated by the other Commissioners that I should give a short but nevertheless factual explanations in respect to hon. Nabutaala's question. The Act was passed some time in August 1997 but did not become operational until July 1998 when we started functioning independently.  Section 40 of the Parliamentary Act enjoins the Commission to make an annual report to the entire House and this is due to be submitted in September this year to the entire House of Parliament. It is then that everything achieved and indeed failures will be highlighted in the report of the Commission to the House.  

I would, however, like to draw the attention of the House to section 7 of the Act which clearly spells out the functions of the Commission.  "(a) to appoint, promote and exercise disciplinary control over persons holding public offices in Parliament;  (b) to review the terms and conditions of service, standing orders, training and qualifications of persons holding offices in Parliament; (c) to provide security staff to maintain proper security for the Members of Parliament and facilities within the precincts of Parliament; (d) to provide a Parliamentary reporting service; (e) to provide such other staff and facilities as are required to ensure efficient functioning of the Parliament; (f) to cause to be prepared each financial year estimates of revenue and expenditure for Parliament for next financial year; (g) to make recommendations to Parliament on or, with the approval of Parliament, determine the allowances payable and privileges available to the Speaker, Deputy Speaker, and Members of Parliament."  

Briefly, this really constitutes the major areas which the Parliamentary Commission should focus on, but there are other  administrative matters that are not detailed in the law.  So, I would request the House through you, Mr. Speaker, to be patient for about a month from now, for an annual report that is due for submission to this entire House in September this year.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Two supplementary questions.

MR. AWORI: Mr. Speaker, we have just been asking questions about security and public performance.  Could the Commissioner confirm to this House that they gave themselves some allowance without telling us and mobile phones. Could he confirm in affirmative or negative with qualifications?

MR. WABUZI GAGAWALA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I had asked the question at the wrong time; now its time. I am forwarding a supplementary question to hon. Guma, that does the Commission have a tender Committee in position for the jobs which are being advertised in Parliament and supplies which are being executed in Parliament.

MR. MWANDHA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The purpose of passing the Act which set up the Commission was to give the Commission a reasonable amount of independence. I would like to ask the Commissioner, hon. Guma, to inform this House whether they are really independent; and if not what could be done to give them adequate independent authority to execute their duties as laid down in the Act.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it would appear that hon. Guma has not given any answers but has just told you that you wait for the report which will come in a month's time.  So, I do not know whether these questions really are directed to what he meant because he has given no answer; he has only appealed to the House to give him a month and then a report will come; then that will be the time to answer.  

MR. KIBAALE WAMBI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. May I be clarified by the Commissioner if it is true that the status of the employees of the Parliamentary Commission are in  jeopardy; that the Members of that Commission, some of them have not been paid their June salaries because the Ministry of Public Service or Finance has not mandated the Commission to do so.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The three Commissioners who represent Parliament on the Commission are supposed to represent the interests of Members of Parliament.  On a number of occasions, we have been hearing rumours about what is going on in the Commission as if those people are not supposed to be answerable to us.  Now, I have got a problem. Do you not think it is necessary for the Commissioners to regularly meet the full House so that you brief us and we also brief you of our interests; why do you have to wait for us to charge you to say something before you meet us if you are answerable and if you are doing a good job?  The roof of Parliament could probably not have fallen if you were regularly consulting us. But, we just hear rumours, we just read in papers, we just read of allowances that you have been over paying yourselves, and we would like to know about those allowances you are getting apart from the mobile phones which you are associated with. Thank you very much.

CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA: Mr. Speaker, I want to be brief. First of all, I want to reiterate that we shall make a detailed and comprehensive report to Parliament - there is no doubt about that, and in just a month from now.  But just in passing, Mr. Speaker, in respect to hon. Aggry Awori's question; to the best of my knowledge, I do not know of any Commissioner of Parliament, be it the elected three Members of the Commission; be it the other Commissioners by law like the Prime Minister, like the Speaker and so on - I do not know of any Member of the Commission who gets an allowance or who has a mobile phone; I have a mobile phone but I bought it from my allowances.  So, I do not know of anyone who holds a mobile phone which has been purchased using funds of the Parliament at least to the best of my knowledge. 

Hon. Wambuzi Gagawala is asking whether the Commission has got such other functioning units like a tender board. These are there. For example, we have recruited a very big component of staff in Parliament. You have been seeing new people and we have a structure for recruitment. We do not do things haphazardly.  

However, I must be honest and say that we had not established a tendering system for procurement of materials that are required by Parliament, but we discussed it in two consecutive meeting of the Commission and a tender system will be in place for bulk purchase of the materials we require like stationery and so on.  

Hon. Mwandha James is asking whether the Act has put Parliament in a position of independence.  I must say that we met a number of road blocks, but we have made very successful strides and Parliament is now independent as by the Act. For example, our remunerations no longer come from the appropriation's vote; it is from the consolidated vote. 

Hon. Wambi was asking whether some staff of Parliament have not been paid and whether the Commission status is in jeopardy. There was a delay, I would not want to call it a jeopardy, there was a delay in comparing notes between the Parliamentary Commission and Public Service so that we could harmonize our positions and finally agree on the figures  to be paid to our staff. So, this one is being ironed out. We have even had a meeting with the Ministry of Public Service, but you  know how Government operates some times. Things are being worked out, it may take time because of bureaucracy here and there.  So, it is not a question of jeopardy; it is a question of delays here and there, but we are making some efforts. 
 
Hon. Lukyamuzi is talking of interests of Members of Parliament among other things. Yes, the intention of the Act was to establish the independence of Parliamentary autonomy so that the institution can discharge its duties without a lot of problems. To this extent, really, I do not see much haggling. Regular meetings, if you so wish, for example in September, when we submit our detailed report in respect to every area, in respect to the functions, it is up to the House to debate it and amend or make even further proposals so that we can see how to proceed.  If we want regularly meetings I do not know either as an institution or the entire Parliamentary body - it is up to you.  But, as far as we are concerned, it is true we have been grappling with some of the problems and we have made a lot of progress.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

MR. OMARA ATUBO  (Otuke County, Lira):  Mr. Speaker and hon. Members of this House, I want to thank you for giving me this opportunity to explain myself in view of the recent events.  

As you are aware, as soon as the news of the death of Opona Acak came out, my name also concurrently got integrated into the whole affair; so that even in the press, you could find big headlines, "Opona Acak killed, Omara Atubo arrested, locked in the barracks", and therefore, any reasonable person would conclude that the two are very much connected. For me, personally, it would therefore mean that I was involved in these unConstitutional activities, and that I am involved in the rebel activities, and therefore, the image that is painted to you, my Colleagues and the public, is extremely damaging. Therefore, I am pleased that I have this opportunity to use Rule 38 sub-rule (2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament to give a personal explanation of my arrest, detention and defamation.  

I consider this matter extremely important to me personally and to the Government and therefore, I have decided to be a bit detailed. I do hope that having listened to the Minister of State for Defence's statement yesterday to the House, my statement will not just be taken as some sort of personal trick to explain away what happened, but rather I do hope that the Government will take my statement and use it for further investigation, so that the truth will be known to the Government itself and to the public and personally to me.  

Let me therefore, first of all, extend my very deep appreciation to the substantive Speaker, to you the Deputy Speaker, and all Members of Parliament, for their timely and prompt action which enabled my quick and early release.  I am really very grateful to all of you.  I would also like to thank others outside this House, many of whom I cannot mention by name, but I would like to mention in particular the media.  I am told that when I was arrested at 5.30 p.m., by 6 o'clock at least, it was already known in Kampala and some FM stations had started broadcasting it. Thanks to the modernisation and privatisation of the system, and to the means of communication which enables us in Lira to telephone this place within minutes, and I am told, thanks to the Movement. I am sure the said Movement also will use their good offices to go into the root cause of my problem and come out with real truth.  I am sure they are capable of doing that.  

In order to understand why I am disputing that I could not have been the transporter of rebels on the fateful night, and therefore, putting what in law we call the defence of alibi, let me start by recounting the sequence of events from Wednesday, 14th to Saturday 17th of July 1999.  This sequence of events can be thoroughly investigated and verified by an independent state machinery and eventually, I hope I will be proved right and the truth will come out.   

On 14th July 1999, hon. Jovina Akaki, our chairman for Lango Parliamentary Group, came back from a visit to Lira and Apac and summoned all the members of Lango Parliamentary Group to meet him for a very urgent security brief, and the centre of this security brief was what he had learnt from Lira of alleged rebel activities and the concern of the district on the recruitment and so on.  We supported him on this matter and the members of Lango Parliamentary Group requested to meet the Minister of Security, hon. Muluri Mukasa, the following day.  

The meeting did take place but I sent him my apology through the Minister Jovina Akaki, that I was not able to be with the Minister of Security for briefing and discussion because I had in my capacity as an advocate to attend High Court in Gulu the following day. I travelled to Lira by public means on Thursday, 15th of July 1999 arriving at about 1.00 p.m.  On Friday, 16th July 1999, I left Lira at about 7 o'clock in the morning in my company minibus which I was personally driving and I arrived in Gulu High court at about 9.00 a.m.  

Two applications were heard by Justice Opio Aweri and they were completed by around 11 o'clock.  I decided to move around Gulu, including going for a quick medical check up in Lacor Hospital. I had lunch in Gulu with lawyers who had travelled from Kampala for this case, and in the same hotel where we had lunch, the commander of Lira UPDF, Major Byoma, also joined us, and I departed for Lira at 3 o'clock in the afternoon. On my way, I stopped briefly at Minakulu and Kamdini. At Minakulu, I called on my cousin brother who is the catholic parish priest; and at Kamdini, I stopped just to have a small refreshment. I arrived in Lira at about 6.00 p.m.  

I picked my wife and we drove straight home at Ngeta which is about 8 kilometres from town on Kitgum road.  My activities on Saturday, 17th July 1999 included meeting police, district leaders and clan Committee members.  When I was at home during this brief period, two incidences took place in my constituency.  One was an ASTU, these are the people who are now the Anti Stock Theft Unit; one of them was killed and also a cousin brother of mine had a land dispute and so on, and he was killed and therefore, I had to go to police.. Between 10 o'clock in the morning up to 1 o'clock I was with the police.  In fact, they wanted this very Minibus to be used by them if I could spare to transport them to the scene of the crime in Otuke, because the police did not have transport.  

I walked from the police to the office of the District Chairman, Mr. Obua Otoa, and asked him if he had a vehicle he could spare for the police to travel to Otuke. The District Chairman allocated one vehicle from the district to transport the police; by that time, it was already 2.00 p.m. of the 17th July on a Saturday. The vehicle was parked in the Ministry of Works yard, the driver was not there and the key was not there.  I told the police, "I have done my work, you have a vehicle now, you look for a driver". I went back to my office. I had a minuted meeting in my office with my clan Committee from 2.00 p.m. to 6.00 p.m.  I returned to my residence at Ngeta at 7.00 p.m.  Those of you who have been to my place know that the police post at Ngeta which is the biggest catholic centre, like the Lubaga of Lango, consisting of the National Teacher's College, dispensary, the Junior School, Comboni College - it is a big centre and I am just at the border.  The police post is only 200 metres from my house and before I reach my house, I have to drive near the police post, and the Police have been very helpful for my personal security. They are detailed whenever I am around to assist with my personal security. Because of the events which have been happening in the district, the security in Ngeta complex was reinforced by an army patrol and the Army was doing patrol work at that time.  I am sure that if I had any unusual movement with my vehicle at night, these people would tell the investigators something. 

On Sunday the 18th at 9 o'clock in the morning, as I had told the police I could not give them my vehicle because I expected to travel for the same problem, I left Ngeta from my house at about 9 o'clock.  I refuelled in town, moved briefly in town and departed for Otuke in the minibus at about 10 o'clock without knowledge that any fighting had taken place and that Opona Acak had died. I happened to meet in town at that time the Vice Chairman of the district, Dr. Charles Odwe, also buying a few food stuffs, as I was buying, to go to Kyoga for paying respects to hon. Ojok B' Leo whose brother had died.  We greeted each other, the Vice Chairman did not know anything that had happened in Lira at that time and nobody told me; either at the petrol station or anywhere in town.  

I arrived in Otuke and I visited the foundation of the Archdeaconry, the Land office of the Otuke Development Agency, I greeted the Gombolola Chief, I interacted with people there. I went to my residence and visited, together with my wife  - her interest was to go and visit her field for foodstuff which she grows back in the village there, and we finished this matter and we came back.  But I want to mention to this august House that the road from Lira town through Aloi to Otuke passes in front of Lira barracks, and I passed in front of Lira barracks at about 10.00 - 10.15 and when I came back, I again passed in front of Lira barracks.  In fact, the soldiers who were mounting the usual quarter guard and so on, I even waved to them, they waved back to me, most of them belong to Local Defence units which we have assisted to recruit, some of them are from my constituency and nothing unusual was noticed.  

I departed for Lira from Otuke at about 4.00 p.m. to attend a funeral at the home of Mr. James Adilo within Lira town.  At about 5.00 p.m, at a place called Barr, about 10 kilometres to Lira Municipality, I met two pickups full of soldiers driving in the opposite direction. We drove passed each other, they never stopped me.  As I was driving within the Municipality to drop the people I had given a free lift from Otuke, the lead army vehicle suddenly knocked the front driver's side of my vehicle and blocked my forward movement.  The second army vehicle blocked me at the back.  This was at about 5.00 p.m. I stopped and switched off the engine. Soldiers numbering about 20 jumped out of their vehicles, surrounded my minibus and cocked their guns. Major Wycliffe Mwesigwa came out of the front vehicle. I recognised him - I know him - and greeted him.  He ordered me to drive to Lira barracks.  I refused and told him that if I had committed any traffic offense - at that time, I thought it was just a traffic offense - he should take me to the police. I also requested that those I had given a lift should be allowed to disembark. This request was also refused.  As we argued, a large crowd started gathering. I noticed that the Major and his soldiers were becoming uneasy, impatient and rude.  I reluctantly agreed to drive to the barracks, arriving there at about 6.00 p.m.  

In the barracks, the vehicle and joy riders, those I had given a lift, were thoroughly searched, but nothing incriminating was found. The vehicle, my wife Margaret, and all others were released and ordered to go away.  As for me, I was told that I was being taken to Gulu barracks for questioning. The Major told me, and I knew for the first time that there had been a fight at night near Lira Municipality and that Brigadier Opona Acak was killed, documents recovered and the rebels captured implicated me;  many politicians and businessmen who were due to be arrested. There was no mention of my minibus transporting rebels.  

I asked the Major to allow my wife to dash home - it is just about 10 minutes drive - and bring for me some drugs, clothes  and other essential items, but refused.  I asked the Major why he did not stop the vehicle and arrest me when we met on the way. He answered that their meeting was to collect me from Otuke where they were told I had run to hide.  The Major further said that he did not know that I was the one driving the minibus nor inside but one soldier who knew me and the minibus told them, so they decided to drive back. In the barracks where we were put in the open, we attracted a lot of attention from the soldiers, from their families, from their children.  I could notice a lot of sympathy for me.  Most of them, I could see from their eyes, I could see them shaking their heads, I could see that they were not hostile to me, but they were having great sympathy for me.  

We left Lira at about 7.00 p.m. and arrived in Gulu at about 9.00 p.m.  I was in great fear for my life.  I was escorted to Gulu by the same soldiers in two pick-ups. On arrival at Gulu Barracks, I was first locked up in a dirty and unlit uniport within the larger prison premise in the barracks. At about mid-night, Maj. Mwesigwa returned and told me that the Army Commander was in Gulu and wanted to see me.  The Army Commander received me well and I want to thank him for it. He is a polished man and we had a good time.  He was reassuring and we had a long chat on the security and political situation in Lango at a very highly intellectual level. He never mentioned to me anything about my minibus ferrying rebels.  He only repeated that the documents recovered from the scene together with statements from the rebels implicated me, many politicians and businessmen in the rebel recruitment and financing. 

The Army Commander then ordered that I should spend a night at what they call the Senior Officers Mess which was furnished, lit, clean, had running water and toilet. In the morning, some tea and cakes were brought and left for me in the mess to eat.  But I safely avoided it. Soon after 9.00 a.m., Maj. Mwesigwa came and took me to the Army Commander for further discussions.  During our discussion, the Army Commander told me that there had been an uproar in Lira and Kampala about my being picked by soldiers and brought to Gulu.  He told me that I would be returned to Lira by the Army and handed over to the District Leaders to prove that nothing bad had happened to me. He further told me that any further and necessary investigation would be carried while I was not in military custody.  

We left Gulu at about 11.00 a.m. together with Col. Oketa and Maj. Mwesigwa and arrived in Lira at about 1.00 p.m.  In Lira we met and addressed District Leaders up to 4.00 p.m.  I was also given an opportunity to talk to them; they were worried, they asked questions, was I beaten, was I tortured and so on. And I assured them that, nothing of that nature had happened to me. And I told them what I am telling you now. Thereafter we visited the scene of the alleged fighting and saw the body of Brig. Apon Acak. At about 4.00 p.m., I moved from the company of the military to that of the civilian, and I felt I was now free.  From the scene, I was driven by District Leaders to my home at Ngetta where I arrived at about 6.00 p.m.  

What happened to me raises a number of issues and also gives us a number of lessons.  In the first place, the concern of Members of Parliament was right about our immunity and privileges.  Of course this immunity and privileges does not protect you from any criminal activities.  But, Mr. Speaker, for these people to have intended to go and pick me from my Constituency on a very sudden allegation, speaks a lot by itself.  

Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, the utterances of Maj. Mwesigwa which I read in the Press should be of concern, not only to Members of Parliament, but to the Government as well. I therefore feel very disappointed by the Minister of State for Defence, brushing aside this fundamental statement by an officer in the Army, that he was misquoted.  I do not believe that the way this man handled me and the utterances, some of  which I heard, must lead the Government to do more than they have done so far on this matter.  And I believe  that my colleagues, Members of Parliament, will not allow this matter just to be brushed aside, and that the responsible Committee should pick it up and ensure that it is thoroughly investigated, and security members and the public educated on our immunity and privileges.  What we say in this House is misunderstood out there.  And some of them do not know that it is better for some of us to speak the way we speak in this House, than not to speak at all and do what others want to do in the form of rebel activities.  

I consider myself a leader and I think that every Member in this House considers himself a leader, and an honourable Member at that. I do not believe that even when a leader is suspected, and our Constitution says you are innocent unless proven otherwise, you should not be treated in such a way that even after you are out from the problem, your image and reputation is ruined sometimes beyond repair.  I think we need to respect our leaders.  And before we condemn them, we should even show them the respect during the process of the investigation and so on.  

Another problem which I think my ordeal raises in this House is about the respect and protection of human rights by State Organs.  And I want to draw your attention to Article 23 sub clause (2) and (3).  I hope you will have time to read it.  I also want to say that my arrest and detention as a civilian by the army was absolutely wrong.  I do not think that there was such a hurry to do what was done.  There was the Police, there were State Organs, there was a Resident District Commissioner's machinery and so on, and things could not just have been hurried in the manner it was done.  And for me first to be arrested by the Army and detained in a place outside the Constitutional Provisions of Article 23(2), Article 24, Article 27, Article 221; I think the Minister responsible has a lot of work to do.

I also wish to mention as issue number five that, as a multiparty politician, I am not happy with the attitude of the military towards us.  There is a feeling that we are the enemy in this country.  And the President himself has many times spoken out to say, the multipartists are the enemy of this country.  And I can assure you that, when the President speaks like that, and when people are taught in mckaka mckaka and other fora that the enemies of this country have been parties and multiparty politicians, they do not take it lightly.  And I want to put it before this House, that as I see today, there is open hatred by some Members of the Armed Forces against multiparty politicians.  And I think this is a very dangerous trend which we must all work together to reduce and remove.

Finally, on this issue and lessons, I am concerned about the security of multipartists.  One of the issues which complicated matters in my district and in Lango Region was the accusations by those who believe in the Movement that insecurity is being propelled by the multipartists.  This is a very dangerous contradiction.  When we begin to politicise issues of security, I shudder for the future of this country.  Because I know that any slightest mistake of anarchy or breakdown of security, people like hon. Omara Atubo, hon. Aggrey Awori, hon. Cecilia Ogwal and so on, will just be murdered in the form of genocide.  I am worried.  

Let me conclude my remarks by denouncing violence and militarism. These two instruments of violence and militarism, if they were to solve our problem in this country, what we saw in 1986, what we saw in 1971, and those who trained in Mozambique and entered Luwero and so on, I am sure that their militarism and violence and use of force would have solved all the problems of this country.  On the contrary it multiplied even beyond the borders of this country.  Because of that, I am one of the few people in this country who religiously believe and is committed to peaceful resolutions of conflicts.  I will never, never support rebellion, rebel activities, violence and militarism.  And I am surprised that despite the fact that, I have been open in my lifestyle and conduct, I have been transparent, I lead a routine life which the intelligence people can easily pick, I am a suspect.  

My ideology and philosophy is very clear.  And if there is anybody in Lango Region, in the North and in this country who assisted to stop rebel activities, get rebels out, surely I am one of them and I should be appreciated rather than condemned. My being in Uganda, in Parliament and contesting elections, are proof of cooperation with Government and participation in the governance of this country.  I asked my Colleagues, to look at us the multi partists who are in this House as a special breed of their brothers and sisters.  And you can still use us to consolidate peace and security in this country.  

The issue of CAMP - Citizen Army for Multi Party Politics, and ARA - Anti Referendum Army, are not part of multiparty, but a bogey created by enemies of multiparty.  Me as hon. Omara Atubo and others have been targets of this group.  And I want to refer this House to two issues of Rupiny, Volume No.6, number 34 and number 37.  In this issue of Rupiny I gave an interview in which I said that if multiparty has to have credibility in this country, the old leadership must give way to the younger and new leadership.  I was quoted here in this Rupiny that "hon. Omara Atubo asks Mr. Obote to relinquish leadership of UPC."  It is here.  Volume No.6, issue number 34. And this was dated May 26th to June the first 1999.  By this time there was already according to the statement of the Minister a little bit of simmering of rebel activity, rebel recruitment and so on. 

Yesterday, the Minister of State for Defence said there was an attack at Boroboro Police Post by this group calling themselves CAMP.  And that they left leaflets there when they attacked Boroboro.  Boroboro is the Namirembe of Lango.  It has a huge complex of bishop's residence, senior school, TTC and so on.  So, it is a very big centre and they have a Police Post there.  Boroboro is on the other side of Ngetta where I belong.  Now, the Minister of State for Defence did not tell us what that leaflet said.  

Let me to quote what that leaflet said and was reproduced in Rupiny.  It is here and I will translate it in Luo.  It attacked hon. Omara Atubo.  It said, "Adwong Omara Atubo myero inyang ni mano wan oman otye olweny iwi byee me UPC ocalo party."  (We are fighting for the cause of UPC as a party).  This is how I translate it.  They are calling me 'Adwong'. And, it went on.  I am just quoting the relevant part because I am sure that the Minister will be able to study it. This letter says, "The problem between Omara Tubo and Obote started in 1979 during the Moshi Conference. We want to tell the people that Omara Atubo does not belong to UPC but he is the enemy and he belongs to DP." The copy is here.  Mr. Speaker, this is the leaflet which was dropped at the site by CAMP, but I want you as the very intelligent people to read between the lines there.  That here if CAMP existed, CAMP could not have been fighting for the cause of Omara Atubo.  CAMP could not been fighting for causes of others and these are the same people who also are attacking me; and I am now being told I am supporting them!  What a tragedy that I am caught between the devil and the deep blue sea. I am caught up between my friends with whom I am working here in this House, the Government of the Movement, they also see me as the enemy and on the other side because of leadership crisis in UPC.  

They also see me and other friends who are here who are called conscripts also as the enemy.  Mr. Speaker, where do you want us to belong? This is a very serious, Mr. Speaker. I ask you because you may not be feeling the way I feel and the way you have reacted in sympathy appears as if you do not understand this conception and ideological problem that we are facing and would lead the intelligence people to ask themselves this CAMP, could they really be the group that I could belong to and they could really support my cause. I am putting this for intelligence analysis.

That document which was dropped at Boroboro by CAMP and which is reproduced in writting here was against me and some of those who no longer believe in the leadership of Obote as the leader of the UPC. Mr. Speaker, I have already said that I demand fresh and thorough investigation by Government using an organ outside the army to establish the truth and to promote justice.  I pleaded the defence of alibi. I was not there and I did not transport anybody with the vehicle and I could not have transported them. 

The Government statement and the way I was picked up and carried to Gulu barracks has connected me to the rebel activity to an extent which has gravely damaged my reputation. I believe that with my statement, the Government is not going to stop there because this is not the first time that security officers and soldiers in the field have sent their report up here, and after thorough investigation, you will definitely find out the truth.  It may not be absolutely true.  It happened to me when Tinyefuza arrested me and others in 1991.  The Government was excited to lock us up, but after sometime, the truth came out and thanks God, those who were responsible for it are now paying for it and others are dismissed. 

I am, therefore, throwing the challenge to Government that for your own interest and truth and to make sure that such mistakes are not made again, carry out fresh investigations on the basis of the information I have provided.  

I thank you for this opportunity; once again I thank the Members, I am totally innocent. I will continue with my normal life openly, which basically is routine and transparent. If I have been misunderstood, I invite the Government again to carry out fresh investigation and I will fully co-operate with them. I also have the option, if my name is not cleared, to use the judicial process to clear my name - that is my Constitutional right and option.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker,  for listening to me.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES SPECIFIED OFFICERS' BILL,1999

THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr. Amanya Mushega) Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that a bill entitled 'The Salaries and Allowances Specified Officers' Bill, 1999' be read the Second Time. I beg to move.

(Motion seconded.)

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA: Mr. Speaker, this Bill intends to cater for the salaries, allowances and other benefits to members of  judiciary, the Judges and above, chairpersons and members of Constitutional commissions and other entitled officers.  It is to streamline, rationalise and monetise the benefits of the entitled officers.  It is to make it clear by law what an officer is entitled to, make it easy for budgeting in event of creating more offices, and make it easy for accounting officers to know the exact entitlements of the entitled officers and also to make it easy for the entitled officers to know exactly what they are entitled to, and the terms, and  hence budget in good time.  

Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, I wish to report that we had a useful, enriching and cordial meeting with the relevant Committee of this House at the Committee Stage and discussed the Bill in detail and carried out improvements on the original bill.  The Bill in short,  is necessary and many beneficiaries of this Bill have the eyes and hopes on us.  I therefore, recommend to this House for a quick approval. I beg to move.
 
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE & LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr. Nabutaala Nabisi): Thank you Mr. Speaker. In accordance with Article 90 sub-Article (3) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, and in line with Rule 143 of the Rules of Procedure of this House, I beg to present the report of the Committee on the Salaries and Allowances Specified Officers' Bill 1999 for the House's consideration, debate, and adoption.  

The Salaries and Allowances Specified Officers' Bill 1999 was read to the First time on 8th of June 1999.  It was then referred to this Committee of Public Service and Local Government pursuant to Rule 99 Sub-Rule (5) of the Rules of Procedure of this House.  The Committee commenced work on the Bill on 13th July, this year.  It invited and received views from the Minister of Public Service and his technical team. It examined the Bill in detail and made inquiries on some parts of the Bill that needed clarification.  The two groups had a frank discussion of the Bill and each side was exhaustive in presenting its views and opinions. 

The Committee wishes to extend its gratitude  to the Minister of Public Service, hon. Amanya Mushega and his technical team, Members of Parliament, staff and members of the press and members of the public who have, in one way or another, made this report possible.

Background:whereas the 1995 Constitution provided for the creation of commissions and certain offices, and whereas parliament has enacted laws to that effect, this includes: Law Reform Commission, Uganda Land Commission, Education Service, Health Service Commission, Public Service Commission, Judicial Service Commission, Electoral Commission, Uganda Rights Commission, Immigration and Citizenship Board. Other Commissions to come include Disaster Preparedness and Management Commission, and maybe, National Planning Commission, Equal Opportunities Commission and others, as will be created by this House, yet there is still no law in respect to the salaries, allowances and benefits attached for the specified officers in these offices.

Article 158 Sub-Article (2) of the 1995 Constitution empowers parliament to prescribe the offices, the salaries and allowances in respect of which are charged on the consolidated fund.  It is for this purpose that the executive arm of Government brought The Salaries and Allowances Bill 1999 to this House to consider and enact into law.  It is believed that the proposed law will make provisions in pursuance of Article 158 of the Constitution for the payment of salaries, allowances and benefits attached to specified officers.  

Arising from the discussion held and the critical examination of the Bill, I would like to report to this House that the Bill is well intentioned and therefore, the Committee is agreeable to a number of Clauses in the Bill.  It however, drew its conclusions on some areas upon which this House should reflect when discussing.  It was within the Committee's view that these Amendments will not increase Government's expenses but will substantially be reducing it in fact. I intend to propose amendments at the Committee Stage which are attached to this report as appendix 1. 

I now highlight that some areas which the Committee feels should be amended.  

Date of Commencement. Clause (2) of the Bill, empowers the Minister to determine the date by statutory instrument up on which effect will be given to the act.  However, it is the considered view of the Committee that the act shall be deemed to have come into force by 1st July last year. 

Justification: the Committee noted that funds worth Uganda shillings 500 million to operationalise the increased salaries was provided for in 1998/99 Budget.  It is for this matter that the Committee deems it necessary to backdate the commencement date of the act to 1st July last year. This will give to retrospective effect and consequently arrears that accumulated, will be deemed to have been paid to the specified officers.  This was not possible in the last Financial Year because the law was not yet in place. 

Clause (8): Repeal of the Salaries and Allowances' Act of 1984. The Committee recommends that Section (3) First Schedule of the Bill be amended to include the  Inspector General of Police and his Deputy on the list of specified officers. Their salaries, allowances and benefits shall be as recommended in Item 3.4.1 and in the summary  of the proposed Amendments. The Committee noted that the Salaries and Allowances' Act 1984 provided for the salary and allowance of Inspector General of Police in Appendix 2.  By repealing the Salaries and Allowances' Act of 1984 would in effect exclude the Inspector General of Police from the list of specified officers. Provision should be made to include a Deputy Inspector General of police after the Inspector General is listed as a specified officer.

Monetisation of benefits: The Second Schedule, part one Section 4 of the Bill, has listed the benefits which the Chief Justice, Deputy Chief Justice, Principal Judge and other Judges are entitled to.  These benefits are open-ended and could therefore be abused as the entitled officers will take advantage of this loophole and opt for very expensive houses, medical treatment, travel abroad and furniture.  The officers should therefore, be given the equivalent benefits in monetary value at fixedates.

The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Second Schedule, part one, Section 4 of the Bill be amended to include monetary value of the benefits as follows:  Monetised medical expenses. Chief Justice 300,000 per month, Deputy Chief Justice 250,000 per month, Principal Judge 250,000 per month, Justice of the Supreme Court 200,000 per month, Justice of the Court of Appeal 200,000 per month, High Court Judge 200,000 per month, as medical expenses.

Justification: the Committee noted that the medical expenses are necessary as matter of health are paramount but Governments continued support to meet the medical bill for an officer and his/her immediate family members in an open-ended manner would strain the consolidate fund.  The Committee noted that monetising the medical expenses will promote the spirit of accountability enable the officers spend within their limits per post ,and it will be easy for budgeting purposes. 

Monetising housing rates. Proposed is: Chief Justice an institutional house, Deputy Chief Justice  2 500,000 per month, Principal Judge 2,300,000 per month, Supreme Court Judges 2,200,000 per month, Court of Appeal Judges 2,100,000 per month, High Court Judge 2,000,000 per month as housing rates.

Justification:; the monetising of housing rates for all judges with the exceptional the Chief Justice shall greatly save the Government extra expenses which usually arise. Hitherto, Government has been offering the officers fully furnished institutional houses or in-lieu, rent for them houses for their choice at the existing market rates.  These are therefore, costly increased Government expenditure on housing for  specified officers.  

It is anticipated that monetisation of the housing benefit will enable the officers to spend within the limits imposed.  The officer will further have a choice on the houses to occupy and even make savings out of this arrangement to enable them to retire honourably. 

The Committee recommends that the chief justice who is number four, in terms of protocol in our Constitution should be accommodated in a fully furnished state-provided institutional house.

Other specified officers: the Second Schedule part two of the Bill lists the other specified officers whose salaries and allowances are charged on the consolidated fund and list benefits to which they are entitled.  The Committee found it necessary to monetise the benefits as follows: monetise medical expenses, Auditor General 250,000 per month, Inspector General of Government 250,000 per month, Deputy Inspector General of Government 200,000 per month, Chairpersons of Commission 200,000 per month, members of commission 200,000 per month, Inspector General of Police 200,000 per month, Deputy Inspector General of police 200,000 per month.

Justification: monetising medical benefit will enable these officers to spend within their limits. It will reduce the strain pressed on the consolidated fund and it will institute a discipline of accountability. It will be advantageous for budgeting purposes.  

Monetised housing rates: this will cover the Auditor General, the Inspector General of Government and his/her Deputy, Inspector General of Police and his/her Deputy as follows; The Auditor General 2,500,000 per month, IGG 2,500,000 per month, Deputy IGG 2,300,000 per month, Inspector General of Police furnished institutional house, Deputy Inspector General Police furnished institutional house.

Justification: a monetised housing rate will save Government extra expenses on providing furnished houses to the officers. It is also envisaged that monetisation of housing benefit will enable the officers to spend within their limits, to have a choice on the houses to occupy and where possible, use any savings to plan for their retirement.

Increase of salaries: it is the considered view of the Committee that the Second Schedule, part two, be amended to include salary changes for the Auditor General, Inspector General of Government and Deputy Inspector General of Government. The Committee, therefore, recommends that under these circumstances, the monthly salaries of the Auditor General and Inspector General of Government be raised to shillings 2.9m/=, formerly shs.2,459,992/= per month.  The Committee also recommends that the Deputy, IGG Salary, be raised to shs.2.7m/= from formerly shs.2,349,992/=.

Justification: people nominated to all these offices are normally people of high integrity and moral probity.  

Housing subsidy: the Committee found it necessary to delete the footnote on page 7, which would infect grant judges a housing subsidy of shillings 500,000/= per month, to help them acquire a house for retirement, which is now in-built in the salary.

Justification: the shillings 500,000/= is already subsumed in the salary as earlier mentioned.

Travel abroad: the Committee recommends that all other categories of specified officers should travel club-class.  This is in effect covers the other specified officers other than judges who are neither entitled to nor listed for the benefits of travel abroad.

Justification: this is intended to incorporate the specified officers for benefits of travel abroad but will also limit the first class travel to only the Chief Justice, Deputy Chief Justice and Principle Judges.

Second  Schedule of Part III: the Committee found it necessary that the sitting allowance for part time Members of Commissions established by the Constitution be retained at 100,000/= shillings per sitting, as well as mileage allowance be paid for travel to office and back while on official duty.

The Committee further recommends that safari day allowances and night allowances be deleted from the Bill.

Justification: the rate for safari day and night allowances for public officers is currently specified in Circular Standing Instructions No.7 of 1994, which is subject to review in form of Periodic Government Circular.

Furniture for Judges: the Committee finds it necessary to amend the 2nd Schedule part IV on the grounds that it will be strenuous on the consolidated fund.  The Committee therefore recommends that there should be no further furniture allowance to renew furniture after the initial allowance has been given.  However, the Committee deems it necessary to maintain the figures on the amount to be given on the specified officers.  This should be given once and for all. 

Conclusion: the Bill addresses the salaries and allowances charged on the consolidated fund and the benefits attached to certain offices created by the Constitution.  The Committee was generally in agreement with most of the clauses in the Bill. However, in order to strengthen accountability and minimise Government's expenditure and to harmonise the charges placed on the consolidated fund, it recommends that the House debates the Bill, taking into consideration the proposed amendments.

Lastly, there is great need for the Bill to be enacted into law since the holders have had to wait for a long time for the law that will specify the emoluments and benefits.  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Report of the Committee be adopted.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman of the Committee.  But before the House debates the motion and the Report, I want some clarification about how we are going to move with this Report. Because when you look at the Bill which was presented to the House which had the first reading, the figures given there - unless than the figures which you are suggesting in the Report, I wonder whether you will be the one to spearhead these changes or it will be the Minister to spearhead them.  

I am seeking this clarification because of the provisions of Article 93 of the Constitution, in that the Committee of the House cannot really suggest increases of sums of money which will tax - may be you agreed.  But I just want to know so that when Members start debating, they are aware of what is going to happen.  

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In actual fact, the amendments have a zero effect on the Budget.  What we have done is to check. For example, Judges have been spending so much money per month, but are now limited by the Bills that they are presenting to the Permanent Secretaries.  We worked out an average that will not have an effect on the actual budget. 

The money being paid out in cash for housing allowance is actually what is being paid to Judges now to rent houses.  All we are doing is divesting the Government from having the duty to go looking for houses for Judges and entitled officers, and give them the money, and those entitled will chose what to do with it.  

It is for purposes of easing budgeting, also making matters easy for accounting officers, but it will have no effect on the budget because it is within the money provided for.  Thank you, Sir.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, the position is that he is reporting on the recommendation which he made to you and you accepted?

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, the Motion is open for limited debate in view of the clear report.

MR. PAJOBO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I really find it difficult to support this Bill.  In fact, the way the Government continues to increase the salaries is so discriminative that it does not help the working people in this Country.  They pick some people, they give them and others do not get.  If we can see this proposal, it is very high, what about civil servants?  How much is a teacher getting for medical treatment?  What about the housing?  So, I find it very difficult to support this Bill.

If the Government wants, why can they not come with a full salary scale for all employees so that we debate and find a proper amount?  If you go ahead here, you will find 250,000/= shillings for medical expenses for others; nobody talks about doctors; n body talks about teachers; nobody talks about the clerks; it is only for a few individuals.  When you come to this group of employees, some are left out.  For example, scale U8 to U6 or U7, there is no mention of housing.  A teacher gets 72,000/= shillings together with housing.  How can I really say that I support these highly paid people to continue to get the salary?  In view of this, also if you go ahead -(Interruptions)

MR. RWABITA: Point of information.  Mr. Speaker, I want to inform the hon. Member that the title of this Bill is very very clear. This is in connection with specified officers; not civil servants as such.  These are officers who have got a lot of work to do for this Country and as the Minister put it right, there is no increment in the Budget, because they were getting facilities anyway, only that they are being monetized.  So, I do not see why the hon. Member is getting very excited as if this is a very big change in their remuneration.  Thank you.

MR. PAJOBO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In fact the information given to me confirms that the wages and salaries are given on discriminative basis. Only confirming!  It is not the truth.  What I am saying is, why put a few? You say that there are few people who have been given this because they are working hard, who is not working hard for this Country?  

DR. MALLINGA: Point of information.  Mr. Speaker, in addition to what the hon. Member who has just informed the hon. Member of Parliament who is on the Floor, we had a lot of discussion when we were determining the President's salary and that of the Vice President. At that time, a policy was agreed - by those days I was a Member of the Local Government Committee - we agreed that the salaries at the top are going to be frozen and those at the bottom will be raised; that is, the teachers, the clerks and all that.  I think that policy has been started. 

Just recently, the teachers had  a raise of about 5 to 10 per cent.  So, I think the concern of the hon. Member who is holding the Floor is being attended to.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  

MR. WANGUBO: Point of clarification. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Can I get clarified when hon. Rwabiita says that the specified officers have been getting this, then what is meant in the justification on page 3, where it says, "The Committee deemed it necessary to back-date the commencement date of the Act to 1st July, 1998.  This will give it retrospective effect and consequently arrears that accumulated will duly be paid".  If they have been getting this, what is then termed as 'arrears' and where does this retrospective part come then?  Thank you.

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA: I thank you, Mr. Speaker, and the hon. Member representing the workers for the concern about the plight of workers.  I would like to point out that really we, in the Ministry of Public Service, are not only being concerned about this, but we are trying to rationalise the situation.  In actual fact, this Bill is going to make a saving on the actual money that has been spent on the specified officers. But since I am speaking to the public and these are sensible officers, there is some information I cannot give here.  

But in a summary form, people who have been entitled to medical treatment - not this one approved by the medical board, just going to the hospital - the amount was unlimited.  Now, we are limiting it that per month, and therefore, per year,  if you get a bill exceeding this, you will take it up yourself.  It has a saving effect on this.

Secondly, the amount being specified as housing allowance, that is what is actually being paid to the landlords by the Government for housing these officers.  All we are doing now is, instead of us going to look for the house for you - for example, the Deputy Chief Justice is living in the house at which we were renting it at exactly this figure, and the Bill provides that you cannot change this figure without a resolution by Parliament.   So, this is just simply rationalising the salaries so that it is easy to administer.

On the question of arrears, the provisions of the Constitution is that you cannot disadvantage what an officer is entitled to. When Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Prof. Nsibambi, was still the Minister of Public Service, there were disparities among different Commissions. For example, the Chairman of Commission A would get 2.7m/= shillings while the Chairman of Commission B was getting 1.7m/= shillings, and they are doing the same job.  So, Rt. hon. Prime Minister, then the Minister of Public Service, brought the matter to Cabinet and since you could not lower those who are earning high money, the decision was taken that we should bring them at per for equal job being done.  

But since you need the Auditor General to approve the salaries to be paid unless there is an authorising law, this money could not be paid although it was provided, because we strictly follow the law and bring them to Parliament.  So, for those ones, it is the money that was earned but not paid.  So it will form part of the arrears and then that will be administratively handled.  

I would like to point out at this juncture that we support the teachers, but the question that was put, when the salaries of the employees of Parliament were raised, we in the Ministry of Public Service were accused of causing the delay in Parliament to be independent.  We raised the concern that if you pay salaries to employees of Parliament above a certain level, it may have an effect, and I was surprised that the Members holding the Floor did not see this.  

I want to point out that as an MP for Igara East, if I cease to be a Minister, I will be entitled to collect 80,000/= shillings per sitting which my teacher in Igara East does not collect.  I presume that is what every Member of Parliament collects. 

So, this issue is really to rationalise the salaries; it is not to increase salaries, and spell them out so that if tomorrow one  appoints a Judge or creates a new Commission, you can easily calculate what are the budgetary implications.  But at the moment, if you want to appoint a Judge, you do not have a figure the Attorney General or the Minister of Justice can present to the Ministry of Finance.  Because one could live in a house of three million, he could live in a house of 1.5m/= shillings, he could have a medical bill of 7m/= shillings a month.  So, this is simply rationalising the pay and putting a limit that beyond this, the state may not be able to support you.

At the moment, an entitled officer can go to a clinic and literally bring a bill of three million shillings and the Permanent is entitled to pay it.  So, at the end of the day, this rationalisation will be less on the budget than the current one.  That is all I wanted to point out.  It is not a salary increment, it is not selecting a group of people; all we are doing, instead of getting a house which Public Service has to furnish, we are now giving you this amount, which is exactly what you have been getting, and in some cases it is being rationalised. If you fall sick, this is your entitlement, make sure that you manage your money.  The day you fall sick, you do not run to the Permanent Secretary and bring a bill - you look after yourself.  

The savings being made will be channelled to the lower ranks of the public servants.  We are very concerned and we have taken note of the concerns that the hon. Member of Parliament responsible for workers is raising , we share them with you. But those concerns must be raised at every level other concerns are being raised anywhere.  Because when we in Public Service brought these concerns to the Parliamentary Commission, Members of Parliament were by innuendo saying, "Are you independent or is somebody interfering with your salary structure?"   

I wish the hon. Member could look at the salary structure for Parliamentary employees compared to the teachers, medical workers and sweepers.  I thank you.

MR. BAKKABULINDI: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker and the hon. Member for giving way.  The information I want to give my Colleague is that without education, we cannot have this space to fight officers, and since it has now been clearly set from the Report of the Committee that medical expenses are necessary as a matter of health, one wonders if these teachers do need this health consideration. I am concerned about what he is saying and should we set up such a precedent to only Judges, looking at them that they are the only people who need a certain consideration of health, we shall be setting up a dangerous situation in this Country.  

MR. PAJOBO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have received all this information and I wanted to say that, first of all the hon. Minister's information is very clear.  I am not complaining that the salaries are rather high, but I am complaining about the system of setting salaries, grade of people or the civil servants.  The system has not been favourable in any way.  What I am asking here is that we should bring the entire salary -(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think what some people forgot to say is that, it is the requirement of the Constitution that Parliament has to make specific provisions for these offices. It is the Constitution that sets up the commissions, that sets up the judges, that we are required to specifically deal with this matter. 

MR.PAJOBO: Even if those are the requirements of the Constitution, that that does not mean that the civil servants should be forgotten and it takes another year, we come here again to look into one group to another.  Mine is to draw the attention to the Minister, apart from fulfilling the requirements of the Constitution, also the other employees of the State should be considered as well. You can see the issue of minimum wage, since 1984 up to now we are still suffering, nobody gives quick attention to the issue of minimum wage.  I am aware that there are already some other steps being taken, but  how long does it take to come to the hands of the people?  So, only to look at one group of the people all the time because the Constitution says so, why does the Constitution not say anything about the others?  I am not happy about it.  Thank you very much.

MR. BUTELE (Madi-Okollo County, Arua):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I to support the Bill but I wanted the Committee to include in its proposed amendment on page three the issue of the Commissioner of Prisons and the Deputy Commissioner of Prisons. These are in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, article 216, I thought they could also be considered under other specified officers if the Committee thinks that the amendment includes the Police Department. I thought it could be in order so that these people can also be considered as specified officers, otherwise I support the motion.  Thank you.

MR. OKUMU RINGA(Padyere County, Nebbi): Mr. Speaker, I would like to support the motion and also the recommendations of the Committee. However, Mr. Speaker, allow me to make some brief comments with regard to the observations and recommendations made by the Committee.  When you look at the first schedule of the Bill, we have 12 specified officers, and indeed going by what hon. Butele has just stated, I am wondering as to whether or not we could propose that, other specified officers mentioned in the Constitution should not be included to increase the number on the list of officers under schedule No.1.  Maybe both the Chairman of the Committee and the Minister responsible for public service could take note and later on advise.  Here I can mention one or two offices, Mr. Speaker, that is the Commissioner for Prisons, the Vice Chancellors of the Government Universities and maybe a few others I am not able to mention here.  

With regard to recommendation given by the Committee on page 6 of the report of the Committee, monetize housing rates.  I have noted here that the Inspector General and Deputy Inspector General of police have been provided with furnished institutional houses.  I am wondering as to why this should be part of the law when tomorrow things can change.  I would like to propose that, in terms of monetisation of housing benefits, the amount provided for be across the board so that even the Inspector General of Police and his Deputy also receive theirs.  

Again on the same issue, Mr. Speaker, I am wondering whether or not there is a check and balance or an institutional arrangement within the Ministry to ensure that the houses being provided for these very important public offices, are houses which are in appropriate locations with appropriate amenities commensurate with the status.  Otherwise, if there is no proper check, 2.5 million shillings may be paid for a house which has less amenities, and of less dignified value to the officers.  May be the Minister responsible may wish to tell us whether there is a check and balance with regard to this.  

Lastly, Mr. Speaker, when you look at article 158 of the Constitution, Clause 1 specifically states that where any salary or allowance of the holder of any office is charged on the consolidated fund, it shall not be altered to his or her disadvantage after he or she has been appointed to that office. This article specifically refers to a situation where one is appointed from one position to another and may be the salary is over rationalised. But I am looking at a situation where even within the same salary structure may be the salary is not commensurate with such an office.  What would the Ministry of Public Service do to ensure that there is parity in real terms?  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. BAKKABUKLINDI(Workers representatives):   Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to welcome the Bill and also to commend the work being done by the Committee.  However, I have got some few observations which maybe, I may need some clarification on.  

When I look at page 4 of the Committee's recommendation about the monetized medical expenses, we have been told that these specified officers are very important people in this nation, and indeed are persons like the Chief Justice; you cannot say that he is not very important. But I am seeing a situation where you give him 300,000 shillings as being medical, and such an old person, or somebody of his equivalent, happens to be sick for a long time and he is required to be taken abroad. I do not know if this particular amount can cater for an officer.  

I was of the view, Mr. Speaker, that people of that category like the Chief Justice, his deputy, Auditor General and to mention a few, instead of giving them a fixed amount, we would leave it open so that when they are sick they can be reimbursed. Otherwise, this gives them a limitation whereby if the sickness is too much, the poor man may end up not getting enough treatment.  

When I look on the same page, page 4 again on monetized housing rates, I see the Chief Justice is being given an institution house and I do agree with it 100 per cent. I am seeing his deputy is being given money, and when I look again on page 6 I see the Inspector General of Police and his deputy are being given furnished institution houses which I think is an ideal idea.  I would not like to see a situation, Mr. Speaker, as already some officers in the Government, including some ministers being given a good amount fit for their classes and they end up going into rooms, simply because they want to save on the money. It will be a shame to the nation to see such important people being found in Kikuubo somewhere in two roomed houses because they want to make a saving. So, in order to avoid that, I was of the view that such important people, instead of providing them with this money which may attract them to do other business, they should be put in such specified houses, if not constructed by the Government being rented by the Government.  Mr. Speaker, I do not agree with this idea of giving such important people physical cash, and then we end up finding them in two roomed houses in places where they are not supposed to be.   Mr. Speaker, apart from those few observations, I beg to support the motion.

MR. WANGUBO((Bunya East, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  While I thank the Committee and the Ministry for such a force that indicates that there is something coming out in rectifying the pay of some officers, I have some few observations to make.  One is that, I am not convinced about the starting time of payment, the commencement date.  But, I do not know what was in the appointment letters to such officers before, otherwise I would imagine that these officers got appointment letters which specified what they were supposed to get then.  So, if there is anything that has been changed now, then it should start as and when it becomes operational rather than backdating it.  If we consider the domestic arrears Government has, I would rather we go on to pay the domestic arrears if we have anything to save, than paying somebody what he did not expect according to his letter of appointment; unless the letters of appointment say it, they would continue working until their salaries are fixed later.  

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I am in total support of what the representative of the workers has put across, that is of providing houses by the Government.  These institutions are permanent; I would say they are like state houses.  If we got every President to get his own state house, then we would be in trouble.  So these institutions like IGG, Auditor General, deputy IGG are permanent institutions. To avoid such a calamity as the Member for Workers has observed, I would support the idea of getting houses by Government, fully furnished.  In any case, it would save us a lot more. For instance, if we took the 2.5 million per month for a period of five years, that would come to about 150 million. I do not think we would need that furniture for any given house.  So we would save if Government provided the houses which are furnished, rather than giving money which would attract these officers to otherwise do other unbecoming things.  On page seven of the report, the Committee talks of a housing subsidy, then therein they say that the Committee found it necessary to delete the footnote on page seven which would grant judges the housing subsidy of 500 per month to help them acquire a house for retirement built in the salary. If it is built in the salary, then what is the point of putting it here, Mr. Speaker?  This is rising on  salary hopes because it is embedded in the salary.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE PRIME MINISTER(Prof. Nsibambi):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would also like to welcome this motion and support it. Let me say that as the Minister of Public Service has made it clear, in most cases we are rationalising what is on the ground, and the Constitution is very clear because if you take article 128 sub-article (7), it says: "The salary, allowances, privileges and retirement benefits and other conditions of service of a judicial officer or other person exercising judicial power, shall not be varied to his or her disadvantage."  The same applies to article 158 where it says: "Where any salary or allowance of the holder of any office is charged on the Consolidated Fund, it shall not be altered to his or her disadvantage after he or she has been appointed to that office."  So this is a very important theme and if you read article 106, 108 , it is reflected there.  So we can not alter what they are getting to their disadvantage.

The second point I would like to a make is that we are mindful of the plight of workers, that is why a job evaluation- first of all let me deal with the compression ratio. Government agreed to adopt a compression ratio of 1:20 that is to say, if the President gets 20 shillings, the lowest paid public servant will get at least one shilling.  The current compression ratio may be in the order of 1:70, it is very high, and it is being reduced, those who are getting reasonable wages will generally speaking stay put while those at the lower levels will increase until we move from a compression ratio of 1:70 to a better compression ratio of 1:20;  and there is also a time frame-(Interruption)

MR. ONGOM:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you Prime Minister for allowing me to seek this clarification. If indeed the compression ration at this moment is 1:70, and the Government wants to reduce it progressively to 1:20, how long does the Prime Minister or the Minister responsible for this, he envisages for this compression ratio to be reduced to 1:20 from 1:70 at the rate at which we are increasing the lower cadre salaries 5 per cent, 10 per cent per annum?

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  Thank you very much. At the time I left public service, the period was to be 10 years.  But there are new developments which may in fact make that arrangement unnecessary; and this was my second contribution, namely that there is a job evaluation exercise which has been carried out. This exercise creates what we call a job evaluation instrument we use to grade the salaries of a job and then you find the right remuneration; and you take into account a number of factors including the required skills, including the level of responsibility and environmental factors and hazards.  For example, a hangman has the stigma of hanging people.  So the hangman has the environmental stigma and when you are remunerating him, you may have to take the stigma into account.  But, when you take a surgeon operating on your brain, the skills required to perform that job, are quite intricate, so you will reward them accordingly.  So when the job evaluation instrument is in place, and I understand the job evaluation exercise is over, it will be an instrument for grading the jobs and for rewarding people using an objective standard;  and various stakeholders were initiated into this exercise and the instrument or the approach was accepted.  

Let me also say that the question of a minimum wage for those who are unskilled labourers was also addressed.  You are aware that I chaired a meeting where all the stakeholders were invited and we did overcome many obstacles by interalia using the monetisation and consolidated approach;  and at the end of the day, we recommended the figure which is much higher than the current one of 6,000; and I know that the Ministry of Gender has already completed the paper which is going to Cabinet and from Cabinet, it will be adopted.  So, the point I am making here is that, the state is mindful of the plight of people at the lower levels;   and it is taking professional and systematic steps in order to address those steps.  So, I want to support the motion very much.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have come to the end of the debate, and I will give opportunity to the Chairman and later the Minister to wind up this debate.  But I think this will be the appropriate time to conclude today's business.  But before I do so, I have got an announcement from hon.Maj. Gen. Elly Tumwine, he is informing you that there is a special performance for you Members of Parliament this evening at 7.00 p.m. at the National Theatre. It is free of charge, and the Prime Minister is the guest of honour. He explains that the Kawadisa is an association of wives and children of Mubende casualty unit of UPDF. So you are invited to the performance. Now, we come to the end of today's business.  The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 9.00 a.m. to receive the final comments from the chairman and the Minister and also to debate the issue of the Co-operative Bank, because I promised you that this week we shall be dealing with this matter.  So we shall utilize tomorrow to deal with that particular item.  The House is adjourned until tomorrow.

(The House rose and adjourned until 30th July, 1999 at 9.00 a.m)
