Tuesday, 27 July 2004

 Parliament met at 2.40 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to welcome you to this meeting and I understand the committees are working seriously too. I want to thank you for the work that is going on in the committees.  

Honourable members, our visitors in the strangers’ gallery are trainees from Forum for Women in Development, who have come to see what is going on here. You are most welcome to the Parliament of Uganda. (Applause)

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT RESOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

i) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES  FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2003/04, AND

ii) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2004/05

(Debate continued.)

THE SPEAKER:  I remember last time we met it was the Member for Tororo Municipality to contribute next, but he is not here. We can now hear from the Member for Mbale District.

2.43
MS OLIVER WONEKHA (Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am standing to support the motion and I would like to stick more or less to two areas within the Budget. Remembering that the theme of the Budget is, “Promoting Economic Growth and Reducing Poverty through Public Expenditure”, I would like to remind the House about the eight, millennium goals that our Government has committed itself to. The first one is reducing hunger by half by the year 2015. Our Government made this commitment at the World Food Summit of 1996.  

In the Budget I hoped that there would be an increase in the monies that are allocated to agriculture. All of us, Mr Speaker, remembering that agriculture is the backbone of our economy -(Interruption)

MR NYANZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Usually whenever we are debating, there must be somebody from the committee, the chairperson or a representative or the minister but as we are here now, I do not see any representative from the Budget Committee. Is it procedurally right to go on debating when there is nobody noting?

MR ERESU: I am a Member of the Budget Committee and I am duly representing that committee in the House.

THE SPEAKER: No, I think procedurally we shall continue with the debate in the plenary without the chairperson of the committee, because this is the House and it is not the committee’s business. If he is here, it is convenient for us to have the chairperson of the committee. I do not see one but I have been told there are members.

MR KATUNTU: The budget concerns the Minister of Finance and I do not see any Minister of Finance in this House.

THE SPEAKER: Then that is improper; we cannot proceed without a Minister of Finance. The Leader of Government Business is here to tell us who is handling this portfolio.

DR KIYONGA: Mr Speaker, although my colleague, the Minister of Finance is not here, we run Cabinet as a collective body and there are enough of us here to represent the government.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I take it that hon. Dr Kiyonga is going to take up the responsibility.

MR MIKE SEBALU: Mr Speaker, just like hon. Kiyonga has said, he is a former Minister of Finance and very competent on these matters, so he can ably articulate them.

THE SPEAKER: Let us proceed honourable member.

MS WONEKHA: Mr Speaker, I am not worried that my issues will not be taken care of. I had just said that I hoped to see more monies allocated to the agricultural sector, which - this House will agree with me - is under-capitalised.   

Mr Speaker, within the PMA framework, we have got the National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) that addresses the extension services. Indeed there is sensitisation going on, I know that many women are participating in this programme. But a lot of sensitisation without corresponding inputs, NAADS will not achieve what we are all looking forward to.

From this country we are exporting organic products, agricultural products but really it is more of a default than a venture that we are going into intentionally. The use of modern inputs in this country is really insignificant. You can only talk of ten kilograms per hectare of fertilizers as an average in this country. There are no pesticides to address pests and disease control; there are not enough herbicides for the control of weeds. Out there, what the few stockists of agro-chemicals do to them is terrible. The chemicals are adulterated so the few farmers who can afford them never really get a good deal. 

Mr Speaker, when it comes to implements, we all know, especially those from the coffee growing areas, that very few farmers have got pruning saws, pangas, files, the implements that are suitable for the kind of crops that they have.

The improved seeds that spurred the well-known green revolution in Asia and in Latin America are not accessible to many of our farmers. My concern here is that Government must put some money into farm inputs for our farmers and here I am looking at the public-private sector partnership. When it came to marketing of maize, this Government went out of its way and went into partnership with private exporters of maize. I would like to see a similar partnership in as far as enabling our farmers to get the best out of their gardens is concerned. In other words Government should go out of its way to support stockists out there, who will bring the necessary implements, the necessary seeds, closer to the people. We would like to see a strategy by Government stretching out to the stockists in a private-public partnership to enable our people get the most out of land. This concerns me particularly because in a place like Mbale where land is an issue, we need to go into intensive farming to utilise those small pieces of land to the utmost, and we cannot do that with only sensitisation from NAADS.  

When it comes to research in the PMA framework, the technologies are indeed available. However, they are not only expensive but also not easily accessible to our farmers. When it comes to expense, Mr Speaker, if the farmers were able to access some kind of rural financing, this would go a long way in facilitating them to acquire those expensive inputs. We are all aware that the few micro-finance organisations out there are not so friendly to the farmer. They are more interested in shopkeepers and without the regulation of the Tier IV micro-finance organisations; you get briefcase micro-finance organisations that cheat our people out there.

In Mbale we have one known as the Agricultural Coffee Association of Producers (ACAP) and they collect Shs 30,000 from each farmer to become a member. A farmer who has Shs 30,000 does not know that he is richer than the guy who is collecting money from him in ACAP because they collect this money and then they disappear with it. They do not bring what they promise. Can we, at this point in time in as far as the Budget is concerned, say that agriculture is really a priority? Do we feel there is enough investment in agriculture?  

Mr Speaker, we all know that our President attended the Maputo Summit of July 2003, where they made a declaration on agriculture and food security. They called for urgent implementation of the Comprehensive Africa Agricultural Development Programme (CAADP). Our President committed himself to putting 10 percent of our national budget to agriculture and rural development. They say it is within a period of five years. We would like to see that in our budget, to know that really our President seriously committed himself to this declaration.

We have rain-fed agriculture. We would like to see in the Budget money allocated to water for production. It is a fact that rain-fed crops yield three times or more than non-rain-fed crops. In this country, like elsewhere, 80 percent of food emergencies are really related to water, particularly water stress. So, we would like to see monies allocated to water for production.

Mr Speaker, when it comes to natural resource management, I represent the people of Mbale who live on Mt. Elgon. The theme for environmental management now is, “Proper Waste Management, Our Wealth, our Health.” The people on Mt. Elgon would rather see monies allocated to care for land degradation, soil erosion, landslides, water harvesting; these are the real issues in as far as natural resource management in Mbale region is concerned. We have overused soils and we have deforestation so we would like to see more resources in that line.

In the Budget, Mr Speaker, I am gratified to see that monies will be allocated to science and technology. There will be a technology innovation fund and there will be a presidential scientific innovation fund. Countries out there do put monies aside for science, for research and those who come up with innovative research are supported. I do not think that our country is not one of those that would make use of such a facility. With that, Mr Speaker, I would like to support the motion.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

2.55
MR JOHN AACHILLA (Jie County, Kotido): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion. I greatly appreciate the Vice-President, His Excellency Prof. Gilbert Bukenya, for ably presiding over the presentation of the national budgets on the 12 June last year and also this year. This is a good gesture to us as Ugandans, especially when we identify the point of delegation. This gives us confidence that we are moving forward under the Movement.

I should also thank the Minister of Finance for performing his job well and presenting the Budget correctly that day -(Interruption)

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wanted the honourable member to clarify to us whether they are moving forward and grooming him to take over in 2006.

MR AACHILLA: Thank you, hon. Capt. Byaruhanga. You know a lot of these things, honourable members. I call upon members to be patient. If you want to take over from your father you do not jump, you have to be patient. So, let us appreciate this and wait confidently. We are undergoing transition and it is healthy for us to create confidence in members we expect to take over when time comes, but not to jump over. (Interruption)

MR AWORI: Could my honourable colleague inform the august House, in this case who is the father and who is the son?

MR AACHILLA: Mr Speaker, I would courageously inform my colleague, the aspirant for the presidency, that the father remains what you wanted and that is Museveni and the son is yourself and the Parliament. I thank you. (Laughter)

MR AWORI: I would like to inform my honourable colleague, if he is referring to me as a son to Museveni, take note of the following: 

One, I am six years older than Museveni; two, I introduced him into politics; and three, we do not have any kind of relationship in that format. (Laughter)

MR AACHILLA: Mr Speaker, I do not want to drag that on but let me inform my colleague that I am here as Aachilla, 39 years old and he is therefore very old, equal maybe to my eldest brother, but we deliver the same thing and we represent the people of Uganda. So, the issue of age is not there but responsibility matters.

Mr Speaker, in the last financial year, what remains to be identified as a challenge to Government was the transformation of the economy through export-led economic growth. When you analyse this phrase it means that we, as Members of Parliament and the House, should by now really seek clarification from the Minister of Finance to be able to find out or to measure by how much we have expanded our production base by region in order to appreciate the performance of our economy in terms of diversification. 

We need to get a clear picture so as to convince the citizens that as we move to this new financial year, it is important for the Minister of Finance, representing the President, to make this point clear. As a strategy in our observation of the diversification of the economy, how far have we gone to expand the production; how far have we performed in the area of quality control? This has been the target of the President and the target of this year’s national budget that we need to improve the qualities of our products. It is important for us to know how far we have gone along this line so that we can be able to measure that in the previous financial year this is what happened and in this year this is what we expect.  

It is also important, Mr Speaker, for the people of Jie, whom I represent, to know how far we have improved in the area of adding value. It is clear that we have appreciated the improvement of quality in the area of other agricultural products like cotton. We have now improved our products to the world market say AGOA, what about in other areas? How far have we gone?  

Mr Speaker, last year the theme of the budget was to, “Increase Production for Increased Exports and Eradication of Absolute Poverty”. This year, it is also similar: “Promote Economic Growth by Reducing Poverty through Public Expenditure”. These two themes seem to be close to each other. You can also note in our Budget Speech that the GDP has improved from 4.9 percent in the previous financial year to 5.2 percent, which you can get in paragraph 5 of page 2 of this document, and the areas of intervention identified were: economic management; enhancing production, competitiveness and incomes; security, conflict resolution and disaster management; and good governance and human development.

I am concerned with the third point: security, conflict resolution and disaster management. Being a victim in the area where security is a major concern, conflict resolution is material that is required and disaster is a day-to-day experience.  

Mr Speaker, we are undergoing a transition, I would like just to call the attention of the Members to this concern of security. I have not had a chance to visit some of the neighbouring countries and even go overseas and see how matters of security are being contained. I would like to call upon everybody and the whole nation that matters of security should not be handled in such a way that we jeopardise the security of our country. Here I come to look at a point where Members of Parliament were reported as pointing at each other and yet they were discussing very serious issues of security and even other people went ahead to extrapolate this kind of misconception. I could call it misdirection of information. Of course they are members of the security organs but then they remain as public officers who are Members of Parliament.

When we look at issues of security and we discuss them openly in bars, we discuss them everywhere and we seem not to care about the security of this country, Mr Speaker - I need to share my sentiments with members of the House that security is a concern of both the Executive, Parliament and the Judiciary. It is very important that as stakeholders in this country, it is our concern that we all have to defend and secure this country. 

I have the experience that sometime back when there was chaos in this country in 1985, because the government by then had collapsed, everybody had to run away including Members of Parliament, both those in opposition or those pro-Government. So, I would like to inform members that it is really our concern to make sure that we guard the security of our country. We should make sure that we discuss any matters that need collective resolution; we should not leave the country to any kind of folk to play about it when we are still in charge as Parliament, as the Executive, we should secure our future.

The other issue of concern to me is good governance and human development. Mr Speaker, I have seen that this requires effective collaboration and focus by all stakeholders, including Government. My concern is how committed is the Executive when most of the projects seem to be given priority according to where ministers come from? When I say where ministers come from, I mean some ministers. Let us agree where we need to criticise and we should do so securely.  

I am raising this very seriously. When I look at the priority to electrify rural areas, Kotido District has remained the darkest ever on earth. People in my region have never had a chance of having electricity. Yet, there has been a lot of commitment from the President including him writing personally to make sure that they light Kotido as a priority, and nothing is done by the ministry. I have gone ahead to write even to the ministers, if they are here they can defend themselves. I have to put it clear on the Floor and –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you my, honourable colleague. Earlier on you started by stating that we should move forward under the Movement. Now, could you tell me what the Movement has done for Kotido in the last 18 years?

MR AACHILLA: Mr Speaker, moving forward does not mean limping forward or does not mean jumping forward. Moving forward means either we are walking or gradually we are going towards what we want to get. It is not that we are going backward, what we are asking is to accelerate what is there –(Interruption)

MR KIWANDA: Mr Speaker, I want to thank the member for giving way. I want to inform the honourable member that actually “moving forward” does not mean that we should reach the final stage because we are moving forward. When the member said we are “moving forward”, he actually meant that even Rome was not built in one day, Kampala was not built in one day so we are moving towards something. He has seen something in Kotido but he is asking for more so that his constituency develops.

MR AACHILLA: Thank you, colleague, for giving that clarification. My concern is captured in the policy statement of that ministry, which I have already mentioned here that I have written to them and I think we shall continue pursuing it when the policy statement comes to the House.

Mr Speaker, when you look at the eight minimum development goals that our country has ratified, there is a commitment of Government to see to it that the millennium development goals are observed and implemented. I appreciate the area of UPE. Where things have reached, a tremendous achievement has been made. But the concern of the people of Jie and Karamoja is that we should have compulsory boarding UPE for Karamoja as an affirmative action. The element I am putting forward here is boarding.

When you look at the area of health as a minimum goal that is required, a lot of it has been done. I am happy to hear that even HIV prevalence has so much reduced to a mere 4.2 percent now. This is better and it is worth appreciating. But then, Mr Speaker, it is worth informing the Ministry of Health and Government that we need technical personnel. We need to put our resources much more in training, we need to equip these units so as to strength the availability of these facilities. We need drugs to be available.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you and I would like to conclude by saying that regional development in the area of security especially the disarmament exercise, which I have heard is about to get back to the programme. I was in Kenya last month and the Kenyan Government is interested in making sure that disarmament is carried out regionally. It is an appreciation that even Sudan is now moving towards attaining peace and we expect that we cooperate with these nations to see that disarmament exercise goes peacefully and successfully. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.11
REV. DR KEFA SSEMPANGI (Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion and I appreciate the fact that the Budget has set aside Shs 400 million to support the Presidential Scientific Innovation Fund. However, I think this amount is very minimal. It will need to be increased because this is a very important factor in our development and in our society today.  

Mr Speaker, I hope that this is not confined to a limited concept of science. When I was a student of Arts in London, there was a department of Fashion Design. I noticed students concentrating on the design and every year there were new designs in the streets, new designs in the shops. I hope that this research could be extended to people who are devoting their time to research in areas of fashion so that our society can also develop without all the time copying designs from abroad. We have hon. Tumwine in this House, who has a tremendous concern in this area. I hope that if there is support, he could raise many young people to do graduate work and research in this field.  

Mr Speaker, I was also at school with people who were doing industrial design. You could see a student taking a match box toy and analysing that toy up and down for a whole year and he would come up with a new model. I hope that our industries in this country could be able to support people in their disciplines to take up this kind of studies. I understand that at Makerere University now you have a whole department of Industrial and Fine Art. This is a department, which if supported, could produce people who could produce industrial designs to support whatever industry we have in this country.

There was another department of architectural design so that people could study how to improve their small towns. I hope that KCC could set aside funds to send students outside the country to do research in this area and that would go a long way even to improve our city of Kampala.  

I am saying this, Mr Speaker, just to make a plea that this Presidential Scientific Innovation Fund could be extended to people that are doing that kind of research. I know that in this House we have people like Dr Esele who have done some research in “eporu poru” I do not think that they have been rewarded. We have people like honourable – (Interruption)

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, I did not want to interrupt the flow of ideas of the member holding the Floor but I was intrigued when he talked about the presidential fund for technology. May I know how much money currently is being injected into research in this country because technology evolves itself as a result of research?  

REV. SSEMPANGI: I think the Minister of Trade and Industry can answer that question.

Mr Speaker, I remember some years back I attended a conference in Washington. I think the head of the delegation was hon. Wagonda Muguli and there was a gentleman from Canada who showed big designs of young children from Africa, India and China. What was surprising was that every child born on this planet has a capacity of one billion neurons in the brain and the way they had the exercise of early stimulation of the brain using toys. 

Today our children in this country do not have that privilege of enjoying and playing with these toys. Consequently they get to be stunted and it was demonstrated that this brain stimulation takes place from day one until the child is six years old. After that this stimulation does not continue –(Interruption)

MR WAMBI: Thank you, honourable member for giving way. I would like to inform you that in this country there is a whole project on early childhood development and that project is spending colossal sums of money on buying toys for the children and the Ministers of Health and Education are aware of that. So we are on the right track also, despite your comments. The Early Childhood Development Project under Dr Mutumba has even constructed day-care centres in some of the sub-counties. So, you are not very far from the right track but there is a lot of money, which is wasted importing toys instead of using the locally manufactured ones.  

REV. SSEMPANGI: I thank you for that information.  I would also like to inform you that at one time I was chairperson of that committee. However, the point I am driving at is that in other countries like China and Japan they develop their own toys so that by the time a child is seven years old, if he was playing with toys to do with medicine or to do with engineering or any other discipline, he would be talking as if he is a doctor or a professor in that area. But I have not seen that development in our country. I have not seen that impact in our country and as you say, does this  –(Interruption)

MR AWUZU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking information from the member on the Floor. He suggested that children in other areas get a lot of toys to play with and, therefore, they are better than our children here. Might he like to consider that our children here are actually wise and smarter than children from those areas because they make their own toys to play with? Our children here make cars, they make bicycles although without engines, they make all sorts of things as toys and play with them. Who is really sharper in the brain, those children who use other people’s toys or our children who make their own toys? Thank you.  

MR OGOLA: Mine is just a rejoinder to the minister’s contribution. As an experienced parent as well -(Interjection)- I have twelve children. (Laughter). I know that these ordinary toys you buy will never develop the brain of a child. A child needs to build his/her particular type of toys, which innovates when they build up houses, build cars et cetera. That innovates them but ordinary toys may not and it is better still if a child, as the minister says, builds up his/her own toys using mud, using canes and so on. That one creates innovation in them and they grow up - unless we have to develop that kind of programme. But when children fail to develop toys of their own, just playing with toys will never develop them. Thank you.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Mr Speaker, some children in internally displaced peoples’ camps are lacking the bare minimum to eat. Would the honourable member consider his position as to whether we actually need more toys than the food for the child to develop the brain?  

THE MINISTER OF STATE, PRIMARY EDUCATION (Mrs Geraldine Bitamazire): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the member on the Floor for giving way. I am glad that Members of Parliament are heavily engaged in discussing the early childhood development right now because that has been a missing link. I am informing my colleague on the Floor, who I know has had a lot to do with children, that as we implement the UPE programme, the Ministry of Education is keenly picking up early childhood education as a key component of UPE. 

We have established in the Ministry of Education a department for Early Childhood Education and Development, which is supposed to really sensitise parents and all stakeholders on the need for the children from day 1 to start learning. Learning starts at day 1 and the most important gadgets for learning at that stage are the toys and any other play items. So, we are not encouraging parents to buy but we are encouraging parents to make toys at their own home level so that the kids can start thinking and learning and get manipulative skills. So, we are not really going in for buying toys, but we are going in for teaching and training parents on how to make toys for their children to start learning early. So, I am glad that the House is engaged on this issue, which is very crucial for the Universal Primary Education. I thank you.

REV. SSEMPANGI: I thank you for that information.  In fact, it is true that during the colonial days our children were not allowed into kindergarten. That was the privilege of Whites and Asians. I also think that the production of toys should not be left to chance. Somebody said that our children could do better than those using toys. Yes, otherwise, when I was small - and I have also seen this in rural areas - parents tie bells on the hands and on the legs. This practice was discouraged by the missionaries as being devilish but this was part of the stimulation for the brain and that is why some of us are doctors in our different disciplines. But the exercise of making toys should not be left to chance. My plea, Mr Speaker, is that there should be some funds devoted for this so that our children may also not just be growing by chance. This should be a planned activity. 

Finally, Mr Speaker, two young men at Katwe Musa Body, one of them invented or worked out a helicopter, which flew for about ten or 20 minutes. The other one made a small vehicle, which was also on the road for some days. The last time I inquired about them I was told that these people are now staying somewhere abroad. I think they received some scholarships. My question is: what plans does Government have to stop this brain drain? Whoever can do some better research, you will hear the following day that he has been offered a big job somewhere, and constantly we remain here either degenerating or without making more further progress in this scientific area.  So, it would be wise, as we now speculate on this Presidential Scientific Innovation Fund, to have some rules in place so that we do not constantly lose our brains to some countries abroad. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.27
MR MAURICE KAGIMU (Bukomansimbi County, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When I was preparing my speech today I read something, which was very vital in the New Vision. It says that the Bishop of Masaka has advised Government - I think this was very wise of him - the title is: “Increase MPs’ pay.” It says: “Bishop J.B. Kaggwa of Masaka has called for higher pay for MPs…” he was at a fundraising function. He said that MPs deserve more pay because they spend huge sums of money to support the needy in their areas. I am glad, Mr Speaker, you were the chief guest on that occasion. (Laughter). Actually a motion is being mooted. The Bishop said MPs were always requested to contribute funds towards developmental projects in the communities.  

Mr Speaker, not long ago the President talked about the constituency fund. We are all aware of how our constituencies have so many developmental projects and so many needs; fundraising papers are going around always hence there is contribution fatigue. Actually, we do not want to eat the money. If the government wants, they can agree with Members of Parliament to allocate the money to a particular place each month. We do not even touch the money if they want. This will help us so that when you go for a fundraising, you contribute when you are also happy, when you are in good moods.  

Mr Speaker, they can even bring a chicken, you fail to buy it and then they squeeze you, “you buy, buy.” Not only in your constituency but also when you go to other peoples’ constituencies you have to contribute, you contribute until you are no more. (Laughter). So, I am calling upon the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs to expedite this constituency fund. When it comes here I am sure it will pass with all the speed it needs. It should be included in the –(Interruption)

MR ONZIMA: I thank, hon. Kagimu, for giving way. I would like to find out from him whether he would be ready to support ekisanja in exchange for the constituency fund.

MR KAGIMU: Usually in matters like this, hon. Prof. Kagonyera is very good in advising. (Laughter). But, Mr Speaker, yes when the kisanja comes we shall cross the bridge when we come to it and –(Interruption)

MRS MATEMBE: Is hon. Onzima in order to promote corruption and bribery here in this House? Is he ethical and in order to promote corruption in this honourable House?

THE SPEAKER: But the point of order is not clear to me. What encouragement did he give about corruption? I think he was talking about two issues.

MRS MATEMBE: I heard hon. Onzima asking hon. Kagimu, would he be prepared to support ekisanja in exchange for the constituency fund. To me as former Minister of Ethics and Integrity, and in view of what is reported in the press that Members of Parliament are pocketing things and people are not trusting us; that when we come here we may not discuss the matter in their interest because we shall have been bought; is it in order to bring that impression to this House, that if you give us the constituency fund, we give you ekisanja? Is he in order really?

THE SPEAKER: First of all, I am not in position to rule on that because you have used a certain term, which is not part of the language here. So, I did not understand that. (Laughter).

THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof Mondo Kagonyera): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to give a piece of information since hon. Kagimu had requested me to do so.  

First of all, I do not think that it is proper for hon. Onzima to treat serious business in the contemptuous manner he is doing. When members want to be facilitated in order to do their work in the constituency better, it is very serious business. Even if the government may not be able to meet it, it does not mean we do not recognize the importance of facilitating Members of Parliament to do the work more. 

Over the weekend I was in my constituency carrying out development work and you cannot imagine how much it demanded on my personal pocket. Therefore, is it in order for hon. Kagimu to wonder whether it is possible for Members of Parliament to be facilitated to do their work? But if hon. Onzima, in his own imagination thinks that anything that the government does -(Interjection)- is in the form of bribery, it is his own business -(Interruption) 

MR ONZIMA: Information.

MR KAGONYERA: I do not require his information. I am giving information to hon. Kagimu and the House. Therefore, it is his business to imagine that every co-operation between the Executive arm of Government and the Members of the backbench is something to be treated in the contemptuous manner in which he is doing it. But my view is that members are right to wonder whether it is possible for them to be facilitated to do more development work in their constituencies, and by the way, it is done all over the world.  I thank you.
MR KAGIMU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and hon. Prof. Kagonyera. No wonder, you do not have a PhD for nothing – it is “permanent head damage”. (Laughter). 

To conclude that point, since 2001 the President has been talking about that constituency fund but up to now - maybe it will wait for the ekisanja period, but I think the earlier the better.  

Mr Speaker, another issue I want to talk about is the taxi parks. I am very grateful to the government for facilitating this expansion - for all the money it is putting in the consultancy because of the traffic jams, but I would like also to throw in my advice. In other countries what they do –(Interjections)- I have visited many, I do not remember, Kenya, Botswana. Other countries do not congest all the vehicles in one park, in the middle of the city. For example, you can put the park for vehicles, which go to Jinja and Tororo between Bweyogerere and Jinja Road. Then people who are going to Masaka can board from Natete. They can have a huge taxi park for people going to these parks so you can decongest the city. 

In fact, now I am realizing why those people were doing it because I remember in Nairobi for example, when you are going to a place like Kagiado, you do not board from the middle of the city, you go ten miles away. So, we should have different taxi parks. For example, for vehicles going to Hoima, people could board in Nakulabye. So the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications in conjunction with the Kampala City Council (KCC), should consider that. 

Mr Speaker, I am grateful to the government for facilitating the bright kids. I think two bright kids per sub-county are given bursaries. I hope it is put into practice because I heard of it but there maybe some corruption in some areas. I can see the Minister standing up for information.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, HIGHER EDUCTION (Mrs Beatrice Wabudeya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank hon. Kagimu for giving way for this information because I heard you say that you hope it would be implemented. I just want to say that indeed we started implementing that programme and even this financial year we are going to finance another two from each sub-county. Thank you.

MR KAGIMU: Okay, thank you very much though some of us are not involved. If things are done behind us, Mr Speaker, they can be done haphazardly and then they can sponsor kids who are not worth it. For example in Japan when a kid is bright, the government takes over the kid immediately. So we should not lose these brains.  

For example, when we were at university there was a man in Nkrumah Hall –(Interruption)

MRS HYUHA: Thank you very much for giving way. I want to give information to my colleague that the Committee on Social Services analyzed this policy and we reported to Parliament. This is actually going to be the third year when Government sponsors two needy but bright children in every sub-county. The criteria of selecting these children is done by councils. These names are sent to the district and the cheques are paid to the schools where the children are. So, it is not being done behind our backs since Parliament was involved and the council is involved.  

MR KAGIMU: Oh, that is very good; thank you very much. Perhaps it was not very much in the open but now it will begin. 

Mr Speaker, I was giving an example. When we were at Makerere University there was a man in Nkrumah Hall whom we used to call a computer. When we were going for meals students were supposed to give in their meal cards to that man so that he would cross out their number. But you could imagine this man could tick all the numbers of about 500 students without checking any card. He would just look at you and tick the card. We called him a computer. That brain was wasted because that man was never picked on to go anywhere. He would now be working with a computer – I am about to finish -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, why do you say he was wasted when he was doing the work he was doing?

MR KAGIMU: Mr Speaker, in economics there is what is called disguised unemployment where you work and you think you are being fully employed, while not. There is also optimum employment. You have to employ the person optimally so that you use the brain. For example, this man [Hon. Hillary Onek] is an engineer; he was on the Water Board. That is where he should be; but if he becomes a bus conductor you would be under employing him. So, that is very serious. (Laughter)

Another issue is about stabilization funds. During the colonial days there was the stabilization fund for cash crops. I know the Minister is going to say that buying of crops was liberalised, so middlemen are the ones buying crops. Much obliged, but the farmers have to be protected because sometimes the crops are bought at very low prices. Government should come in and subsidize the peasants. America is doing it, Britain is doing it, and Europe is doing it. In fact it is said that if the American Government were not to subsidize the farmers, they would not be competing. But the farmers here are not helped; you find a man selling coffee beans for say Shs 200 or Shs 300. So, a stabilization fund should be introduced.

There is this issue of AIDS orphans –(Interjection)- yes, but my time was eaten, you know this information. Okay fine, these AIDS orphans, in fact one time I wanted to bring a motion that Government introduces a ministry just for orphans, but then I was advised that there is the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, which caters for children and so many things. The government promised a policy but up to-date the policy has not come. 

We are burying young men everyday who are leaving behind AIDS orphans totaling to two to three million. In the end the situation will go out of hand. The NGOs cannot manage that. UWESO has tried, other NGOs have tried but they cannot manage; the government must come in. These orphans are citizens of Uganda and the task of looking after the citizens and bringing them up is the duty of the government. In Luganda we have a saying that if somebody is helping you mourn, you have to cry even more. So, the government has to come in and cry more and bring the policy here so that donor funds can be availed. 

Mr Speaker, they leave these children to relatives. You find a man already has ten children of his own and then his relative leaves him 20 more children and the man cannot look after them all while the government is looking on. I want to warn the government that in future if these AIDS orphans do not grow up well, the children who have grown up well will not live comfortably in this country. So, they must all grow up well so that we have a good future.

Another issue, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, no.

MR KAGIMU: Okay, I am ending with this one. Hon. Dora Byamukama moved a motion about pensions and up to now I have never heard the Prime Minister responding to it. The people supposed to get that pension are dying. I remember the kawonawos, these ex-service men, one time during campaigning time, were called to Bombo to register. Poor men had to sell their plots and goats to get transport and then to go to the Commissioner for Oaths to endorse their things before they went to Bombo. They are now asking us what happened. “Why do you come to us when it is campaign time? So, you are waiting for campaign time again so that you pay us?” 

So, the Prime Minister, oh! He is standing up. Okay, I have finished, but he can give the information. Thank you very much.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform hon. Kagimu that the Third Deputy Prime Minister answered this question. We have this problem that when we answer many of these questions some hon. Members of Parliament are not here and they do not try to find out what was answered in their absence. I urge you to be diligent and discover what has been answered during your absence by reading the proceedings of our body legislative.

3.45
MR THEODORE SEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise like to support the motion because the theme of promoting economic grow and reducing poverty through public expenditure fits in well with the revised PEAP, which is rotating about the five strategic intervention areas of economic management, enhancing production, competitiveness and incomes, security, conflict resolution, disaster management, and good governance.  

Mr Speaker, I think if we were to capture these objectives, I have high hopes that this country would go very far in attaining its growth and development goals. 

I was looking at chapter 7 that talks about performance of the economy and that real GDP growth is estimated at six percent this year. They further stated that although this is lower than the target rate of seven percent, it still represents a credible performance by our economy and it is higher than the average growth achieved by the rest of Africa. 

Mr Speaker, I was happy to note that Government is benchmarking the Southeastern Asia countries, the tigers. But when it comes to comparing with other countries of Africa - well, I know a one-eyed person is a king among the blind - but I would like Government to focus on other developed countries, the tiger economies, because once we look at that, we would know that it is indispensable doubling the industrial sector as a percentage of the GDP, not the percentages themselves. This would make more sense. In that regard we must increase the size of the manufacturing sector from the current 9.7 percent to 21.9 percent. 

I also would like the Minister of Finance to look at these figures critically and the export returns, which we hoped in our budget, would increase by 24 percent. This should be in a more substantive manner, which must jump from the current 12 percent of GDP now to almost 25 percent if we are to take off, and the private credit must move from the current 6.4 percent to 38 percent. This is when we shall welcome it as a success. But in a country where we are involved in export of low value primary products that are susceptible to market vagaries, we cannot move very far. We have to industrialize and those should be our targets.  

I also have another reservation about real GDP growth being at six percent. This has a lot to tell us, particularly if we look at paragraph 18 where the Uganda external debt is quickly becoming unsustainable. Is growth measured on its own or we have injected the external borrowings to boost the projected growth? This is because the debt percentage to GDP has risen from 55 percent - and that is even before we undertook the HIPC measures - to 65 percent. As we speak now, we have Shs 4.2 billion in external debt. 

Originally, Mr Speaker, the Highly Indebted Poor Countries Initiative targeted the net present value of debt to export at a ratio of 150 percent. But as we speak now, it has almost doubled to over 279 percent. When you portray these figures and you tell me it is growth, I have reservations. This could be idyllic and we need to crystallize it in its proper perspective so that we give the country a true image and picture of how we are proceeding.  

Mr Speaker, the budget talks about privatization and that to date 117 enterprises have been divested, leaving a balance of 31 to be privatized and other measures that are contained therein in the Budget. We have sold them out. I would like to be assured, how much do we have on the consolidated fund account? How much do we have out of these sales? How do we intend to put it into meaningful ventures, because we have given away, we have sold away, we have allowed a lot of concessions but I would like Government to come out and tell us how much we have in our consolidated fund, out of these privatized enterprises of the state, because they belong to Ugandans.    

I would like to lastly comment about good governance and security, because it is also one of the pillars and one of the major objectives of Government in this financial year. For sure good governance is a prerequisite, but we have a lot of concerns about it. I would look at two aspects only. We have to fight corruption. I read with sadness about even a minister helplessly lamenting about being asked for a bribe. If a government minister can bend to such levels, how about the entire Ugandan population?

My worry is, even the figures we give here might be figures arising out of corrupt tendencies. This is why I want to encompass it in my submission. I have a case in point. Recently it was read that Uganda’s economic performance is boosted by revenue arising from corrupt tendencies and no Government Minister rose up to challenge the French Ambassador on that point. It was very well publicized and nobody stood up to challenge him. 

And it is very bad to see Government Ministers turn into debt collectors for private companies, Mr Speaker. A case in point is where Government ordered the Non Performing Assets Recovery Trust to drop an appeal against the Commercial Courts award of Shs 4.6 billion on 18th May this year. This was earlier on preceded, on March 16th 2004, by both Ministers of Finance going to see the President in Paara Lodge to convince him to prevail over Nile Flowers – that was Ministers Rukutana and Kutesa to tell Government to pay up. Why should ministers turn themselves into debt collectors for private institutions and companies? What does it have to tell us? Nile Roses belongs to somebody else and I wonder why ministers could go to that extent. 

Recently the whole Director General of the Internal Security Organisation mentioned that a powerful minister in Government, with strong interests at the airport, was involved in drug trafficking. Reports were read, the papers were read, and none of the government Ministers came up to point a finger or to refute the allegations. So, I am happy that we are moving on well presumably, but this kind of trend - if we leave such issues unattended to - I am afraid we might be building idyllic performances. People in the countryside are becoming poorer and poorer. We promised to give them money to borrow and we have never done that. 

The fourth tier of micro-finance, the lowest, was promised in six months’ time but up to now it is not in place. Yet a few people could be going away with it. I believe, Mr Speaker, that we need to be honest with ourselves. We need to be honest with our country and this is how we shall realize the projections we make. This is how they shall benefit the entire country and all Ugandans. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.56
MR ABURA PIRIR (Matheniko County, Tororo): Thank you, Rt hon. Speaker and the entire Parliament. I also take the chance to join the rest of the colleagues who have already contributed and supported the motion. I have only five observations to make. 

A budget is a national planning project in that it should be able to cover the country, the whole network of the country’s activities or projects. When you talk of infrastructure like the road network, I think the distribution of maintenance and the construction fund should be given in a manner that it should include those regions, which permanently have marrum roads, like Karamoja.

Mr Speaker, I would like to express my views on education. As I see UPE, a lot of classrooms have been constructed countrywide. This is a good move but there is something we have to put in place, the standard of education. In Karamoja the highest institution of learning we have is a Grade III Teachers’ College, and we have 12 secondary schools. After senior three or senior four when you go to the TTC, that is the end of you. I do not know whether it is adjustable after reading the budget. Is there room to adjust this and include one public institution, which can offer diploma or certificate courses, in Karamoja? We have no other institution in the region. That is one part. I say the highest institution we have - our university is Grade III.

I come to the part, which is very vital in the country, the sports. As a one time national and international sportsman, I am lamenting the way we are handling sports today. The Government has not yet come out with a sports developmental programme. We should do it. In the 1970s, 1978 was the last time the Cranes as a team played in the Africa Cup of Nations. From that time they are performance is going downwards - no more, because of under-facilitation. Sports is like, you know, when you are in the army. Napoleon used to say that a soldier moves with the stomach; sports also needs a diet. We are under-facilitated in sports. You remember the days of our glory, when Aggrey Awori, John Akii-Bua and others, including myself -(Laughter)- yes, when I struggled to qualify in the 1976 Olympic Games in Montreal -(Interruption) 

THE MINISTER OF STATE, SPORTS (Mr Okello Oryem): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is not exactly true that sports in Uganda has reached the bottom of the earth. Two weeks ago a young man called Boniface Kiprop won the 10,000-meter race in Italy, breaking the world record in the Junior Championship race. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, Uganda Cranes at the moment is at its third stage of the qualification match for the African Cup of Nations and the World Cup. We have done so well, we beat the Congolese, we equalized with the Ghanaians in Namboole. More so, I am glad to inform the House that the policy on sports in Uganda is ready and will be presented to Cabinet within the next two weeks. (Applause) I think once the sports policy has been approved by Cabinet and has been brought before the House, then members in the House will know that Sports in Uganda is on the way forward and surely we will regain our glory. Thank you.

MR AWORI: Thank you Mr Speaker. As much as I agree with what my honourable colleague, the Minister in charge of Sports has said, especially regarding our young man Kiprop who set a junior world record two weeks ago, I regret to say that there was a minimum of Government input in his success. Why am I saying so? 

In the last 20 years there has been no construction of any sports facility in this country by the government. Namboole Stadium was a gift from the Chinese. Over and above that, we even failed to live up to our bargain. The Chinese said they would give us a facility and we would also make a counter part contribution. Take for instance –(Interruption)

MR KAGIMU: Mr Speaker, let me also air out my concern so that the Minister clarifies once. Even with the corruption in FUFA, you remember the President gave Shs 200 million and he bought a building for them, the building was mortgaged and recently I saw it in the press being sold. There is a lot of corruption in FUFA; all the money is “eaten” and the players are not facilitated. Ezra wanted to help but he is being frustrated; Minister Mukula also wanted to help, he was blasted by FUFA. Honourable minister, what are you doing? (Laughter).

MR KIBAALE WAMBI: Mr Speaker, I would be grateful if the minister could further clarify on the sports policy. I am a Member of the Social Services Committee and I have been in this committee since 1996 but all along we have been told of a sports policy, which is at Cabinet level. Today I am surprised we are being told by the Minister that the sports policy has not yet arrived at Cabinet level; that it is going to be presented to Cabinet in two weeks’ time. You remember honourable members, about one year ago the Committee on Social Services almost declined to pass the Budget for the Ministry of Education because of the sports policy, and we were promised that the policy was on the way. Now we have heard it from the horse’s mouth that it will be there at the critical moment of passing the Budget. Could the honourable minister clarify to the whole House whether what you were saying since two years ago is true – that the policy has not yet reached the Cabinet level?

MR OKELLO ORYEM: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think when all members of this House are contributing they are honest and say the truth. As I reiterated earlier, it is true that the policy is ready and at an appropriate time - I hope within two weeks, Cabinet timetable allowing, we will be able to present it in Cabinet. It is not true that I presented at any place that the policy was before Cabinet, no. Previously I had said that as soon as the policy is ready we will be prepared to present it before Cabinet, but I have not said that it was presented before Cabinet.

Hon. Kagimu asked what the minister is doing. The minister is not shouting at him, the minister is working on sports. The issue of FUFA is being dealt with, it is not true that FUFA House has been mortgaged and it is also not true that FUFA House will be sold. I can assure you that there is a programme in place to repay whatever money FUFA extracted when it used that house as security to borrow money from a company called Swift Commodities. Already part of that money has been repaid. There is understanding with the company, and FUFA House will not be sold. 

The issue was whether there is corruption in FUFA or not. Corruption in FUFA is being dealt with on a regular basis. Everybody keeps saying that there is corruption in FUFA, but if you look at the thing in whole, nobody has proved beyond reasonable doubt and pin pointed any incident of corruption in FUFA. But if we were to get enough evidence to pin point Obua for example or any other person in FUFA who has committed corruption, surely we would take criminal action against them.

On hon. Aggrey Awori’s contribution that the government had no input to Boniface Kiprop’s performance, that is not true. Government has contributed to Uganda Amateur Athletics Federation by the time they were taking the team to Italy and also as a policy and there is a way of managing sports these days. Sports the world over is not managed by Government, it is managed by the private sector.  

Hon. Aggrey Awori was an ambassador in Washington and Belgium for so many years; he should know better; managing sports now is done by the private sector. Even if you see the President’s manifesto, it is very clear that we will create an environment for the private sector to contribute to sports management in this country. In that particular issue, actually as in Brussels, so many companies came forward to assist Government in taking Boniface Kiprop to Italy where he broke the world record. Thank you.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker - (Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER:  No, no, continue, honourable member.

MR ABURA PIRIR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for his input, not forgetting the individual people who came up to support sports, like Ezra, who really facilitated the achievements of the last athletes who got us a junior medal.

What I am talking about here is that our Government input, if you want sports to regain its former glory like in the olden days, let us separate the Ministry of Sports from Education and it goes back to Culture and Community, which is today under the Ministry of Gender. The Ministry of Education is already too wide; it cannot handle this issue. Let this sports activity go to Gender so that the money can go directly to the colleges and schools, to the district sports officers for building up the potential of sports.  

Mr Speaker, I hear the bell ringing and yet people contributed more than myself. I was given the opportunity, I beg for more time.  

I would like also to say something about the Police. Mr Speaker, today we are battling the war of corruption in Uganda. In Karimojong we have a saying that, “If you want to kill a snake, get a short stick, go near the snake, hit it on the head”. Likewise, if you want to get rid of corruption in Uganda, facilitate the Police. The welfare of the Police should be improved; that will be the end of the story of corruption. What can a policeman do with a salary of Shs 50,000 or Shs 70,000 or Shs 100,000 when somebody can come and corrupt him with Shs 100,000? In Kenya a policemen is paid an equivalent of half a million Uganda shillings. Our police officers are underpaid. I am proposing that the salary of police personnel should be raised to Shs 300,000 then the work on corruption by the IGG, the Auditor-General, and all Government inputs will reduce because the policeman will be half way in the field.

Another alarming thing is fire. The other day the minister was told to make a statement about the fire. Our negligence is very dangerous. The fire brigade is a scientific section in the Uganda Police whose budget is even higher than defence, because the way they make their budget, they make it basing on the types of fires. We have got four types of fires; we have electricity, oil fire, natural fire and gas fire. All these require special chemicals. These days it is outdated to use a fire engine, which runs at the speed of a chameleon, to go to rescue people in Nakawa. We need a helicopter now, a fire helicopter. You can see now they have initiated what we call one way driving traffic, which is blocking the advantage of the fire brigade people. So there should be fire helicopters so that when there is a call to stop a fire, they fly. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, on health, we in Karamoja we are at a disadvantage. A region of one million Ugandans does not have a referral hospital. Could the Minister of Health endeavour to put aside some funds for Karamoja to have a referral hospital, because we have already got the municipality? So all the patients in Karamoja are to be ferried here to Mulago. At times you know ethnic problems, when you go to the neighbour – kindly, I cry, give us a referral hospital.

Finally - Mr Speaker, people have consumed my time and I am one of the rare people who speak here. This does not mean that I do not have the ideas, I am not bankrupt; I am totally rich with ideas, but I don’t like duplicating.  

I would like the Minister of Local Government to clarify why Karamoja is being floated. One time it goes to the North, another time to the East, another time it is just Karamoja. Please, for the sake of our regional administration, we belong to the North. Right from the colonial time, our provincial education officers were from the North, in Gulu; even the provincial commission was from Gulu. I also studied from Karamoja up to Gulu. So we belong to the North, stop floating us. Does Karamoja have legs? Every time there is a project, which is benefiting people, they float us to Karamoja where there is no project. When there is a project, which is – please -(Laughter)

Mr Speaker, finally, there about 10,000 children in Karamoja who have nowhere to go after senior four and senior six. I repeat, kindly elevate us and give us an institution, which can offer people diploma courses or certificates at national level. I thank you; see you next time.

4.16
MS ROSE MUNYIRA (Woman Representative, Busia): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion and I would like to start with the Education sector. I appreciate the budget effort to promote UPE. In the Budget Speech, Shs 10 billion was allocated to the Education sector to cater for recruitment of primary school teachers and Shs 9.9 billion for the recruitment of our secondary school teachers. I think this is a good gesture and I am sure it will go a long way to reduce the problems that have been facing this sector as far as the teacher student ratio is concerned.

Mr Speaker, however, I would like the Minister in charge of this sector to come up with a policy to reduce the drop out rates in the schools. There are very high levels of dropouts both at primary and secondary level, right from P.1 to senior six. There is a lot of concern about taking children to school but there is minimum concern about keeping them in the schools. This has reflected badly even in the labour market. 

I was at one time addressing a school in my constituency and I was told that in that particular school there was just one female teacher. This in fact emphasizes the fact that the dropout rate of the girls is even worse. When you compare the two sexes, the girls drop out much more for various reasons and it is reflected, as I have said, in the labour market. We know very well the importance of having these female teachers in the schools. So, if a school can have only one female teacher - and even in the health services -(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, PRIMARY EDUCATION (Mrs Geraldine Bitamazire): Thank you very much for giving way my colleague and I thank you, Mr Speaker. Training as a teacher is a career, which is picked by the individual concerned, some become doctors, others accountants, drivers, and engineers. So, if we do not have enough supply of female teachers we cannot create them. The problem we have is that when female teachers get married, or when they get children they tend to stay with their families and if you have a surplus of female teachers in Kampala, you cannot force them to go to Busia or any other district. Many of them would prefer to be deployed or employed where their families are and this is a problem. 

I think in a democratic country like ours, we cannot really force people into professions. What we are trying to do now is to attract teachers to remote areas by constructing teachers’ houses. We think if a married woman teacher has a house, probably the husband will transfer to where the wife is teaching. So, Government is doing everything possible to: one, attract young girls to become teachers by making primary teacher education free. It is free right now.

Secondly, we are trying to put up houses so that we can transfer them and then their husbands would leave their jobs in Kampala and probably transfer to join their wives. We have a problem with female teachers, their deployment, recruitment and so on but Government as you know is trying their best on that issue.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform the Minister that the actual problem with female teachers down there is not about looking for where their husbands are. I think this is down playing the real problem. We know that the working conditions for women in this country are very unfriendly; even right from our Parliament here, it was created to be a male institution; that is it. And so even when we go to the schools, there is no accommodation for this lady, coupled with the domestic workload and all those other responsibilities. 

There is no way you expect a female teacher to come to school carrying a baby and she does not have where to put that baby while she goes to class. There are no maternal facilities for them and at the end of the day a woman will jump on a bicycle, ride six kilometres back home with a baby strapped on her back and maybe does the cooking. I would like the Minister to look at this problem this way so that she works hard and tries to address this problem of the female teachers very affirmatively. I am sure the teaching profession is one area where the women in this country really love to be. Thank you.

MR KAGIMU: Mr Speaker, I remember at one time hon. Aggrey Awori brought a motion on the Floor so that MPs who have babies could be given some facilities here to breastfeed. If that failed to take off, you think they can give them to the miserable teachers in the villages down there?

MR AWORI: We were successful in our request and there is a place in this building for that. The Sergeant-at-Arms knows where feeding mothers can do their maternity work.

MS MUNYIRA: I thank all the honourable colleagues who have given information, but my main concern, which I would like the Minister to address, is the issue of the girls dropping out of school. In fact if there were many or enough female teachers, if there were enough young girls remaining in schools and many of them qualifying as teachers then you would not even have a problem of deploying them in the upcountry places. But in a situation where a school has just one female teacher, I think that needs to be looked into. I would also like to emphasize the issue of keeping these girls in schools so that this dropping out of various places is stopped. I think it is not really fair to them. 

Mr Speaker, I would also like to comment on the issue of graduated tax. The Minister in his Budget Speech proposed that this tax be reviewed in the financial year 2005-2006. The idea is not bad, neither is the idea of paying graduated tax. The problem comes about with how that money is utilized. The Minister said he would call upon the Minister for Local Government to address problems concerning tax collection. I think collection is not a problem because when you go to the Local Governments, in fact the people concerned are very vigilant about collecting this money but the concern of the people is how that money is utilized. Utilisation leaves a lot that could be desired –(Interruption)

MR KIWANDA: Thank you very much for giving way. I want to inform the Member holding the Floor that the biggest problem with graduated tax is actually collection. In my constituency alone I have lost about four people, they were all shot in the process of collection of graduated tax. So the system being used is so harsh, people are being mistreated. I want to inform you that collection of this tax is really very bad.

MRS ZZIWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Over the weekend I met my constituents in Luzira Parish, Luzira Prisons and Butabika. They were very concerned about the collection of monies of Kampala City Council; this is the Local Government within Kampala. They were arguing that before the Local Government Development Programme was initiated Kampala City Council used to do a lot of programmes within the city council. But since LGDP was introduced they cannot see anything, which is financed by local Government and they asking, where does the money go? Most of them continue to pay; they have even gone to the extent of paying ground rent levied in the urban setup but they do not see where the money goes. That is the supplementary information I wanted to give.

MS MUNYIRA: Thank you very much hon. Zziwa. I think you have pushed my point further. What I meant about the problem not being the collection was that the way they collect it may not be best, but they make sure that they collect the tax. The problem is with utilization; there is really nothing much to show that comes out of that money. The people may afford the Shs 10,000 to pay as graduated tax but the problem is; what does that money do to help the citizens of this country?  

I would like to raise something about land, just briefly. In the Budget Speech the Minister talks of reforms in the land registry to meet modern, private sector growth needs. This is a very good idea in itself and for this country. I think this was long overdue.  

The land registration system in this country is very laborious and complicated. You find that the information about land registration is not something you come by very easily. A few times I have addressed people in Busia concerning registration of land but when you talk about it the information is completely strange to the common man and woman. I do not know whether it has been deliberate or due to lack of funds but information about registration of land to benefit our people has not been flowing very easily.  

Mr Speaker, the system is also very costly as it stands today, for any ordinary citizen to undertake. We need to set up a system that is functional, and which caters for all levels of people in this country. It is not fair for people to move from the villages to say regional level to register their land, then to move to Entebbe. Some people try and just leave their land leases there. So, Mr Speaker, I appreciate this move and I pray that the Minister moves very fast as per his programme to implement it.

As I talk now people in my district are suffering at the hands of some gold mining investors who just took advantage of them. They do not have much knowledge about land registration. He told them that he had acquired the land in a year when the present Constitution had not come in place. So that land where they have been living for many years, even where their ancestors lived, belongs to the central Government and does not belong to them and they do not have any right of compensation whatsoever to that land. So, I received this suggestion with open hands and I know that it will go a long way to help my people come out of that kind of problem. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.31
MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I rise to support the motion – (Interruption)

MR SEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, as the debate goes on, we have been given responses and they set the Parliamentary debate 2004/2005 Budget Speech. Mine is about the procedure used in answering questions, because when they give them to us like now it is likely to distract our attention –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: It is an advance copy; as far as I am concerned it has not been presented. Take it as an advance copy of what somebody is going to say.

MRS MASIKO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I support this motion but I have a few comments to make. 

I thank Government and of course hon. Ssendaula that at long last he has cleared the air about the privatization of Kinyara. On page 9 of the speech he says so many things and that Kinyara Sugar works and 20 percent stake in the New Vision Printing and Publishing Limited will be privatized through public offering of shares. He concludes that in order to promote public participation in privatization, priority will be given to divesting the remaining, well-managed public enterprises through public offering of shares. This has been the cry of Ugandans and I can assure you, honourable members, keep an open eye. Kinyara is well managed and it is doing well. As I talk now, Kinyara has embarked on a master plan to expand the factory using its own resources. So I hope this will be implemented.

Mr Speaker, I remember we asked for the land and resettlement policy but to my knowledge I do not know of any up to now. As the previous speaker has said, there is also confusion in my district. This is about Kiryandongo UPDF Farm. Even when the Army took over this land in the 1970s, those people who were there were never compensated; they were evicted and they are somehow roaming around. We have informed this House that they need to be resettled. As if that were not enough, when the Army took over this big chunk of land and it never utilized it properly. Therefore, people after all were never compensated, they came back and settled on the unused land.  

Recently we heard that this land was given to an investor in the names of Mukwano to grow some oil seeds and these people are being harassed to leave. What is interesting is that even some Mukwano workers have been victimized; their work permits were terminated on the pretext that they failed to stop the encroachers. But Mukwano himself as an organization did not evict these people! How can the workers evict these people? As a district we have decided that eviction should stop and I hope Mukwano and the government hear our plea until these people are compensated. We do not want poaching to come in Masindi and I do not want to carry people who are landless to Parliament like some other people do. So, please, kindly help.

Number three is on page 71 of the Report of the Parliamentary Budget Committee on Indicative Preliminary Revenue and Expenditure Framework. There are some people in the names of mobilisers; they used to work for Government and were employed by the Movement Secretariat and the President’s Office. A total of 251 were terminated but their gratuity was never paid and up to date I have been receiving complaints, especially from those from my district that they have not been fully paid. The practice has been that every year these mobilisers would be given their gratuity but I am surprised that these have never received their gratuity. The Minister without Portfolio was stepping in for the Minister of Finance and these were directly under him as the NPC; he could have some good information on how soon these will be settled.  

Mr Speaker, I am really perturbed about the inconsistency in the policies – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: There is a ready answer now.

THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Kabakumba for giving way. It is true that there are retired mobilisers and those in the Secretariat now who are owed some gratuity arrears. Whenever we get some money we have been allocating some every month towards settling these arrears. We are also negotiating with the Minister of Finance to ensure that as soon as possible we could put this behind us. So, the matter is known and every effort is being made to settle it. 

MRS MASIKO: Thank you very much for the information, but “how soon” is the question I am facing every time I go to my constituency.  

Lastly, I am worried about the inconsistence in policies from the Ministry of Education. I will start with UPE. Of course the numbers and dropout rates were contested in this House last week but after UPE, what happens? Government is talking of granting aid to schools. There are seed schools but as we talk now there is no money for this financial year to grant aid to any school, even the seed schools. What will happen? In my district there are many sub-counties, which do not have any Government-aided secondary school. There was a policy of a polytechnic per sub-county. We were so excited especially for us from rural districts where the UPE graduates do not make it through to secondary and tertiary institutions but as I speak now, that one has died but there is no substitute. At least in my district we have not seen any such polytechnic –(Interruption)

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker and my colleague. I just want to put the record straight. It is not true that the project or scheme of a community polytechnic per sub-county had died or is dead; it is alive. So far we have 16 operating community polytechnics in the country and we are expecting 14 more during this new financial year. They are going to be constructed and then from that stage we shall have one per district and we roll the programme down in phases. So, it is not dead but we were advised by experts that we can only implement that programme in a phased manner. We shall start with the pilot scheme then we roll it down as we evaluate and learn lessons and improve as we move along. So, it is alive. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MRS MASIKO: Thank you very much honourable minister and I am happy and excited to learn that the programme is still alive. The problem is that when you come to piloting, Masindi is never considered. So, we take it that the programmes are not in place because we are equally needy but we are not taken on, on these important programs.   

I want to also –(Interruption)

MRS ZIIWA: Thank you very much. The clarification I want to seek from the Minister is whether the ministry has really gone into partnership with the private developers who would be very willing to co-operate in the area of technical schools. Is it true the ministry fears going into that venture itself because it is very expensive, and it is not excited about going into partnership so that the private developers can for instance provide structures and the ministry provides technical equipment so that our graduates of UPE can have somewhere to go in some way or another? I wanted just to throw it at you honourable minister because it is a challenge.  

MRS RWAKIMARI: Thank you my colleague. I would like to know from the Minister of Education the progress of the EDB Bank project in construction of laboratories and libraries because we cannot continue talking about fostering science subjects without laboratories on the ground. (Applause)

MRS MASIKO: Thank you very much. All those are manifestations of inconsistent policies. Mr Speaker, I was talking about the marginalisation of Masindi District and Bunyoro, really. We had our only NTC in the whole of Bunyoro; that is Masindi NTC. When the axe came, it was the first victim. Those of you who do not know our history, the present Kichwamba Technical Institute was supposed to be located at Kabalega in Masindi District. For unknown reasons it was shifted to Kichwamba, and several other institutions. Even the only NTC – hon. Pirir was lamenting here, which we heard about. At least for him he still has it but for us it has been closed. 

Mr Speaker, the Minister told us that the female teachers find it difficult to go long distances to teach. We had hoped that if Masindi NTC was in place, more women would go for training as teachers and, therefore, teach in our schools in Masindi District. Now, what is the fate? Is it possible to return our NTC? I know you are talking of the land being Church land; Masindi NTC had its own land, which is not Church land. If that is the problem, the land is there; kindly reconsider Bunyoro and give us Masindi NTC back, please. 

Lastly, I do not know the policy of nursery education. You have told us now and again that this is a private arena, but the loan money that my committee recommended under the Nutrition and Early Childhood project, I saw that you were constructing nursery schools in the name of early childhood resource centres. Can I know the policy on nursery education?

Last weekend I was in my constituency, they were putting me to task that, yes, there is UPE; what is Government doing about nursery education? I bluntly told them that that was private business. But I know that the money of the nutrition project is Government money and unfortunately, as usual, Masindi was not among the pilot districts; we are still going to miss out. Since this project is not going on very well, even the counter-funding money is not there, what is in store for some of our districts, Masindi in particular, to really – somebody is telling me we are being victimized because we fought Bazungu, and rightly so. We shall continue so long as they do not give us what is due to us. I will leave it at that.

Staffing is also a problem. Mr Speaker, since 1997 we have been building classes under UPE. Can’t we shift policy and we concentrate on building houses for teachers? I know there is a provision, I think, of 15 percent or less, but this is discretionally if you think you can - and you know the politics at district level, they may or may not even give you when your area is so marginalized. For instance in Masindi District, Bujenje County Kasenene Primary School has over 1,000 children but the only small structure we put there has one teacher. The others are saying, “We cannot go there”. Even the headmaster refused to stay there. We have been trying to go to the district, I even talked to the Minister in charge of UPE, he said, “No, this is at the district level”. I went to the district, they gave only four houses and they were distributed, somehow. Can’t there be a deliberate policy developed and monies sent to the districts on condition of building houses for teachers? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.48
MRS LYDIA BALEMEZI (Woman Representative, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also wish to support the report on the Minister of Finance’s Budget speech, but there are few points on which I would need some clarification. 

This is in regard to the Ministry of Ethics. When I looked at the Budget and what has been budgeted for the Ministry of Ethics and that of Gender, I see that a lot needs to be looked into. As you know, Mr Speaker and honourable members, the women especially of this country, fall in these two ministries and out there in the country they have not see a lot being done by these ministries. So much has gone astray and a lot of immorality has been promoted in the country. But when we look at what the Ministries of Ethics and Gender are doing for the women, our colleagues feel that we, women legislators, are not doing much though we fall under these ministries and they are the backbone of whatever we do here as legislators.  

The Ministry of Ethics and Integrity has not been very well facilitated to send its officials on the ground. In fact, I have not seen personnel from the Ministry of Ethics; I do not know whether it is the minister alone who operates as a ministry; I need to be guided on this. I have never seen any ministry official from the Ministry of Ethics; and if they are there, then they are not being seen. It could be that there is very poor facilitation -(Interruption)

DR WANDIRA-KAZIBWE: I am seeking clarification because, with your permission, sometimes I am not here. I am not aware that there is a Ministry of Ethics and Integrity; I would like to be clarified, Mr Speaker. When I last knew of it, there was a Minister of State responsible for Ethics and Integrity under the President’s Office. I know that the Ministry is the President’s Office. I need that clarification, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: In other words, it is a department within the directorate.

MRS BALEMEZI: Thank you, my colleague, and I welcome you back to the House.  

MRS ZZIWA: Maybe, Mr Speaker, let me give this information. I thought the Minister should have been here to put this clearly because our colleague is requesting for this information. As the Chairperson of the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs, we have just had an opportunity to meet with the Minister – yes, is the Minister here? The Prime Minister is here, okay.

MRS BALEMEZI: Mr Speaker, since the Prime Minister was not very prepared for this, let me continue with my -(Interruption)

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, I am always disaster-prepared -(Laughter)- but I am disappointed that the Minister is not here. I am disappointed because they must be here to answer. But the Minister of State for Finance is taking down the questions and he will be able to prompt him to answer. So mine was deliberate silence in anger. I thank you.

MRS BALEMEZI: Mr Speaker, I think the Prime Minister’s response has highlighted a lot about the Department of Ethics and Integrity but we were expecting quite a lot from the President’s Office where that Minister falls because he is not being heard or seen and I thought that maybe it is because of lack of facilitation. So, I request that the Minister of Finance should perhaps allocate some more funds for this department so that we as women and other vulnerable groups can be handled and our problems and issues addressed in that respect. 

For example, these days we are hearing so much of these nude dancers and many members, I do not mean of this Parliament, but many people attend these shows - even young children who fall under the UPE programme have started attending such night programmes. So, even the UPE Minister might lose out on her efforts.

With the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, I feel that the Ministry was overstaffed or it has too many departments within one Ministry. We tend to lose out as people who would wish to be handled by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. And our minister, having these five departments under one person, sometimes she feels overloaded because of lack of good facilitation. She does not surface in most of the women’s issues, say workshops and meetings, but I think it is because she has so many ministries under her and she has to move about.

THE SPEAKER: Ministries? I thought it is one Ministry.

MRS BALEMEZI: The Ministry of Gender.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, as one Ministry. They are not Ministries.

MRS BALEMEZI: Yes, Mr Speaker. She has so many departments within her Ministry and she is not adequately –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, ELDERY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS (Ms Florence Nayiga): Thank you very much Mr Speaker and thank you my colleague hon. Balemezi. I appreciate the concern about the insufficient resources or facilitation but I would like to raise the issue that it is not the number of departments in the Ministry that can fail us to perform. For sure we have enough staff, each department has a Minister of State and it is only when the Ministry is personalized - because if the Minister delegates me to represent her at a function, I would expect that the organizers would accept me because I carry the information and the message from such a Minister. 

So, I call upon our colleagues to appreciate the fact that the Ministry is quite huge but it has the political leadership. We also normally have top management meetings where we sit, discuss issues and have a common vision as we implement the programmes. So, I would like to call upon you not to feel disappointed. If you do not see her in person but once the Ministry is there with you, accept it. And for those issues that you really feel you want to see her personally, then the office is always open. That is the information I wanted to share with you.

MRS BALEMEZI: Thank you –(Interruption)

MRS NYOMBI: Further information, hon. Balemezi. I want to inform the Minister of Gender that last month Kayunga District held the Day of the African Child and we wrote a letter to the Ministry of Gender. Unfortunately, I was chasing it myself, not with the Minister but with the Ministry and a day before the function I had to go there because I kept on calling and I was tossed here and there. I only went there a day to the function and there was no document, no official to go and really officiate at the function in the district. So, I support hon. Balemezi, something must be done. 

MRS BALAMEZI: Thank you, colleague -(Interruption)   

MRS MEHANGYE: Supplementary, Mr Speaker, on the information about the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. On Women’s Day in Kamwenge I did write and invited the Minister, and I actually followed up this invitation. The Minister never delegated any of the people in her departments to take over and come to Kamwenge. I actually took the initiative and talked to hon. Nayiga Sekabira who accepted to come to Kamwenge. Unfortunately, she was not facilitated. Her old vehicle could not make it to Kamwenge and she also was unable to come. 

So in Kamwenge I had to – fortunately she did fax to me the speech that she had and – Mr Speaker, something must be done about that Ministry.

MS NAYIGA: I would like to take this opportunity to inform my honourable colleagues that now I have a brand new vehicle and I will be there. (Laughter).

THE SPEAKER:  Continue, please.

MRS BALEMEZI: Yes, Mr Speaker, I thank you and I would like to thank my colleagues who gave us more information to bring out my point. I think you have also seen the gravity of the need for more funding for the Ministry of Gender and the Departments of Ethics and Integrity.
I once again wish to talk about rehabilitating the old bridge between Jinja and Mukono. This is an alternative road to Kampala. Kampala being the city and Jinja Road being the outlet to the East and the North, we are faced with a lot of problems, especially now as we are going in the rainy season. We get so many accidents on the main Jinja Road and whenever there are such accidents, sometimes a number of vehicles get involved in the accident and the road gets blocked for some time. However, there is an old alternative road, which even has a bridge, which bridge is also not being used by vehicles and pedestrians because of lack of rehabilitation.  

Mr Speaker, sometimes I fear when I see the train moving on top of that bridge. The reason we were given for the road not to be rehabilitated is that it has a weak foundation and it would take big sums of money to rehabilitate it. But at the same time the train keeps on passing on top of the bridge, which railway line shares the same foundation as the foundation that was made for the road.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, TRANSPORT (Mr Andruale Awuzu): Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you hon. Balemezi for giving way. It is true there is an alternative route to Jinja from Lugazi; that is in fact the old Jinja Road and if you read in your policy statement from the Ministry, we are actually tarmacking the section of the road from Njeru up to Nyenga this financial year. We shall continue like that until we tarmac it up to Lugazi. It means there will be an alternative route, should anything happen in Mabira. 

The railway bridge, you will agree with me, has also been weak and it has just been repaired – if you are aware. It has been repaired with funds from the European Union, but the railway bridge and all the small road bridges do not have the same foundation. If you noticed, the road bridge is much lower and it is on the side. Therefore, it cannot have the same foundation as the railway bridge, which is much higher and definitely has to have a much stronger foundation than the road bridge. But, you should not worry because we have so far advanced plans of putting a Nile bridge somewhere around the Owen Falls either upstream or downstream. So, there will be a second bridge.  Thank you very much.

MRS BALEMEEZI: I thank you very much, honourable minister, for that information. But as you hear, Mr Speaker, they are thinking of coming up with a new bridge, which will take even more than what it would have taken to rehabilitate the existing bridge for the cars and pedestrians. But since that is what the ministry has opted to do, maybe we shall go with that and I would be very happy if we had an alternative route between Jinja and Kampala. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Dr Kiyonga.

5.04
THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTIFOLIO (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I also rise to support the motion on the Floor. In doing so I want to make particular reference to the contribution of hon. Kamuntu when he seconded the motion, and also the very strong points that hon. Sekikubo made this afternoon. 

The first point that hon. Kamuntu made was that when we are looking at growth in the economy, we as leaders and as Members of Parliament, we should go below the figure and look sector by sector where this growth is taking place. I think that was a key contribution, because unless we watch which sector is growing we may find it difficult to distribute the benefits of growth. And if we find a sector that employs most of our people and it is not growing, even if the micro economy is growing, then we cannot impact on the poverty among our people. So, this point made by hon. Kamuntu was very critical. 

In the last Session, towards the end, the committee chaired by hon. Rwamirama made a presentation here about this AGOA factory but more importantly, it went in depth to look at the cotton sector. It profiled for us what benefits we could get if we could do more in the cotton sector, what added value we could have, what back and forward linkages we could have and it was clear to me that following that advice could assist us to reach many people in the economy and, therefore, impact on the economy. 

I think each one of us represents a constituency. It is okay for us to come here and say, “The economy is growing but we are not seeing the benefits in the village.” In a general debate like this Members of Parliament should come and say in specific terms what is happening in their constituencies, but it should not be general. In your constituency, is there more milk? Is there more cotton? This is in line with what hon. Kamuntu said. What sector of the economy is growing, is this a part of the economy that is affecting most people? This offers to all of us opportunities to see the whole country through our leaders the hon. Members of Parliament.  

Indeed my perception, Mr Speaker, is that our people in the countryside do not like us being called legislators. That is why we are saying that we are using our money to try and relieve some problems there. Our people see us as development officers, as people who know their problems and who will help to work out solutions. I think they are right because what other route do they have to do this? They have to extend their problems. So, I want to support this point by hon. Kamuntu and I am sure in the government we are going to take it seriously. We must disaggregate this GDP and see which sector is growing. 

Another honourable member even said that we should tell the people how much of this GDP is in each region, how much is in each district and how it is changing. I think this is still in line with what hon. Kamuntu said.

Then hon. Sekikubo today made another very critical point - although I am from the Executive, I liked his criticism - that it is inadequate, it is misleading for us to compare ourselves just with Africa because Africa is the poorest continent, it is the least moving continent in terms of economic development. So, we cannot be satisfied by saying that we are ahead of a number of countries here. So, I think he made a point. Our economic growth can, yes, be compared with Africa but even beyond. Our goals should be higher. 

Hon. Kamuntu, also said that we should support each other as frontbenchers and also backbenchers because we are in the same country; through criticism and positive proposals of how we can go forward. And I think this budget demonstrates some serious developments in our economy where both sides, front and the back, should work together. If you look at the nominal size of the budget this financial year and you look at the nominal size last year, we are in about the same place and the figure is so many trillion - 3 point something. 

This is worrying! The population has grown, there is inflation but the size of the budget is about the same. This is a big worry, which should concern both of us. What is happening? Is it the rate of growth that we need to work out solutions for, all of us in order to see how we can move forward? So, I think this was a good articulation and illustration by the two colleagues.

I also want to indicate to our colleagues on the backbench that this problem of corruption is also felt in the Executive. We should not look at it as if the Executive is defensive of corruption. This is a problem that is hurting this country seriously and I think this is where we need to work together.  If you look at what is going on in HIV/AIDS, the government had its structures, still has its structures, the Uganda AIDS Commission, President’s Office, Ministry of Health; it is a multi-sectoral approach and we are trying to see what we can do. But we came here on the Floor discussing with our colleagues in Parliament and we agreed that we should have a special committee on this problem of HIV/AIDS and after a search under hon. Wacha, we agreed that we needed a standing committee on this major problem.

We have just come back from Bangkok, Mr Speaker as you know, and really I would like to commend our colleagues who were on the committee; they carried the Ugandan flag very high in Bangkok on this subject. (Applause). This Friday there was a national meeting convened by this committee. People are being invited from all over the country to come and get a briefing on HIV/AIDS by the Parliamentary Committee on HIV/AIDS supporting the work of the backbench. So, as we talk about corruption, it has been interpreted that institutionally in Parliament we are not informed to fight corruption properly. The best institution we have is the Public Accounts Committee, which is retrospective in terms of how it works.

I would like to –(Interruption)

MRS ZZIWA: Thank you very much, hon. National Political Commissar. I am sorry about this disturbance but I think it is very important. The fact that we are supporting the co-operation between the Executive and Parliament I think is important. It should be brought forward that when the Executive gets a change in policy or conceives a change in policy, it is very prudent that it gives an opportunity to Parliament either through a sector committee or through an arrangement for us to discuss and understand this policy so that we go along together. 

On several occasions where we have had vivid conflicts between the Executive and Parliament, it is because the Executive has had a policy shift. I may mention some of the policies where we used to know that we are moving like this and if I could just quote one: for a long time we knew co-operatives were dead or they have no progress. Today we are being told, “Let us go co-operative”. And we have not even had an opportunity for the mobilisation, which hon. Speciosa Wandira did for us in the regions - we did not have an opportunity here in our sector to understand co-operatives. Why are they progressive now and they were retrogressive then? And many others; the list is endless.  

But we need this co-operation. We need to come along. At one time we had a very deep argument about the strategic sectors in this country and others were saying livestock is not, banking is not, this is and all of a sudden now we are seeing shifts. When these shifts come we cannot support them fully, and we continue to have arguments. I thought I should bring this that we do not bring the arguments because we do not want to support Government, but we bring arguments because you have not come forth to bring us on board. 

PROF. RUGUMAYO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The co-operatives are alive and kicking. Only last week the President launched the Parliamentary Co-operative –(Laughter)- just as an example – the Parliamentary Co-operative is worth nearly Shs 800 million. We have more than 60 new co-operatives vibrant throughout the country; we have smaller societies, which are coming up. On the average every district now has over 10 new co-operatives. I thank you, Sir.

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, Mr Minister and Mr Speaker. It is true Government is sending a lot of money for development purposes at local government level. But recently I had His Excellency visiting my constituency and he tried to tell people how much money is sent to the district. Before I even said anything, people shouted from the crowd, “We do not see that money you are talking about.” I think we have a problem. The ministries from which this money come should go down - if it is for roads, a certain amount of money is sent to Mpigi District say Shs 20 million, Shs 30 million – should check what this money has done. 

At one time I had a small road to my place, which is supposed to be a sub-county road. They cost it at about Shs 9.5 million and they said they could not raise that money. I tried to squeeze my pockets and got only Shs 1.3 million. I asked the district engineer to give me a grader and they graded that road very well, only that I did not get culverts. But the road, which they had estimated to cost Shs 9.5 million, was graded at less than Shs 2 million. Therefore, Government should be very serious on this and the Ministries of Health, Local Government, and the co-operatives as the minister has said, the Ministry of Education –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I am a Member of Parliament in my own right and I must say that regularly I have been getting information from the Ministries of Local Government and Education, giving us the breakdown of funds that are being sent down. It is the work of a Member of Parliament, having got this one, to go down and tell the people in his/her constituency that, “As a Member of Parliament, I know we have sent you this money for this item, and this for the other item.” As a Member of Parliament you have to monitor and help your constituents know that funds have been sent so that they can also follow it up.

That is how we should do it. If you leave it to the public officers, suppose they do not want to reveal it to the public that they have got the money? They only cry that they have not got the money, and then this problem will never be solved. But I must say that for me I get information about the breakdown of what has been sent every month and what I do, of course, I mark my district and the municipality concerns and then the items. But I think they are doing it.
  
MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My problem is not knowing how much is going to the district. But I think the ministries should go and monitor these things. You see, we have organs like the RDC. He is supposed to monitor but he is not facilitated; we are equally not facilitated. How can you go round the whole district? By the way, we have about three constituencies in my district; if you say that the money, which was allocated to roads, did not come to my district, they will tell you it went to Gomba or to Mawokota South or to Butambala. I have no mandate to go round the whole district –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I am not supposed to debate but are you suggesting that roads should supervise themselves? Because when you are talking about ministries, the ministries are using public officers, these are the ones to utilise the funds that are being sent. Suppose they get the funds and they do not use them for the intended purpose, who will supervise? I think we, Members of Parliament, should play a role in supervising our constituencies.  

DR KIYONGA: I thank you, Mr Speaker, for that clarification. I think the point that hon. Mutuluuza was making has been very well addressed by the Speaker, who is also a Member of Parliament like ourselves. 

On the point raised by hon. Margaret Zziwa, the point I am making is that we are two sides of the same coin and working together can mean that sometimes there is a conflict. But because there is a method of working together, we eventually get out of the conflict for the better of the country. If you take for example the history of the Budget Act, this was initiated by the Backbench. Many of us in the Executive, including myself, were very apprehensive and it required the leadership of hon. Dr Wandira Kazibwe to say, “No, let us listen to these people”. The Bill came and eventually you know it has disciplined both sides. We are now regimented about the Budget and the country is better off, at least in terms of how we are tracking the Budget. So, I think we have just to keep tracking weaknesses and see how to deal with them. 

But my point is on corruption. I am saying that on corruption, it will help if within Parliament we also have an institutional mechanism to help the fight against corruption. (Mr Odit rose_). Mr Speaker, since there are many of us who wish to speak, I think I will end here, except my colleague maybe wants some clarification.

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, now that the National Political Commissar has started responding to certain issues of general concern, I would like to request Government to reflect seriously on how they have been computing their Gross Domestic Product. Our economy is basically agricultural and we have no record, no census on agriculture. Even this simple response on page 2 from the Minister of Finance clearly indicates that it is a sensitive matter and it is difficult for them to compute the GDP based on agriculture. And from our committee, we have also come to appreciate, because we have invited consultants to make their presentations on their findings on this sector. They have discovered that agriculture has never had any census for a very long time - if anything it is more than ten years now. And the Ministry of Finance comes with a very elaborate GDP; where do they get the statistics from? 

We have insisted that since agriculture contributes over 40 percent to the GDP, out of that about 17 percent is from livestock, we believe that Government should think seriously and come up with more trusted, elaborate and accurate figures on agriculture so that we can be able to address the area of our economic performance from empirical data. As far as we are concerned, really National Political Commissar, I think the government should come up with a better explanation and response to issues raised by Parliament other than this paragraph, which we have seen on page 2. It is unimpressive, disappointing and insufficient. Thank you very much.

DR KIYONGA: I am glad that my colleague got the opportunity to raise that point before I resumed my seat. This GDP, where are the figures got from?  That is a good question. But you also know these figures are not only found in the Government of Uganda’s books, they are in the World Bank, they are in IMF and other development partners. But I like your question. You doubt, are these figures correct? What I would expect from a committee of Parliament, an independent arm of the state, is not only to ask - because as the Speaker was saying - those are the people bringing the figures and you are saying, “Come with other figures”. 
We need capacity within Parliament itself, on a serious matter like this, to go through research and make a critique of this information and then when we find a fault we say, “You see, you have been giving us wrong information; see what we have produced”. In that way we strengthen each other. So, I think we are together. We just need to really continue pushing and helping each other.

Finally, is the issue of hunger. Hon. Wonekha has raised the issue of land in certain parts of the country. We are almost settling conflicts on land everyday. Some parts of the country do not want other people to go there, others do not have land and we do not have money. I think it is also a historical role of this House to settle this problem, because people are killing each other over land. People have no food, some people have land; others do not have. We are the same country but we cannot share the same land. So, I do hope one day we will deal with this matter. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR BESISIRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not know if the NPC was running away after he saw me standing up. He is saying that we are not helping, but the government itself does not want us to help it, because we have asked Government to put in place a land policy for this country, we have asked Government to put in place the settlement policy, it is not coming. So how do you expect us to help you? 

The NPC himself chaired a committee on the conflicts in Kibaale and he has never reported to this House. I do not know whether he is waiting for another conflict then possibly he will – how does he expect us to help?  

He is talking about corruption, that we are partners. There was a commission into URA, what happened? Does this House know what happened, how do we help? So, we want to be partners, but are we given the information? It seems every time Members of Parliament here raised issues the Executive tends to go on the defensive instead of appreciating that there could be a problem in this country, there could be a problem in this sector and I think possibly we should see how best to handle it. In that way we can be partners and move very well. Thank you very much.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker -(Interruption)
 
THE SPEAKER: Is this on land?

MS ALASO: Yes, still on hunger, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: On what?

MS ALASO: On famine. 

THE SPEAKER: No, now we are on land really.

MS ALASO: Yes, what hon. Kiyonga is referring to. The fear in the Teso region is that we have suffered severe climatic changes. There has been no rain and one of the things we have been appealing to the Executive to do is to save the wetlands of Teso; knowing the central role the wetlands play in climatic modification.  

When the honourable minister comes up to say we are not working together, I would like him to tell me what he has done in order to save the wetlands of Teso, which have been occupied by pastoralists, in order to save the climate in the region so that we produce the food? Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, LANDS (Mr Baguma Isoke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Rt hon. Prime Minister made a signal to me that I should respond on behalf of the National Political Commissar on the issues raised on the land policy and the settlement policy, even the wetlands.  

THE SPEAKER: Is that how you communicate; he beckons you? Okay, proceed.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Thank you, Sir. There are certain instruments and certain documents that cannot be produced as soon as they are required or as soon as they are demanded. Producing a land policy is one of such instruments that cannot be produced in one year, or even two years. My ministry started working on the land policy for this country, drawing on a cross section of academicians and developers, and as you know the land policy is an involving matter. We are now at the first draft before it comes to Cabinet. 

However, Sir, as indeed the Sempebwa Commission did find out, this policy will be before Cabinet before the end of this year. But it has not been an easy thing to come by.

On the other hand, the land policy is scattered in many pieces of legislation. It is in the forestry law, in the wetlands law, in the wildlife law, and in various agricultural enactments. So, it is the aggregates of this that makes the land policy.

Regarding the resettlement policy for this country, before Parliament went on recess in the last Session, the First Deputy Prime Minister and the Minister responsible for Resettlement made a statement that his Ministry had evolved a policy on IDPs and a policy on refugees. On the drawing board was the resettlement policy. My Ministry of Lands is working with the Office of the Prime Minister to come up with a national resettlement policy. I cannot give the date but the technical people all over the country are working towards a national resettlement policy. 

This policy is towards implementing principles that are in the Constitution, in particular Article 29, that a citizen of Uganda has the right to move and settle anywhere in the country, but you cannot take that as a principle that can be implemented anyhow. There must be a guiding policy and the modus operandi of settling either being settled by Government or migrating like our ancestors have been migrating across the plains of Uganda.

Lastly, although we have not made a statement in the Plenary, there was a serious incident that occurred in the District of Kasese on the 2nd day of July this year. Developers, cattle keepers and cultivators in Kasese clashed over land and my Ministry moved fast to the spot, to put a halt to the clashes. We are now in the process of sub-dividing what used to be Ibuga Army Farm to the two communities, the cultivators and the cattle keepers. It will be appreciated that Kasese District is one of those districts where the carrying capacity of the land is below the optimum level and there are definite steps that Government is taking to rectify this.

In the Committee on Natural Resources, I will be making a statement next month about what we are doing in Kasese. At the beginning of this month I also made a statement regarding what Government is doing to resolve the historical and the emerging land problems in Kibaale District.

Finally, by 30th September my ministry will have named the commission of inquiry on the residual land problems in Kibaale District. I thank you, Sir.

DR KIYONGA: Let me just clarify two points. One was raised by hon. Alaso. She really raised it in a diplomatic way. I do concede that as far as Teso is concerned, we had a problem there with the wetlands, we moved in, but we appear to have done an incomplete job. I received information this afternoon from Prof. Omaswa that it appears there is more movement of people to the wetlands. I would like to request hon. Alaso and other colleagues from Teso that this time, let us move together. Let us not chase each other; let us move together to resolve that problem.

The other was the challenge by hon. Besisira on the Uganda Revenue Authority. I would be surprised if Government did not issue a statement on this issue of URA, if we did not, then we defaulted. But that is no excuse for Backbenchers to sit back and say, “They did not tell us anything”. History will ask you, “You were in Parliament; there was a commission of inquiry. If Government did not come up, what did you do?” You see! So, you have to ask; you have to push. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, honourable members, I have recorded those who want to speak, and you seem to be tired. I have seen many of you walking out; I have recorded you, Member for Busujju. I now want to make this statement that I should have made at the beginning, to inform you about certain developments going on here –(Interruption)- we are soon going to complete this debate. The ministers may come in at the end. By Thursday definitely we shall wind up this debate, but tomorrow we shall continue to receive your submissions.

I wanted to say that as you may have noticed, there is an on-going, countrywide debate ahead of the transition to the multi-party political system. The matter of financing political parties has emerged prominently as an issue for consideration. This matter is a responsibility that the Constitution gave to Parliament in Article 72(3) that Parliament shall by law regulate the financing and functioning of political organizations. This House did pass the Political Organisations Bill, 2002, on May 9th 2002, which Act by the same name is in place as Act No.18 of 2002. 

In this Act, section 14 has a provision in respect of restrictions on contribution from foreign sources as a way of how political parties may raise finances. In this context, the debate may ultimately involve this House revisiting the law of financing political parties. Different stakeholders have approached the Speaker to involve Parliament in the study of this matter well ahead of any process that may warrant us to look again at the existing legislation. The Speaker has, therefore, sought the advice of different parliamentarians on this matter of financing political parties and has constituted a steering committee of Members of Parliament to liaise with an independent consultant on this matter. 

I must say that I also consulted the NPC, he has also consulted others and the Members of Parliament on this steering committee are: hon. Ben Wacha, hon. Zziwa Nantongo, hon. Dora Byamukama, hon. Kizige Moses, hon. Kinobe, hon. Ephraim Kamuntu, hon. Kafiire Rainer, hon. Godfrey Ekanya, hon. Wadri Kassiano, and hon. Muruli Mukasa. 

Honourable members, I encourage you to generate ideas for this Steering Committee on the study of financing Political Parties. A study is very important because should we happen to revisit the law, then our decision will be based on scientific bases. This is what I wanted to inform you about - this steering committee. 

It was not easy for me to constitute this committee because as far as I know, currently Parliament is being run on a Movement Political System, although some people are challenging it. So, this is my attempt at having a cross section of Parliament being represented on this steering committee. But it is your committee, you will definitely share ideas with them and eventually they will make a report, which we are going to use with another consultant. A consultant has been identified who will help us to understand it. 

I agreed to set up this steering committee because of the constitutional provisions, which I have read to you that the responsibility to determine these rests with us. So, please support this committee. Thank you very much.

MR ANANG-ODUR: Mr Speaker, I wish to thank you and Government for this important initiative. I think it is an initiative in the right direction in the process to move from Movement system of governance to multi-party system of governance. 

I am just wondering as to whether it is possible for us in this committee you have set up to look into this financing arrangements, which you are thinking about, outside the POA. To me, really it is a sub-set of the POA because even if it were to be resolved now, there are a lot of disputes on this law. I see a situation where some political parties may not be able to benefit from this financing. Sir, I am aware that we are going to have many Bills before Parliament; I also want to find out whether the revision or amendment of the POA will come along with the other Bills?
My fear is, if it were to be so, it might be resolved rather late. I would otherwise - maybe the NPC will comment on this, or the Rt hon. Prime Minister - have felt much more comfortable if the POA could be amended now to take into account what the court talked about and what we want to achieve so that political parties can now be able to participate at all levels of debate both with Government and in consultation with members at grassroots. 

As of now I am a Member of the Uganda Peoples’ Congress. I am not allowed by this law because we have not registered and because we are contesting certain issues in the law, to go and hold meetings or set up my structures. This is my worry and if it is not done, I do not see how we can move smoothly towards these desired goals. Otherwise, I thank you for the initiative but I think this should actually be clarified and sorted out. I am sure my brother here will –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, as we stand now, the law, which was passed, is minus two sections. Otherwise the other law is still there and there is a law in the Constitution, Article 72, that political parties must register. This is a constitutional requirement. But you are aware that the Minister for Constitutional Affairs recently gave us copies and tabled the roadmap here, which roadmap was sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to scrutinize and report back. My recollection is that one of the things that is going to be done is to deal with the Political Organizations Bill to facilitate the transition. 

What you will change, that one I do not know but it is one of the activities or one of the things that are going to be done soonest. According to my recollection, maybe it is coming around September or October - something like that. It will definitely be considered then. That is true.

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank you for forming that committee but I want to seek your guidance. Do we assume that now the issue of a referendum on whether to go multi-party or not will not arise; because I think this would be done after that? I seek your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I cannot answer whether there will be a referendum; that I do not know. For me I see things as they are in the Constitution. What the arrangement is, is up to the Prime Minister to tell you.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are about to bring the White Paper here and in it your questions will be answered. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, honourable members, I just wanted to make this statement so that you know there is that steering committee and you co-operate with it. I want to thank you for what you have done today, and sitting up to now. Please, continue to raise the quorum. I do not want to be talking about this quorum because it goes in the Hansard. I do not want it but I am encouraged that what I saw this afternoon is that many of you came. Please, continue. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 5.47 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 28 July 2004 at 2.00 p.m.)


