Thursday, 28 July 1994

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliamentary House, Kampala.

PRAYERS 

(The Deputy Vice-Chairman, Mr Ekemu, in the Chair.)

The Council was called to Order.

MOTION

(General Debate Continued.)

MR HIGIRO SEMAJEGE: Yesterday I was emulating a few ways whereby we can improve our economy.  I had mentioned trying to reduce imbalance.  (1) To assist entrepreneurs - local entrepreneurs by giving them special financing and (2) to begin to have ratios which prefer the rural areas in our developmental budget and the third now is on tourism.  Tourism can bring money with little investment; and this appears - (Interruption)

MRS SEKITOLOKO: Point of information. Mr Chairman, I wish to inform the speaker on the Floor because I was told by the one who was holding my portfolio last night when you finished, that he had raised this issue of taking money to the rural areas.  I have stood up here a number of times and I have said I am not going to tire to give you information. I wish to say this - that as we talk now, 270,000,000/- is available for everybody from Mbarara, Kisoro, Kabale, Rukungiri, Bushenyi  -(Interjections)- this money has been available for the last one year and so far Mbarara has borrowed on 10,000,000/= Kisoro has borrowed only 15,000,000, Kabale 23,000,000/-, Rukungiri - 12,000,000/-, Bushenyi - 47,000,000/=. 

How does one access this money? This money is accessed through the subcounty.  It is the subcounty, the RCs, the Chiefs and the whatever, who actually recommend you.  It is the Minister or anything.  All the subcounties in those districts I have counted have got access and know about this money.  I wish to appeal to you Members to please contact your members.  That is about South Western.  As we talk now half a billion is available for Pallisa, Lira, Apac and Gulu and Kitgum.  So far, Shs 174,000,000 has been borrowed by Pallisa, Lira has borrowed Shs 79,000,000, Apac has borrowed Shs 90,000,000/=, Gulu, Shs 153,000,000 and Kitgum - 60,000,000.  I am talking about millions. Now, that is the money we call ADB.  There is a further Shs 750,000,000 available for the same area - that is Pallisa, Lira, Apac, Gulu and Kitgum.  So, far Pallisa has borrowed Shs 80,000,000, Lira – Shs 91,000,000, Apac – Shs 67,000,000, Gulu – Shs 91,000,000 Kitgum – Shs 93,000,000.  About Shs 330,000,000 is still available for those districts to borrow.  That is from the last one I have read but from the first one Shs 321,000,000 is available for those districts to borrow.  This has always been there since NRM came.  

(Interjection) Lastly, there is money for - There is 1.9 billion shillings for 4 districts.  That is Kasese, Masindi, Soroti and Kumi.  This Shs 1.9 billion is meant for those four districts.  This is under cotton.  This is where we are doing our seed multiplication programme but we do cotton as a programme.  Now, this Shs 1.9 billion has just been made available and it is going to be released in trenches of Shs 100,000,000.  I would like to end my information to the hon. Member on the Floor by saying that - that is what is being administered through the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.  But since the Minister of Finance is here, I am sure you will get all the details.  Thank you very much.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information, Mr Chairman, I would like to thank the hon. Minister of Agriculture for that information.  But I want to make one complaint.  When these monies come in, people are not informed.  We do not know even where to go for such money.  Now, the hon. Minister says this money has been around ever since the NRM came to power! Now, who are those people that have been borrowing this money? 

Now, may I request, with effect from this information we have got, that the hon. Minister of Finance together with those who are concerned make this information available to us so that we can tell our people so that they can make use of this money.  It is not point having money in the bank somewhere and nobody used it.  That is one of the reasons why we are saying people are poor in the villages; whereas this money would have done a lot but nobody knows about it.  It is only after we have complained that we now are being told.  Thank you very much Mr Chairman.

MR HIGIRO:  Mr Chairman, we are all grateful, to the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for the information she has just given us today. But she should also realise that when we ask for such information or when we ask for rural development and we have never heard that information, we have the right to ask: but one worry is that of all the districts she read out, Masaka is not there, Rakai is not there and for that reason, whatever she has read, to me, has very little meaning because - I want to conclude my remarks.  

I have said that tourism would bring a lot of money for Uganda but there are many natural assets, which we have neglected and which could be useful for us and the bigger one is the historical area like ‘Bigo bya Mugenyi.’  We all need the government to have ordinary murram roads and once that happens the investment will be done in their areas.  That point is what would bring us money.  

Another worry for me  - the other time I talked about water.  I do not want to repeat it but I want to tell you that we have annual migrations.  People in Lwemiyaga and I will extend it to people in Nyabushozi, people in Kazo - For example now, people in Kazo and Nyabushozi are coming to our area until go to - I do not where because there is no water.  We were given promises by both the President and the Minister of Agriculture here that we shall get some dams. In fact there is a time she said it when she was in my own county in front of the President that machinery were available and the dams would be constructed immediately.  It is now 2 and half years gone.  We would like the government to know that without water, there is not going to be any development in our areas.  

Lastly, livestock in Uganda is not looked after.  Cows are being slaughtered here when they are pregnant.  In the old days, that was not acceptable.  Drugs are being sold in any form that is not very useful.  There is no control, and there is no direction. There is only a small pocket in Uganda, which has livestock now as you know.  The districts which used to produce a lot of cows do not have them and the few cows which we have now; unless we look after them properly, and we are not doing so, especially now when we have no water and they mixing - so diseases are being spread anyhow. 

I would wish to see that government, particularly the Minister of Agriculture, who now say that there is some money to issue - to really issue that money to see that we have water and we protect animals form diseases. I thank you very much Mr Chairman.

MR D. LUBEGA: Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  I begin my remarks by talking about ‘Entandikwa’ particularly with regard to the Minister’s Statement or rather in the Budget Speech whereby under paragraph 40 in the Budget Speech she points out that various small entrepreneurs in the countryside are hampered by lack of relatively small credits to enable them undertake productive or commercial ventures. This particularly concerns peasants and youth.  Government is providing 6,000,000,000/= in this Budget for this purpose.  I hope what the hon. Minister of Agriculture has pointed out is not in the a bit of this particular statement and the Budget.  

Now, I have heard several remarks by hon. Members here, that this 6,000,000,000/= should be spread out in the countryside by way of counties so that we can carry out developments.  It should be equitably distributed.  Two years ago, this hon. House, through its Members have been talking about provision by the Ministry of Finance of certain sums of money which will enable the representatives of the people that the NRC Members to make sure that there are certain developments in their areas which could be even directly or indirectly supervised by them. I think this is an opportune time when we have this Shs 6,000,000,000.  It should not be confined to only certain areas.  In any case, when one examines this aspect, you will find that areas which have been earmarked - according to speeches here; have also had a big share, I understand of other programmes.  

So, this leads me to strongly support Members who have proposed that this Shs 6,000,000,000 should be equitably distributed.  Recently, we enacted - (Interruption)- only recently, we made laws - we enacted laws forming Women Councils, and Youth Councils.  There Youth Councils have come up with a number of well designed projects for investment in terms of small scale industries and so forth and so on.  I have looked at the Budget for Women in Development, You and Culture and I fail to see clearly where these women and youth councils are provided for.  If this Shs 6,000,000,000 could be spread out probably it could cater for some or rather for some of the projects, which have been designed by the youth and the women besides other things.  So, I join my Friends here, the hon. Members who are arguing that we should really utilise this Shs 6,000,000,000 countrywide and countrywide. (Interruption)

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I rise on point of information and I thank the hon. Member for having given the way.  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor - when he is talking about this initial capital arrangement which is now commonly known as ‘Entandikwa’ When we initiated this, it was after a careful analysis of the problems in Luwero Triangle having found that besides opening feeder roads, providing storage and what have you, the people in these areas, could not still produce anything for marketing.  Then we identified in my office, the issue of lack of equate line to entrepreneurship at a peasant type of level.  Then, when we put this issue to finance, they came up with a figure and yet   broadened it to deepest areas which we could not dispute because, anyway, Luwero Triangle is not the only place which is displaced; but now to propose it for equitable distribution to all the districts in the country, would mean that it would not make any impact.  (Interjection)  Because the idea is to concentrate on a certain area and actually make an impact. 

As I was coming into the Ministry of Agriculture with reading a lot of money, which has been owned and not borrowed. It was not invested in Luwero Triangle! This is money elsewhere in South West, in North and nothing has been read for Luwero Triangle, which is depressed.  So, I would appeal, through the information, that the Ministry of Finance considers it clearly to clarify on the matter on ‘Entandikwa’ and come up with clear modality of dispersing it.  Otherwise, we shall be discussing something and be derailed from the purpose for which it was initiated.

MR RUTAROH:  Point of information.  I wish to have this matter fully clarified. If the idea of ‘Entandikwa’ was initiated after careful study by the Minister and his colleagues responsible for Luwero Triangle, why is this money not allocated specifically to Luwero? If they asked for that money, it should be specifically put on the votes of the districts, particularly with this decentralisation.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think hon. Members we should not labour on that point.  It has been raised and the Minister will be in a position to answer -(Inaudible)

MR D. LUBEGA:  Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  I hope the hon. Minister of Finance, when winding up will clarify this matter. Now, I go to Uganda Electricity Board and the consumption of electricity.  There is a lot of complaints about electricity charges.  It appears there is a deliberate design by the Uganda Electricity Board, through its Ministry, to discourage the consumption of electricity and this design has led people to cutting down trees.  With effect from 1 July 1993, the tariff rates were as follows: for domestic usage - we have from 1 to 30 units - the charges are 20/= per unit; but immediately consumer goes beyond 30 units and consumes between 31 and 200 units, he is made to pay 70/= per unit.  As if that was not enough, if one goes on to consume 200 units and above, he pays 100/- per unit.  This is a deliberate design to discourage consumers of electricity and a drive by the Minister or UEB to  -(Interruption)

MR KAJURA: Point of information.  At the moment, the amount of power of generated at Owen Falls, may I call it 1/- that is the old project; is insufficient to meet the needs of the country.  What many years ago, when the demand was low, the rates were constructed in such a manner as to encourage more consumption.  t the moment, we are discouraging more consumption because we do not have the power to give you - to give the consumers.  (Interjections) 

Well, it is like when you have a parent who has got 300/= and the family demands Shs 7,000 - what do you do? You go and steal?   So, at the moment, what we are generating which is about 160 mega watts is inadequate to meet the needs of the consumers because some of the projects take as much as 23 mega watts, others 20 and unless we discourage the totality of the demand, it will be impossible to meet those demand from what we are generating today. As the time - we hope that in about one year’s time we shall be able to generate 180.  But even then, that will not be adequate.  

As, you will know we have embarked on the second Owen Falls Projects or the Owen Extension as we know it.  When it is completed in four, five years time it will generate another 200 mega watts.  We think that with the current rate of development, which is obviously reflected in the amount of electricity that is used that will still not be enough.  So, we have under study currently, of yet another big project. We have various alternatives, Bujagali is one, maybe, about 250 mega watts; Kamudini about 500 mega watts; Eyagwe North and Eyagwe South, in total about 600 mega watts; and Owen Falls between 800 and 1000 mega watts provided the environmentalists, the green party do not object; because they form a very strong lobby and they are normally listened to.  

So, that is why we are having this study because we realise that even with the extensions the amount of the quantum I am talking about - what is generated will not be enough.  Hence, the creation of system which discourages consumption, in other words you try to make people consume less so that they can leave within what is available; and we reckon that - now, we are talking about the ordinary wanainchi. If an ordinary wanainchi uses power for lighting, he is able to live within the first bracket of Shs 20.  Thank you Mr Chairman. 

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. May I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor and also the Minister that, instead of charging what he calls, the Minister, calls discouraging rates for electricity? It is illegal according to our statutes to charge those rates before coming here for approval.  I thank you. (Applause)

MR MWANDHA:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I was the first person since we started this Debate to raise the concern regarding these tariffs and the explanation given at that time by the Minister is different from the explanation he has given today.  (Laughter) Now, the explanation which was given then was that UEB needed money to undertake this project in Jinja and they had to produce Shs 30,000,000,000/=; and therefore, it was necessary for UEB to get this money as soon as possible so that they can pay the Shs 30,000,000,000/-. At that time he made no reference to the fact that the reason why the tariffs went up was because UEB was not generating enough power.  So -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Just, please, try to put your point.

MR MWANDHA:  But, Mr Chairman, what I want the Minister to clarify is really whether he has carefully considered the effect of this rate - of this high rate of UEB electricity tariffs on the environments because he is saying because we cannot produce enough we had to discourage consumption of electro power.  Has he actually carefully considered the effect of this policy on our environment?

MR KAJURA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I responded in the manner in which I did because of the way the hon. Member from Rubaga raised a matter.  He was talking about the increasing scale; that the scale is going up. He was talking about quantum really I think the emphasis was why are you charging more those who are consuming more.  I think that would emphasize the question.  Whilst earlier on it was the question of value of how much money people have got to spend on electricity.  So, both are complimentary but they are different.  It depends on the emphasis.  So, I do not think there is a contradiction, it depends on what the question seeks, and I think the hon. Lubega was more - was pointing at why penalise the big consumer rather than rewarding him for spending more.  I think that was the - and that is why I answered it that way.  Now, on the question of word UEB charges and its effect on the environment, I afraid these are two interrelated problems, but in a way they are separate.  We are not going to stop increasing our generation of power, our rehabilitation of the existing facilities and a measure of rural electrification at the moment because it’s needed.  This country is going to develop and we cannot stand by and do nothing about increasing the quantum of power generated for this country.  I think it will be a false where we are approaching the moment if we are to say because the trees are going to fail because wanainchi will not be able to afford electricity, therefore, we do nothing.  Since UEB has got to fund all these projects under the expansion, the rehabilitation and rural electrification at the same time I am afraid, the rate has got to remain high.  If in the meantime the wanainchi have got to depend on charcoal.  I am afraid there is very little we can do, but what we need to emphasize is to develop other forms of energy; and my Ministry is addressing itself to this problem, although of course not adequately. 

I have time and again appealed to the hon. Members to plant more trees.  Whenever there is this matter than Members murmur.  But they should set an example, by planting more trees.  Two, they should also show great enthusiasm for looking at other forms of energy like solar.  We removed tax 54 per cent on solar power, in the hope that they will be cheaper and affordable.  So, we would hope that you would encourage people of medium means to try solar energy; we now have small factories producing -(Interjection)- the coffee, the husks they are compressed and they can be used for providing -(Inaudible)- of energy.  There is biogas -(Interruption)

MISS WEKIYA:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is the Minister in order to go into details of energy when he really knows that even other service which are connected to electricity and cannot use of those things like water are very expensive because electricity is high.  When recently I have been even been complaining to him about the water Bills which the Jinja people have given me at that rate of water monthly, you pay Shs 63,000 for water and Shs 63,000 for sewage and there is electricity.  Is he in order, Mr Chairman? 

THE CHAIRMAN: Since the question - a point raised by hon. Mwandha was about environment, so the Minister was answering specifically on that.  He is in order.

MR LUBEGA: Thank you very Mr Chairman.  I hope when the Minister presents his Ministerial paper - statement he will clarify most of these aspects because although I paused one question. This question calls from many other questions; and the points of clarifications, and I thank the Members for giving these various infirmations and for asking clarifications.  Among other questions that maybe asked would be why Kenya and, maybe, other neighbouring countries are consuming electricity from Uganda at such a lower rate.  Much lower than what is pertaining here in Uganda.  When you are giving your Ministerial Statement probably you will come up with these explanations. 	

The third point is on road construction.  Hon. Members here yesterday - did observe that road construction is disappointing us.  They singled out Jinja road and we received explanations and disappointments from the Floor as to why what took place - what happened - what happened did happen; and now the solution is being sorted out.  But this is not an isolated case, people who move on foot in Kampala as I do will realise that on the Eastern side of Uganda House on a small road connecting Kampala Road and Nkurumah Road you will find big potholes on a road which was repaired less than half a year! And you can also if you travel between Kampala and Masaka, even if you traveled for just five miles between Ndeba and the round about where Mityana Road joins Masaka Road, you will find that, that portion of the road has pilled off, there are so many potholes drainage system has blocked.  I think the method and quality of construction leaves a lot to be desired.  I have talked to the hon. Minister of Works; he appreciates the point and he has promised to re-do that portion, but at whose cost? The taxpayer! 

Now, when the Minister of Works presents his statement I hope the Minister will give explanations concerning the quality of the work on the roads and why these roads are spoiled so fast after reconstruction, rehabilitation or resealing whatever the case maybe.

The fourth point I would like to talk about is industrialisation of this country, and I would like to single out industrial areas, say for instance, here in Kampala, there is Nalukolongo, Nabisasiro talking about the Western sector or Kampala City. We could also talk about other industrial area or areas, which have been marked for industries.  There are many people who are prepared to set up industries, but the biggest problem is services. Industrial areas have been marked planned but there are no services, no roads, no electricity and such things; and this is delaying the work that industrialists should be doing.  I know there are many investors but they are hampered by these facilities. I propose that Government should consider borrowing a big loan or raising a big loan so that these infrastructures and services are providing so as to enable people who are interested in setting up industrial concerns do so.  

Finally, I will talk about PERD.  I hope the Minister of Finance when winding up will give a very clear explanation as to how far, or what has been done, how far has been done in terms of divesture.  Some of us who look at parastatals are more closely probably than others because of our roles in some of the parastatals so observe that Government indebtedness is the one single factor which prevents parastatals from doing well.  I can single out National Housing, for instance, as you speak, the Government indebtedness is to the tune of about five billion, imagine -(Interjection)- that is probably a figure which I picked on recently.  So, parastatals could perform much better than they are doing now if Government indebtedness should be cleared.  This matter should be addressed seriously by the Minister of Finance and by Government as a whole.  With those few words I have been warned that time is over, I thank you very much for allowing me to make these points, thank you.

MISS J. BINTU (Youth Representative, Region): Thank you Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, on the Budget presentation, chapter 40 what is being called Entandikwa we are really concerned as Youths, the Youth Councils and Women Councils which were formed out of this House initiative, they are purposely meant for development of these organs and now, when we are here looking at Entandikwa when we get diverted views that this Entandikwa is supposed to be for certain areas, without considering these youths and yet in it Budget presentation - the Budget Speech there is a statement whereby it is saying that this particular concern, concerns the peasants and the youths.   Government is providing Shs 6,000,000,000. That is page 17; I really seek clarification from the Minister of Finance as to how this money will be distributed to these two categories.  Because right now we are being diverted when we went to the Ministry of WID and we looked at their reports we did not find any money allocated to these councils and we are wondering if these councils really were not for the development of these organs, why were they formed by this august House.  Mr Chairman, this one seeks clarification. 

I want to make some observations on the taxes being collected.  These taxes are supposed to raise income to our country and our districts at large.  Recently we were reading in News Papers that some people - the graduated taxes defaulters were being held; and well knowing that most of these people were civil servants who were being held, and this is a crucial point because most of these workers when their salaries come they are supposed to deduct some money to pay for this tax; and they have been getting some shortage of their salaries just because they expected to get their graduated tickets.  But all of a sudden when they found road blocks somewhere they are arrested or they are held and taken somewhere for safe custody, allegedly that they have not paid this tax.  

I do not know how the Local Government is going about with this, because one time I was in a certain district and most of these civil servants are youth, they came and contacted me and asked me were they really defaulters in reality of it was a problem of the local administration and Town Council not to get this money.  When I asked them what they had got I was informed that when they went to Town Council they were told that the local administration had got a cheque from the reliable Ministries, but then the local administration had not forwarded this cheque to the Town Council and yet the Town Council people were telling them to pay money so that they would get their graduated tickets, but they will be refunded this money.  I look at all this as being a type of corruption. 

So, I am seeking clarification from the Minister of Local Government as to how if at all these people were supposed to pay this money who would refund this money? And is it their fault that they are being not paying this graduated tax? 

I would like to go to the decentralization which I have been informed and which is taking off in some of there is still a question mark, because some districts - these public service committee which have been informed, they are insisting that they would like to get their people, people from those areas to be some of the heads of department within these areas; and there is a question that if it so happens at all districts prefer to get people from their own districts, then where will other people go? 

This is a crucial point because most of our youth are now moving on the streets when they go back to their districts they tell them certainly there is no employment for them; and when they come here also they tell them their offices are full and yet here there is retrenchment which is going on but the some people who would have been retrenched are not going they are remaining there and then our youth continue moving on the streets. This is also another point, which should be looked into, otherwise, if the retrenchment exercise is underlooked, then we shall continue getting people - these youth graduates on the streets moving.  

Recently, that is this week on Tuesday, there was an announcement on the radio whereby the Police roadblocks, which have been on most of these roads, were supposed to leave.  This real night, most of these roadblocks were moved away; and the next morning that was Wednesday, between Kafo and Mijera the robbers attached a taxi coming from Masindi and one of the passengers got injured. Though the Police took the initiative of going around to find out who were the robbers, but the passenger stated it clearly that they had identified some of these people as being among there people who used to be on the road-blocks.  

So, you can imagine how even our Police Forces are indiscipline, because they are well aware that after removing them from these road-blocks, they will not get somewhere to get some money from  -(Interruption) 

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. On that note, I would like to inform the House and hon. Members that the credibility of the Uganda Police needs a lot to be desired.  A week ago, in fact last week, one of the hon. Members who hails from Lira was robbed by a Policeman on patrol and he is here with us, he can testify to that.  The Police Force of Uganda needs a lot to be desired.  Secondly, my own brother  - my young brother you remember last week, I was not here in this House, my young brother was shot dead by Policeman.  The Police of Uganda leaves a lot to be desired.

MISS BINTU:  So, Mr Chairman, you can see what it means by some of these Forces of ours, what they are up to is to feed their stomachs and not to work for the country and for the development of our areas.   (Interruption)

MR BAGUME ISOOKE:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, the hon. Member from Lira has made two very serious allegations.  The people of Uganda know that the Police Force is being restructured, has been politicised and it is much better than the Police Force we know in all the decades in the past.  (Interjection) Yes, and because of those serious allegations, is it is order for him to leave those two statements naked without substantiating who is that Member of NRC that we robbed, and what are the circumstances - we need clarification of these two points raised in the House, who is that Member who was robbed and what were the circumstances, were those actually Policemen with numbers gazetted Policemen of the Uganda Force, or they were robbers clad in Police uniform.  Secondly, what are the circumstances - the unfortunate circumstances that surrounded the shooting and killing of the brother to our colleague in the House.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, you are raising a point of order.  The hon. Member was making a point of information to the Colleague who was satisfied and continued with her debate, so he is in order.

MISS BINTU:  Thank you, Mr Chairman, so I was still saying that, the Minister of Internal Affairs has to look into this, whether these people disguise themselves in police uniform or whether they are true policemen, because as the case for this other tax which was robbed, the passengers identified those people, except that they did not read the police number since they were on disarray.  

I would like to inform this House, on how some of the hon. Members and some of the hon. ministers do not give priority to some hon. Members of this House - when a hon. Member goes to visit or has an issue to discuss with the Minister, or another hon. Member in his office, he is not being given first priority and certainly these are some of the privileges of the hon. Members of this House.  I would like to call upon the hon. Ministers in this House that if the hon. Member has an issue to discuss with the hon. Minister, he should be given first priority  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Please your point has been taken, do not labour that point, you have already made it.

MISS BINTU:  Last week, I had some issues to discuss with the hon. Minister in his office, I sent a note to him and then I was made to wait for two hours and yet, I had other duties to fulfill; so I am calling upon some of these privileges should be given to us as hon. Members.  I will not mention - (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please, your time is up take your Seat.

DR LUYOMBYA (Historical Member): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for allowing me to contribute on this Debate.  (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order hon. Members, the hon. Member’s time had run up, so we are on the next Contribution. Order, hon. Members you better take time and listen, there is a clerk assistant assisting me.

DR LUYOMBYA: Mr Chairman, thank you very much. Mr Chairman, let me try to be very brief and keep within time.  While contributing to this Debate, I would also like to express my gratitude to the Ministry of Finance for having put up a balanced Budget this year.  However, I have got a few areas where I would like some clarification because I have worries in those areas.  One, looking up at sections 39 and 40 of the Budget Speech, it is stated that for Development Expenditure, it will need Shs 398 billion out of which only Shs 69 billion will be raised locally, and that is about 18 per cent; that means the rest has to be obtained in terms of loans of grants.  We all know that, it is normal to borrow money, as long as you can use it, effectively to generate profit and development 

My worry is the absorption capacity.  Just at the beginning of the this Session, this afternoon, the Minister of Agriculture, said that there is lost of money in the districts, which is not being utilised, we do not know why, it maybe lack of information, it may be corruption somewhere or may be that even that money is embezzled.  

While outlining this point of absorptive capacity, and that we should be carefully when borrowing, and borrow only what we can effectively use I will outline two examples, one; there is the so called, Australian Grant of dollars 2 million, which was given to this country to facilitate or contribute to the industrial development, we were given a period up to December, 1993 and if that money was not used, thee Australians were going to withdraw that grant.  I am sorry to mention that since then that money has been withdraw, we shall need an explanation. I know there are efforts being made to have that grant reinstated but it is going to un uphill tasks.  

Looking at section 40 in the Budget Speech says; “various small entrepreneurs in the countryside are numbered by lack of relatively small credits to enable them to undertake productive or commercial ventures.’ In July 1991, the Government of Uganda negotiated a small and medium enterprise line of credit with African Development Bank, this was equivalent to 30 millions units of account which is about dollars 38 million.  This line became effective in 1992 April, and it has some conditionalities of a commitment fee of 1 per cent on any amount of money which is not used.  Todate, out of dollars 38 million any dollars 7.5 million has been used.  Mr Chairman, if I am -(Interruption)

MISS KADAGA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the House that one of the reasons why we are unable to utilise loans, is because Government has each year, contravened the External Loans Act.  Section 6 of that Act, requires Government after negotiating any loan to come to this House table a report about the lender, the conditions, the terms of interest, so that we can know about it, but this has never been done.  So, I would like to inform that Member and the House that, that is why nobody has knowledge about these loans.  Thank you.

DR LUYOMBYA: Thank you for that information. Mr Chairman, this money is laying with UDB at a commitment fee, of 1 per cent, it means Government is giving dollars 300,000 per year, really for nothing.  I would like the Minister to tell us why UDB is clinging to this money all this long and small scale industrialist are not assisted to get it. 

Now let me move to the point of poverty.  We were told yesterday, by the hon. Member representing the Workers, that there are about 6.7 million employable workers, but who are not employed, and it is not only that number of employees, but while we are talking about this workers, we should think of the population growth; should move hand in hand with the economy of the country.  Our economy cannot sustain the population growth at the moment.  It is not only having land available but there are other things, which have to go with it.  I would like the planners to think seriously about Family Planning and population control, if the economy is to be helped to cover -(Interruption)

MR SSENDAWULA:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, the figures we have, and these are verified figures, that the economy is growing at rate of about 5 per cent and the population is growing at rate of about 2.6 and that is extremely health for a nation.  So, I would not see why the hon. Member should be worried about the situation like this, but I have really cause to excuse him because these are areas, which are extremely economist and very strong economists.  Thank you very much.

MR OMADI:  Point of order.  Is it in order for the hon. Member to tell the country lies that economy is growing, when in fact people in the rural areas are extremely poor and they have no money; is he using mere figures which he collects from his officers and therefore, and he has a responsibility of telling the truth and looking after the people in the village.  Is he in order?

THE CHAIRMAN: The Minister was quoting the figures, he was not quoting the facts in the village probably, and he is in order.

MR ADYEBO:  Point of information and point of clarification, Mr Chairman, to the House, arising from the objection from my hon. Friend Omadi caused by the contribution of hon. Dr Luyombya, and following by the information given by hon. Ssendawula, Deputy Minister of Trade and Industry, the fact is that the economy is growing at the rate of 5 per cent, and the population growth is about 2.6 per cent growth.  Now, this information is being contested by hon. Omadi.  The fact of the matter is that, there is a difference between a growing economy and the welfare of the population.  

Now, here we have a situation where the economy is growing, by the growth of the economy is not being felt by the ordinary wanainchi in that if you now compare hon. Omadi and my dear Friend, if you go around, Kampala itself, look at the construction of houses, the construction of houses, new houses, new industries, is demonstration of the growth of the economy, but the population, the waninchi are not deriving direct benefit from those.  The fact of the matter is whereas the economy is growing, the ordinary wanainchi has not yet benefited from the growth, that is what you should know, and that is what is true, because even the growth of the economy can be supported by the construction of new road, you see, but the new road construction is not being felt by the ordinary wanainchi who may not have the shilling in his pocket, to support the homestead.  

So, the growing of the economy should be understood economically.  There are two facts; the economy is growing but there is poverty those are true facts and you, the hon. friend must be exporting labour.  Some countries have grown that way.  You can even export cheap labour.  For example, we have all heard people going abroad to do the so-called cheyo and those people sent money back in this country and it has helped to educate their children and they put up houses, in Ntinda.  

I move to another area of poverty.  Poverty can be caused by wrong policies. In 1990, in this House we decided to have the ranch restructuring board.  We have been talking about taxation and forming a middle class of people.  There was a middle class of people in Masaka engaged in ranching.  These were disrupted and the land was taken away from them.  Unfortunately, that same year there was insecurity in that area and all their animals plus houses they had put were destroyed.  Those people who were middle class are papyrus and they are on the street.  

Those people submitted their losses.  I know of 18 of those who submitted their losses and it totaled to Shs1.06 billion and they wanted to be compensated because Government knew about that instance and they were not protected.

I think if we are to talk of Entandikwa, we should not only think of these unorganized groups. We should also think of organised groups who are capable of warping and paying taxes back and assist them with this Entandikwa.

Let me finish up with taxation for industries.  I know there has been a reduction of 10 per cent in excise duty as far as the beverage industry is concerned, because the sales for these industries are increasing.  But it would be better if Government started with these industrialists and worked out an optimum level of taxation; it would help both ways.  Thank you very much.

MR WASSWA:  I thank you very much Mr Chairman, for at last catching sight of me, and granting this opportunity to contribute on this Motion. I will start by welcoming the new Members in this House, thus the workers and the Youth and I thank the N.R.M. Government for sticking to its promise better late than never.  I thank the Minister for Finance for his Budget Speech.  But I would like to sound one warning to him.  In his Budget, he should always think about rural areas or upcountry, which are in a very sorry state.  There are areas in this country, say like Buvuma Islands, where most Members including Ministers in this House - where they have never been.

MR COSMAS ADYEBO:  Point of information.  May I generously inform my Friend hon. Wasswa that last year in the month of May, I led a high powered Government delegation to the Buvuma and other Islands.  At that time I was accompanied by the Minister of State for Internal Affairs hon. Tom Butime, and I was accompanied by so many other ministers. When I led that delegation, my self, but at that time the hon. Member had not yet come to the political arena and I think -(Laughter)- that is why he missed us.  But the Government sent the delegations to the islands. Thank you.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, i would like to add to the information given by the Prime Minister to the hon. Member holding the Floor that while I was still in Government as a Minister, I visited Buvuma Island and I am proud to say that I was the first Minister ever to visit those Islands.  (Laughter)

MR WASSWA:  I thank the Prime Minister for his information and also the hon. Kagonyera, I thank you for your information.  But I think the Prime Minister is confusing me to be one of the Youth who have just joined this House.  I have been in this House since 1989.  (Interruption) 

MR MAYENGO:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform my hon. colleague on the Floor, and the House as a whole, that this confusion as to whether Ministers have reached the Islands or not, should not actually arise. It is like saying that one has visited Uganda therefore he has visited the entire continent of Africa.  The Islands as the implication is are many detached and difficult to approach.  When a Minister lands on one, like the blind people who went to see the elephant he says I have seen them all.  The Minister should make an effort to visit all the Islands, which are populated.

MR WASSWA:  I am thankful for hon. Mayengo’s information. Mr Chairman, I have been talking about backward areas in this country.  There are areas in this country which have not yet felt the impact of the N.R.M. Government.  Places like Buvuma Islands, the one I am talking about, and when I narrated the sorry state of Buvuma Islands in this House some time back, every body laughed. These Islands have poor every thing.  Health facilities very poor; education facilities very poor; transport facilities very poor; in fact everything is very, very poor.  During my time, that is the time I have been in Parliament, I have tried my level best to take their some Ministers including the First Deputy Prime Minister.  After his visit, the First Deputy Prime Minister came here  -(Interruption)

MR ISRAEL MAYENGO: The people are moving from the Islands to the main land, which has made the Government to think that it is of no use taking services to the islands because there are no people there. It is for this reason, that I have been urging the Minister of Finance - the Deputy, to reduce import duties and sales taxes on the small machines that one of the canoes. I would wish the House to support me when I bring this Amendment.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR WASSWA: Mr Chairman, I think you will protect me - I a getting confused by these so much information given to me.  I was saying that when the First Deputy Prime Minister came back from my Constituency, he came to this very House and said that Buvuma Islands need special attention.  But unfortunately, everything stopped there, and no action has been taken.  Also, sometime last year, we hosted His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda.  He saw the sorry state of the Islands. There is one thing I would like to say about the President’s visit.  He made some pledges - Shs1 million to Buvuma Secondary School and one million to Buvuma Convent.  Unfortunately, up to today, the promise has never been fulfilled despite of my movement up and down in the President’s Office.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member by reminding him that besides the donations in free pledges, the President directed that the ferry be run by Machan District Administration and since then, that ferry has been run by Mukono District Administration, the only one of that type in the country, instead of being run by the Central Government. Secondly, regarding donations of that nature, they are programmed and this is not the best forum for him to ask for them because arrangements have been made to fulfill these pledges.  So, the hon. Member should know how to go about it if the Minister or the President visited his area and made any pledge.

MR WASSWA: Mr Chairman, I have been to President’s Office several times chasing this money, but I have not received any fruitful information. (Interruption)

MR ONZI:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  The hon. Member is pointing at a very important point.  When His Excellency visited Iringa County, he pledged radio call, a lorry, pick-ups and we have received a radio call; we have received a lorry and pick-ups, yet he is seeking permission to buy 12 pick-ups.  One for Yumbe Hospital; one for Adjumani Hospital; surprisingly I have not yet received any information about the letter, which seeks to purchase these items, from the Central Tender Board, up to now.  Thank you.

MR WASSWA:  Mr Chairman, I think hon. Onzi’s information has proved that it is really very difficult to get these pledges.  I think one time, the Minister responsible should come to this House and brief on those pledges.  Otherwise, our people are on our necks.  They think that we are the ones delaying these pledges.  I am saying this in good spirit because I do not want the good name of our President to be tarnished by such cheap things.  My people are thankful to the Government for this decentralization.  But they are saying that to understand fully decentralization, they want Buvuma County to be raised to a full District status.  

My friend in CA has also talked about the same thing in the Constituent Assembly. I have also written several letters to the Minister of Local Government, we have also told that to His Excellency the President when he visited us, we told that to His Excellency the President when he visited us, we told that to the First Deputy Prime Minister.  So, we are really very, very serious, and we have written several letters to the Chairman, RC V Machan District.  And I am calling upon the Minister of Local Government to get some time and go to Buvuma Islands to see what exactly is there then find out what he can do about that issue. 

In the Budget Speech I am against increment of sales tax on imports of used clothes to 30 per cent.  About 80 per cent of the people in this country depend on second hand clothes, including Members of this House, including Members of the CA, including the poorest of the poor in this country.  Therefore, I am calling up on the Minister of Finance to scrap the increment.  I think you very much for giving me this opportunity to contribute. 

MISS BIKORWENDA (Woman Representative Bundibugyo): Thank you, Mr Chairman, for giving me this opportunity to pause views from Bundibugyo District about the Budget Speech.  I thank, Mr Chairman, for having availed me this time to inform the hon. Minister that my people were very happy about his elaborate Budget Speech which they understood, and then, asked me to suggest -(Interjection) their reply to you.  These were their views.  

While they appreciate the Budget, of this year, they had a few remarks, which they made on it.  One of their requests was to ask the Minister of Finance to education them on how the economy is growing in comparison to the rampant poverty felt by those rural people. In fact, I tried to explain to them to no avail.  May you please kindly educate them and maybe you can avail them some technical information that they will understand, and to see that it is worthy living the way they are doing.  

People are really very poor, and I should tell you that they are really very, very poor.  They are even failing to afford something to cover themselves, even dressing themselves. And they were mostly annoyed when they heard the Minister of Finance increasing the tax on second hand clothes.  Surely, they said may be, Minister will interested in seeing people going necked on the streets.  Moreso, when you feel necked, you do not feel psychologically okay, you can even run mad when you are walking necked, an adult.  And it was mostly felt by the women who have got the burden of dressing their children and their parents and their husbands. (Laughter)

MR BWANIKA BBAALE: Additional information. In addition to what the hon. is saying, the same situation is in Katikamu, people are crying about these second hand clothes. But worst of all, the question of tax is going to deprive a lot of people who have been engaged in this kind of business. What are they going to do, especially women.  In my constituency you find women standing on the roadside selling second hand clothes.  So, if government is abolishing taxes, that mean second hand clothes are not going to come -(Interjections)- imposing, I beg your pardon, imposing taxes that means the clothes are not going to come and we are going to have a lot of people idle, unemployed.

MRS RHODA KALEMA: Further information. Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor and also the hon. Member here, hon. Bwanika who has just given information about the second hand clothes that we have a problem here, we are Policy Makers in this House.  Our problem is, what do we choose, should we continue making our people dress up in second hand clothing, and then forfeit the development of our textile industries -(Interjection)- I know; protect me, Mr Chairman; I need your protection. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order, please.

MRS RHODA KALEMA:  Mr Chairman, I am aware of the period of adjustment, we have a problem.

MR NDEGE: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, I want to raise a point of order to this situation because at eh moment, we do not have any textile industry which we are operating.  So, is it in order for us to increase tax on something, which does not exist?  (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN: The hon. Member is in order.  Please go ahead and finish. 

MRS RHODA KALEMA:  I am aware that Nytil at the moment has come to more less to a standstill -(Interjections)- but the intention of the Minister and the intention -(Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA: Point of order.  Is it in order for the hon. Member on the Floor to contribute and not give her information?

THE CHAIRMAN: The Member is in the process of giving her information, she is in order.  Please, go ahead.

MRS RHODA KALEMA:  I am informing the hon. Member about the issue of the Minister having to increase the taxes on second hand clothing for the benefit -(Interruption)

MR MAYENGO:  Point of order. Mr Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Member giving information as well as so many other Members who have complained about the proposed and emphasize, proposed taxes on used clothes to forget that the idea is that the Minister brought here a proposal, it is up to this House to pass it or not.  It is up to this House to reduce it.  Mr Chairman is it in order for all these hon. Members to do that.

THE CHAIRMAN: You are out of order, hon. Members. Order, order, please. Please, resume your Seat hon. Bikorwenda go ahead with your Debate.

MRS BIKORWENDA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  This is what the people of Bundibugyo asked to find out in this House, how many Members of NRC are putting on, and if they are there, they are requesting them very kindly not to give that vote when it comes during the Budget. Secondly, they asked me, how many Members of NRC are putting on Nytil products? So if there is nobody putting on the Nytil product - (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order, hon. Member, please, do not labour on that point too much now, you go ahead to the next point.

MRS BIKORWENDA:  No, I am giving you the message - I am a representative of the people.  So they said, please be kind enough to consider a decent dressing for all the population of Uganda, at the least amount they can afford.  So, now to avoid  - there is a decline in the production sector, which resulted in less tax revenue.  And this one is caused by so many factors while we have the less revenue collection.  Production is decreasing, it is very decreasing and the Minister accepted that it decreased - there is a decrease in production.  There are so many factors embodied in that - in reduced production, and all the ministries here are concerned and affected by that less production.  Because there is lack of coordination of their policies in their ministries.  One thing, there is a very big gap between the producing sector and the marketing sector, that one we believe.

The Ministry of Transport comes in, the Ministry of Agriculture comes in, the Ministry of Finance is the strong backbone of the reduction of that production, and yet he comes here and tells there is less production.  Hon. Members, I wish to inform you that Bundibugyo District which has been really marginalized is a very rich District in potentials like coffee, cocoa, fish, rice, wheat, timber, and tourism to mention but a few.  Government could help to increase the production, by assisting the farmers to reduce the lot of human labour uses to prepare these products e.g. coffee, they lose a good amount during the local methods they use to prepare it.  Maybe, the ministries concerned would help them to give them some harrowers on a credit scheme arranged by farmers so that the quality and quantity is maintained.  And they would like all ministries to be reflected on the ground, by that I mean to say, we have Ministry of Education, which has got schools in every district.  We have the Ministry of Health, which has got sub health units everywhere, but they are some other Ministries, which do not exist at all in some of these districts.  They are demonstrated anywhere.  You can see that this Ministry exists here.  Minister of Agriculture could be having some demonstrational farms with up to date crops, which they hear of over the radio in those districts so that the women have got accessibility to those farms, to study them and acquire the new crops but they are not there at all.  Animal Husbandry, there should be a farm showing - demonstrating to the farmers how they can look after some of these animals poultry or dairy farm.  There is nothing, just to mention but a few.

External forces are mobilised by this government to effect development. The resources are not felt by some of the districts. Is government being very fair?  But they were very happy to hear the President because the Budget Speech and the opening of the Session were concurrently carried together so they were very happy to hear the whole President appealing to the Minister of Finance and Economic Planning asking them to restructure the whole economy of this nation.  Otherwise, we are perishing. I wish to see funds accorded by government to assist people in alleviating poverty to have those funds sensed to rural areas.  In making it in form of soft loans that the entandikwa we are talking of already, some districts have been earmarked for those funds.  And again, some of them are allocated in some regional blocks.  Now for example, is suffering?  We do not know where we belong.  There is a South-Western Programme where we do not exist.  Now we jump off to the North, we are even in the North; where do we identify ourselves?  (Applause) 

In Bundibugyo District, fees it is cheapest and they like services.  Cheated in a way that government gets loans which in your turn the loans is to assist to recover, yet the services are not rendered at all through those loans.  They lack services in a way that, I have mentioned a short list of the potentials in that district.  They are not utilized at all, that district could also develop, at the same level as other districts are developing.  For example, the Minister of Natural Resources will never be forgiven because we have got - (Laughter)- we have got some waterfalls, which could be used to get power flow so that we have some small industries that are not utilized.  We have got some hot springs in the District, which could also be utilised, but they are not utilised.  Let the poor road - I was very happy to hear from the hon. Deputy Minister of Finance talking of a machinery for Bundibugyo road, I hope he kept his promise because all the people are there waiting to see you in rampant.  If you can bring - when they see that machinery on the road come 25 January 1995, when there could be a new government.  So we hope the next elections will find there a smooth road.  (Laughter)

To wind up, on liberalisation. We would be doing well if liberalisation could favour us.  What I mean is, the people who come in to buy our crops, the coffee and cocoa, just come once and go because the road is so poor, it is made up of very sharp rocks, hon. Kagonyera can be a witness when he went there when he was a Minister, he had to close his eyes, he did not want to look this way, he did not want to look down -(Laughter)- because he was fearing it, because the rocks are closed up. Why the present buyers are not going back; is that, the road is bad.  When the rocks fall off from the main ones on the left side of the road, they go down rolling and they roll the other side of the road.  So, the road is now getting narrower with time.  And when the Deputy Minister of Works talked about the reduced hours on the road, I was surprised; we did not know what he was meaning by reduced hours.  The erosion, which is taking place on that road, leaves the rocks necked and these one damage the private vehicles and they go condemning us.  They have bought cars more times, and they have realised more losses, and the profits which they could have realized from the crops, come again from Bundibugyo.  So, it costs them a lot to repair the vehicles than the profit they make when they come to buy our crops and the taxes are there. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, please wind up.

MRS BIKORWENDA:  Yes, I am winding up, Mr Chairman. (Applause) I am saying, at least, I have thanked the Minister of Education, he has really tried his level best.  We get the 50 per cent, the teachers are being brought, he was sympathetic enough not to close our TTC because it was under - the enrolment was not enough.  But now if facilities were available, the college is over flowing.  Because parents were able to pay school fees and send there their children. But now with this bad road, the next season will not get any private buyer to buy the coffee and the school fees will again, really be a vicious circle there will be no school fees for children at school.  

So, we thank the Minister of Education, but then we have a quarrel. Allow me with the Minister of Health - there was an influx of refugees in Bundibugyo District, which eventually spread in cholera.  And we were busy asking again and again finances so that the patient would be ferried into the hospital very quickly.  But people are dying as they are being carried.  And you know how fast cholera kills.  Cholera is attended to but at a slow rate, just in the main hospital but then in the rural areas, people are dying as they are being curried on the way to the hospital.  

So, I would request the Minister of Health, please consider availing the nation, especially national hospitals without vehicles so that the patients can be taken urgently to the hospital.  I think if you cannot avail it, the case of transport can be solved by giving us a helicopter. We do not mind -(Laughter)- because of the bad road.  With those few remarks, I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR KIYONGA (Bukonjo County, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to start my contribution by recognising the continuing and positive improvement in the structural adjustment programme. Over the years, this programme has enabled government to remove the privy distortions in our economy.  Those of us who come from the coffee areas can see some evidence of this. When the price recently went up on the International Market, the peasants that are engaged in coffee production immediately noticed the change.  And in the areas of Bugisu, Bundibugyo, and in Kasese, if you walk there, you find people carrying iron sheets, mattresses, radios and bicycles.  This being evidence that the move of the price distortion is also reaching the farmers.  

The structural adjustment programme has also led to the effort being undertaken to rationalise the government structure and particularly the Civil Service.  And as we heard from the Speech of the Minister of Finance, the external inflows have definitely improved the stock exchange. The other one is to sell part of that Bank to the local banks and privatise the remaining part of UCB, since the stock exchange is established.  The idea is good but the problem with it is, if the stock exchange delays then we delay everything and it would not help us very quickly and the burden will be made.  

The third part is to split the bank into several parts.  Place one for privatisation and leave another one for offering to stock exchange.  That option is also very welcome, the only problem it has is that if the market fails then that one, which has been privatised through the stock exchange, would also fail.  

The fourth, option is to invite the local people plus the local banks, it has an element of discrimination but we have a saying in Runyankore that ‘ekishorobwa kihango okyendeza enkoko yaawe.’ I do not know how I can translate that, a good piece of something you always give it to your own chicken first.  The chicken now is a Ugandan, we first start with a Ugandan although it has discrimination but I think we should start with a Ugandan. This one would help us to get the Ugandans involved in the financial sector and get the thing moving. 

Now, how do we privatise? I have gone through the details but we are suggesting, in order to enable this bank to be taken over and very quickly too, let us sell the privatisation.  We have experienced in Kenya.  Do not let us put the whole bank at once and say we are selling it because if we do so it is the big ones who will gain the result being that may be the big ones will make it cheap but I think the whole essence of privatisation is to democratise ownership so that everybody has a stake in something.  The democratisation ownership should be the purpose of privatisation and if we sell it Ugandans will be able to buy portions of this bank as they are doing with Kenya Commercial Bank and the National Bank of Kenya across the border.  

I am sure with a phased privatisation programme the people of Uganda will own this bank and things will improve. 

I would like now to turn on what type of loans or bad debts with us.  We looked at that.  We had to know who borrowed this money and for what purpose.  How much money did he borrow.  What were the conditions of his borrowing?  Did he give a security and how long has he been in default.  We found the following.  As I said the Minister has corrected the figure.  Of the 52.23 billion, 47 per cent of that money was the principle amount borrowed. 52.2 per cent was interest charges.  Why and that is the reason of some of it cannot be paid but we have examined that, we looked at that.  Because there were those people who also borrowed the same money and paid and equity demands that at least we get this money, at least, the principle paid.  Maybe the Trust may examine what to do with the interest rates but then if you want to be fair you should treat everybody fairly because the reason, Sir, I had that some people did not pay is not that they were unable to pay as you read in the Bill you will find that there were those who were unwilling, not unable, they were unwilling to pay.  Why?  Some of the people who got these same loans as I have already mentioned, got them on different excuses and the intentions were not honourable at that time or they got it as a thank you and, therefore, they took it for granted that they did not need to pay.

Where did this money come from? Where was the money coming from? Part of the money was external borrowed money either as grants or as deposits.  We have analyzed this amount and you can see them in detail on page 12 and page 13.  Part of the money came from USAID for what they used to call Rehabilitation Productive Enterprises, those that brought those white lorries.  Part of the money was for medium scale industries, part of the money came from IDA, part of the money came from the African Development Bank and the last part was from DANIDA for Rural Farmers Scheme.  Of that 48.7 of the total amount of bad debts is from borrowed money also from external sources. 51.3 per cent is form people’s deposits and, it is this one which is of greatest concern because on grants may be the government can design certain measures, but on people’s deposits, there is nothing you can do.

We also looked at the structure of these loans what I think of borrowing wise.  Most of the money was in commercial, it was transport money but most of it was in commercial but I would like to touch on one thing, that is the rural farmers scheme.  The Rural Farmers Scheme actually although it has 5,000 out of the 500,000 accounts, it is a very little proportion, it only amounts to 4 per cent and on the average each loans is about 120,000 so it is small money.  81 per cent of the big money is owned by very few people and those you find the thing is so big to the extent of having 160 million shillings.  There are those who owe over, about 200 or 300 million shillings each.  

is always a feeling of how these loans are given.  How are they regionally distributed? We examined this because at times there is whispers around and may be most of the loans are going one side and most of the loans are not going. We found that most of the loans, at least, the accounts held, 60 per cent are in the central region.  And that one is understandable because the central region is where the capital of this country is and it is where most of us are.  Secondly, 27 per cent is in the Eastern Region.  Why? 27 per cent of these accounts are in Tororo and Jinja. It is also understandable and Mbale.  10 per cent is in the Western Region and the Northern Region has 4 per cent.  (Interruption) Mr Chairman, I would like to qualify these things.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order.

MR KIYONGA: Mr Chairman, I would like to qualify these things lest they become a gospel truth that most of the money is actually in the Central Region.  It is not true.  A deep examination of these accounts reveals that people could borrow from the West and borrow in the centre. And these things are so revealing because you can tell by the names. So the mere fact that the percentages are what they are does not means the loans were applied in that Region.  It is not supported by empirical evidence after looking at the data.  In fact, you will find so many of the loans purported to be in Central actually are coming from the West or from the East or from the North.

We looked at the security given for these loans.  What types of securities were given? In most cases securities were given but there were so many loopholes. In fact, except for the Rural Farmers Scheme, most of them were covered except about 12 percent but in some cases people just took titles to the bank.  There were no encumbrances put on those titles.  Two, the valuations of those titles left something to be desired.  With due respect to hon. Bageine, if he is here the way at times these things are valued does not reflect the true value of the title that you are securing the loan for.  So, there are problems, although most of them are secured, others have left a lot to be desired. 

We looked at the age and since my Colleague, the former Managing Director of the Bank, Chairman, Managing Director and former Adviser, a member of PAC in the other previous regime is here, we looked at that one to see whether he actually performed according to the norms. Since Mr Kaijuka -(Laughter)- we found that in actual fact, up to 1986 the loans and debts in this portfolio that we are holding was only 1.1 per cent -(Laughter and Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order.

MR KIYONGA: I heard one Member saying the economy was not performing. The statistics are there, and you can look at those also, but I am not going to go in those details because I have the data and I can avail them to the hon. Minister of State for Foreign Affairs. But in actual fact, between 1989, 1990,1991, something happened and something big did happen.  But that should not take us away from the real issues at stake and since now the same man is now enjoying, he is new born again NRM so we can say that he will carry the message across. (Laughter and Interruption)

MR KAIJUKA: Mr Chairman, is my very good Friend, hon. Kanyomozi in order to make a political speech whilst he is making a very valid point that really there was a professional Managing Director at one stage -(Laughter)- in that national institution, is the hon. Kanyomozi in order to continue with his political speech?

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister you came late.  Hon. Kanyomozi is in order; he is making a report.

MR KIYONGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like now to turn to the last part of the Bill.  How this Bill should be and I am taking you to page 17.  We looked at all the clauses and we decided to change certain things.  We provided, we inserted the word ‘Bond’ as an instrument so that it is that Bond, which will be issued by the Treasury, can be used as an instrument and it could be sold and be redeemed.  We wanted a sinking fund so that when the money is collected is not put in the Consolidated Fund but put in sinking fund so that it can be used to recapitalise the bank.

In doing so we thought that would help and reduce the burden both to the Treasury and to us.

On the Board of Trustee, we expanded the professionals to include Chartered Accountants, please with banking knowledge, Finance and Accountancy. Originally, it was restrictive. We also did the same to the Committee and the Membership. We moved on to look at how the Vice-Chairman of the Board should be selected. We thought the Vice-Chairman of the Board would be selected by the members of the Board from amongst themselves since the Minister is selecting the chairman, we did not think it was necessary to have another one.  

We also looked at the Minister.  What happens if the Minister is also on the list?  What should we do?  If he is on the list we are saying he should also declare himself to his colleagues before makes any suggestion on people he is going to appoint.  Why are we saying that because we do not want him to appoint somebody who will look very kindly or very smartly at his known portfolio and should he not do so what happens? 

I was looking at the report as an after thought. Under normal circumstances if he did so and appointed somebody whom he knew, when he knew he himself had an interest on this non-performance, the thing would be for him, and he would be going against the law. The normal situation is for him to resign or be dismissed with disgrace but the hon. House may want to put that in the law if they saw fit.

We looked at the penalties.  The original penalties provided as a fine for non-disclosure or non-adherence to the law, provided for Shs 500, 000. We thought that most of these people, the two thousand that I mentioned are owing us Shs160 million; Shs 200 millions and to say because he has refused to do so, you ask him to pay a fine, we thought that one was too little.  So we increased the amount to Shs 1, 000,000 and two years imprisonment or both.

We went on and looked at the functions of the Board.  The Minister had been given a provision under Clause 6 to give specific directives.  We did not think that was proper because in case he has interest elsewhere, not himself but elsewhere, he may give specific instructions that Kanyomozi should be assisted.  So in order to protect him and to protect the bank and the nation, we said he would only be allowed to give general policy directives so that they are not specific. 

We looked at the administrator of the fund, the Chief Executive.  Originally the Minister was going to do so single-handed.  We thought it would be better if the Chief Administrator was responsive to the Board he is working with so we say the Board will interview all applicants, reduce them to three and recommend those to the Minister so that the Minister can appoint one. There was a provision that some people in the Civil Service should automatically be seconded to this administration. We thought that was dangerous. We want transparency and competition and people should be selected in this important task on merit.  

So, we recommended no.  Civil servants if they are interested in serving on this Trust or Board, they will apply like everybody else and be interviewed on merit and when they pass they qualify and go and work, they can ask for leave of absence for the period of that or when they will be serving.

I have already talked about the sinking fund, I do not need to repeat it.

Now, there was a problem about the assets and investigations machinery should be thorough and to do that we also provided in the auxiliary functions a penalty similar to the one I have already suggested so that people can give information when this is required.

We looked at the Tribunal. A Tribunal, the Chief Justice was going to only be consulted but we think the Minister should consult the Chief Justice and also consult his Colleagues in the cabinet before the chairman of the Tribunal is appointed.

Furthermore, and also the other two members of the Tribunal will also be done after consultation with the cabinet. We want that collective responsibility because of the sums of money involved.  The expenses of the Tribunal, Clause 20, we are suggesting those will be handled under the Minister of Finance. 

The Minister already touched on the Schedule.  We feel these Schedules are necessary. They are necessary because there are certain things we wanted to put in place. Trust, there is a law in existence about limited liability.  If a company borrows as a limited liability and goes bankrupt, we stop there.  We are saying no, even if you borrow, you are a beneficiary to that loan we will follow you individually and collectively. 

Two, what about the members of UCB who gave the loans against the set rules and regulations?  We are saying they too will be followed because we have learnt that there are some underhand business that have gone on and this is the reason why we provided for that Schedule Two so as to ensure that we can go back and follow people even if they have left, even if the company has collapsed so that we can get our money back.

I have already in the Third Schedule touched on privatisation and we have already suggested the way ahead and how we need to do so.

In conclusion, I would like to appeal to the hon. Members and through you, that the decisions we arrived at in supporting the Trust despite our former recommendation was after seeing the magnitude of the problem.  Secondly, we thought it prudent to try and salvage whatever money we could on behalf of the depositors of this bank.  

Thirdly, we wanted to establish a financing institution, the UCB, the peoples own bank to be indeed a peoples own bank and moving it.  Fourthly, wee looked at the implication of not doing anything and what it would have on our financial sector. With all these things we decided that it was wise, prudent and within means and reasonable that a Fund, a Trust Fund should be established to recover the loans that the UCB has committed. 

I am recommending to the House that we support the Minister’s proposal.  We have on your behalf examined this in detail and the report is therefore for you to read.  If there are any queries or questions, Members of the Committee will answer, except that perhaps there is a - will be to keep away that money that will come from the excess coffee prices in a fund which stabilisation kind of fund like it used to be for cotton because that thing for cotton was withdrawn and now we have seen what has happened to cotton because of the fluctuating prices there is no more protection, cotton farmers are no longer happy they have no security and if we are not careful the same thing is going to happen to coffee.  This year you have a good price, therefore, you want to take them, next year when you have a bad price there is no way of compensating them. So, the best way really is to create this fund so that when there is a bad year the fund can be used to at least stabilise so that they get something.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR ONGOM:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, my point is about consistence I would not personally mind, if we want to draw the market away then just draw the market away when the price is good they received a good price.  When the price is bad they should accept, but we cannot mix the two that now when they are trying to compensate themselves for loose revenue now we say we want to take part of their money.  

So, I would like to just a moment hon. Didi, I would like to give notice to the hon. Minister that when he is winding up, if I am promised that they will take money now but when the prices falls below production cost they will be compensated then I will support.  If not I will move an amendment to reject this Act on coffee. With your permission I could take clarification from hon. Didi. (Interruption)

MR AGARD DIDI: Point of clarification.  I would like to thank the speaker holding the Floor for allowing me to make this point, because one I have a very great admirer of what I call Kiyonganomic, this is very serious because -(Interjection)- from the time when he was a Minister for Finance.  I will particularly speak one point today when he suggest that leaving the market forces alone is not sufficient there should be areas of intervention.  Before I finish I would like him to comment on the question of produce or crop finance, I will give the example of the 1989 the Rural Farmers Scheme.  When so much mobilisation was carried out, with some imaginary promise that the price could be around 120 a kilo but no appropriate arrangements were made to ensure that whatever the farmers produce was bought.  With the result the disaster result then the price of maize crushed in some areas to a miserable price this is shillings 20.  

So, I believe that being consistent with the idea of intervention, it is one thing bringing so many tractors whenever we think of a standing agriculture. There is one thing bringing in so many other things but if we do not go once for the - harvest which I think is being handled.  But more importantly if there is no support for those who go into the marketing sector so that the villagers are sure that if we produce this is will be bad.  Because in Uganda I believe that is why we have not specialised, take the example of beans, if a country wants a one colour type of beans and the farmers were told that if you grow this type it will be bought next year I am sure heaven will be the limit. So, I think consistence with this principle of collective intervention would be this question of how can we ensure the farmer that what he produce it will be bought.  I thank you.

MR KIYONGA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman, I will come to that let me first finish this point on coffee because there has been some questions that then where will the Government get that money to compensate or even now if they remove the tax on coffee.  In his statement, the hon. Minister for Finance did admit that from January this year, the Government moved to a different method of that thing petroleum products ad vorelum.  Before what used to happen Government would decide that we should take 20 or 30 shillings per litre, which is very easy to correct very predictable.  Then Government decided to ad vorelum which means you would just say that the taxes is 20 per cent if petrol raise at 100 you take 20 per cent, if it raises at 80 you take 20 per cent.  

Now, the Minister admitted that until May he had not intervened, the prices fail on the international market, the people who are supposed to truck this did not if they did not see they just kept quiet and reset the petrol company - we lost revenue because the Government had noticed what was happening, Government had the authority to change the tax rate by statutory instruments even without coming here.  The tax from petrol would have not been lost, now we lost that tax and my view is that even the weak civil service we have this are brought on taxing petrol which brings in significant amounts revenue is going to lose - even in the future.  I would still recommend that we go to a specific rate on petrol, and we say we shall get 200 or 300 shillings every litre.  So, whether the price there falls or comes down we are protected.  

You will note that the petrol companies in this country have shown us that actually they have lifted heavy profit, where have they been, why have they started investing so heavily very beautiful petrol stations all over the country in the town even where they were not they have come up, because they have made very heavy profit arising out of this policy, arising of our failure to notice that the price outside was falling and we should adjust our price. Now, having lost that revenue we are going back to the man who is crying of poverty to take away his coffee money.  So, there was an alternative where we could have got this money.  

Having said that let me briefly go back to what hon. Didi asked, this question of intervention really in intervention, the basis for intervention is that, the peasant in the village has no access to information or has no capability to have information.  When the price of falls or changes he cannot know, he does not know whether next year we shall need more maize or less maize.  So, by intervention we mean we should be able to guide him we should be able we ourselves who are in position who have the information take the correct information and encourage him to do the correct thing.  What hon. Didi has just described that peasants were told to plant maize and they did so, obviously this was a policy, which was not coordinated. Maize was produced there were no stores, there were no roads, there were no buyers we could not have expected a different thing.  So, by intervention we have to take into account all these elements.  

Then my point is on decentralisation. I would like to commend Government that it is making progressive steps to ensure that we decentralise power to the people and now we are giving them financial authority so that they are the ones allocating resources and I am glad to indicate that the district of Kasese now has also appeared in the list of districts to be decentralised this financial year. But I would like to point out Members, that this decentralisation on the face of it is a beautiful thing but for districts like my which has local capacity in terms of man power it can be a disadvantage.  So, we have to keep on look out that we help to strengthen capacity there from Government and also from Members of NRC.  If this capacity is not strengthened we are going to end a financial year the money has either been stolen or has not been spent and going back to the Treasury, because now we have to plan for the money we have to allocate it and call attention of Government when we have additional need.  In fact, I would be interested to know -(Interruption)

MR DRANI DRADRIGA: Point of information. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform the Member holding the Floor that already a lot of interference is been given by central government in decentralisation. About one week ago there was a directive issued by the Minister for Trade and Industry to the effect that districts which are trying to raise some revenue from their own produce being taken out of the districts must stop forthwith and it there - impounded they have to be released. A district like Arua which is already decentralised has been trying to make some small revenue but reasonable enough to help it pay salaries wages and so forth. Now, Government is interfering this and in fact I would ask the Minister responsible to make clarification on this it is giving the right hand then you move the left hand.  Thank you.

MR KIYONGA:  Mr Chairman, I heard of this issue even before the Minister comes up.  My own view really is that you can have positive and negative interference, when I have talked about centralisation I have first talked about the resources which are going from the centre to the periphery and as we know as the Minister of Local Government did tell us once here there is going to be subsequent step on the issue of revenue to decide which revenue is going to be collect at the district, to decide which revenue is going to be shared in what ration between district and central Government.  I think I felt satisfied with explanation given by the hon. Minister on radio, that this issue of putting road blocks in the way on produce is interfering with n overall policy of improving marketing for the produce of our peasants  -(Applause) So, it is not even if we take power we must use the power properly, we can have power and misuse it and then we would come worse than before.

Now, my final point on decentralisation is that I would like at some stage Government to explain what is going to happen when it comes to interruption with financiers.  Before, the local people are going to decide which projects they want and the projects are normally agreed on between government and financiers until we have enough money ourselves. So, when the World Bank comes, when the African Development Bank comes is it going to Kasese to discuss there or some one will discuss on our behalf here?  Because unless that one is cleared we shall still have the distortion. If some one will decide here and say Kampala will have roads and say that is the project the World Bank has approved and the people of Kasese how will they know that these negotiations have gone and they have also taken part?  With your permission -(Interruption)

CAPT. BABU:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member on this particular issue of negotiating for loans for different parts.  Today, in Government there is some sort of culture that when people are going to negotiate for these loans, people who are not qualified end up going to negotiate for these loans and there is a lot of prove for this one.  I will give you an example, where the City Council for example was going to negotiate the loan on the World Bank, decided to give the expert who had drawn up the papers and take a man who had no idea at all of what was contained in the project, and this they left the man and we had to go and beg the Ministry to take the man who actually could go and negotiate with these people.  This has not stopped there, when technical men are going to negotiate in this country you find Ministers going, and some of these Ministers could not belong to those Ministers. They just go and this is causing -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

CAPT. BABU:  Mr Chairman, this is causing a lot of problem.  So, this point we must with this centralisation decide if the people themselves in the areas concerned Kampala City Council - the district Council will get experts in certain area to go and negotiate for those districts.  It is a very important point and I hope the Ministry of Finance will look into this one very seriously.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR KIYONGA:  Mr Chairman, as I conclude I would like to say that I am happy with the progress being made in the structure adjustment programme and that we have a big imbalance which has been admitted by Government that the majority of the people of this country the peasants have not been linked to the market economy, and that in order to correct this we require ideological orientation, we need to purpose - intervene particularly in the are of infrastructure extension and credit.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr Chairman, I would like to thank all Members for this very lively Debate.  I was also pleased that discussing the country’s economy is now taking as much interest as discussing the country’s politics.  Formally, hon. Members were more interested in the politics of the country unless in the economy I am glad about the improvement now that everybody is concerned about the economy.  

Mr Chairman, made very many interesting points and it is not possible for me to address all of them, I will address a few areas where I would like our understanding to meet both as Ministry officials and also as Members of Parliament to understand what we mean.  

First of all there is a big Debate on the ‘entandikwa’ for me, I thought it was a simple matter but now it seems it is getting out of proportion.  Most of the areas there is some kind of credit, which ordinary peasants can access if they want to, into the production.  But, there some areas yet were such credit projects have not been put in place.  For example, in the area of West Nile, in the area of Busoga all the districts of Busoga, the districts of Buganda, Bundibugyo and Kabarole.  In those areas, even if a local peasant wanted some kind of credit, if not possible, that is why when hon. Kisamba Mugerwa there was a meeting in his area, he said in that area even if one had entrepreneurship and had all facilities and needed half a million shillings in order to produce there was no project there which could be accessed to. 

So, in answer to this lack of such facilities the Government has put aside 6 billion shillings.  This is a recognition that while we have the banking system, some of our producers are so small and so remote, that maybe, the demands of the commercial banks are too high on them, can we try to develop a system where accessibility to small credit can be put in place and create a developing fund which can be put back.  

The others are projects supported from outside in the other districts like SWAP, like NURP is a World Bank project basically with our little contribution.  But this is the first time the Uganda Government, the country is putting its own experimental pilot project to see whether it can work and therefore, can be created into a permanent project of some kind of rural credit which in the end up develop into an institution for rural and small scale credit development.  

So, I want Members to see it in this light, this does not mean that there is sufficient credit in the country at all that is one of the weakness hon. Dr Kiyonga has said, there is shortage of relevant credit for people involved in many areas of production fishing carpentry etc always things our people do and we are trying to see as our resources develop how we can put up schemes that can help them and build an institution around them.  I thought I would clarify on this matter, so that we can -(Interruption)

MR DRANI DRADRIGA:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I will not try to disturb the very good statements being issued by the Minister.  But, it is very important if the Mover who is now winding up can give us a specific clarification on the criteria for selection. I think the major issue in the House has been the criteria for selection regarding that kind of assistance.  We do agree that the most crucial area is accessibility to credit to - at the end of the day to have a shilling in our pockets.  So, it might be useful if he gives us that clarification on the criteria for selection then we shall be able to appreciate.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  What I mentioned areas and I said hitherto, other areas while some areas had some credit chains for peasant farmers there are some areas, which did not. For example, in the new budget, we have managed to secure funds from CARE, UNCDEF, so a project to be called West Nile credit project.  So, this one puts West Nile out of the list I have read. This now gives us the area of Busoga, the area of Buganda, Bundibugyo and Kabarole, and we are trying now to see how we can start to create things even of ourselves not waiting donor funds.

I would like secondly to say that budget is a package I have heard hon. Member pick out of the Budget some thing they would like to fight and stop and something they want not to stop, I, want to ask you to look at budget as a package. It contains carefully considered and determined goals and objective as well as resource mobilization measures. I, therefore, strongly recommend that the Budget be look at and considered in its totality, unadjustment of one side should be accompanied by a corresponding adjustment on the other side in order to maintain the equilibrium.

Thirdly, I want to take this opportunity to address some of the issues raised in the general debate, which has an economic basis I will not make any comment on the politics.  First, is the increase in the taxes on used - my Friend hon. Babu almost said that we should make a restriction to stop this.  But I want us to look at this problem not as a problem of second hand clothes, as a problem of economic recovery and economic growth of our people.  Hitherto, most of the people in Uganda and a number of them were imported in the cotton industry as cotton farmers, as cotton ginners, as industrial works.  Today, these people are not employed and today the people of Teso, and Kumi when faced with famine they cannot buy food from Kasese, because they have no cash crop they can think of which can give them money even if food crops fail for them to buy food, we have to bring back the cotton industry.  We have to get people to invest back money in the cotton industry that is why the cotton industry had been liberalized. More people were employed in the Textile industry before voucovere are employed in the second hand textile industry today. (Interruption)

MRS BIKORWENDA:  Mr Chairman, I would like to go in record. Because as the taxes were raised, and the message went down to these second hand dealers, that it has been raised because some big shots, have got big shares in the textile industries, unless they are killing that business, to promote theirs.  Thank you.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Madam, I was giving you the background. Second-hand clothes for Uganda are a new phenomenon, which has come up as a result of the collapse of the cotton industry.  We must bring back the cotton industry.  Why? Because most of our people are depending on the indigenous cotton industry, than the second hand clothes business.  

Secondly, government would like its people to wear new clothes.  Yes.  It is possible.  So we want to remove the tax as much as possible from new clothes.  So, that people can have access to new clothes.  I was told, first of all also; in the taxation theory I was told by hon. Babu and my sister who has spoken this afternoon, that all of Members of Parliament, Ministers, everybody is putting on second hand clothes. I had not known that; but taxation that is another reason.  Because tax is given where people consume. People have left new textiles.  And you must raise revenue; you must follow consumption.  So, that is another reason, which technically, a taxman looks for - they only tax people, where they consume.  The people have left you in that area, please; you follow them, where they have gone; if you are going to raise any tax.  

But Madam, that is not the intention of government. The intention of government, we would like hon. Members for you to put money in ginneries again - hon. Abu shaking his hand, he says not now.  We want to create conditions, which will make you make money, by putting up ginneries.   When we put up ginneries, when we renovate our ginneries; our people will grow more cotton.  If they can grow more cotton, they get a cashcrop; they get money.  That is why they are poor now, because they are not selling things, which will give them money.  If they get the money, they can export cotton that is why there has been privatization for government to stop efficiently managing textile mills, to give it to the people, who can run them properly.

For this to happen, there must be a market for the products in which people are investing.  So, reducing tax on new textiles is creating a market for new textiles, so that people can go back into cotton.  And therefore, Gentlemen and Ladies, do not think - no the surface of it and second hand clothes.  It is a measure taken deliberately to bring back the cotton industry, to create a new cash crop again to our people, in order for there to be growth and there be also wealthy among the people in the rural areas.  We must get them to produce something they can sell.  But secondly, also second hand clothes. I would like you to protect your people.  These people spend money to buy second hand clothes.  It is difficult to tell whether you are buying value for money - second hand clothes; you take a risk, you take a chance, it can last, it may not last.

So, we should not say, that since we have been unfortunate and our people now find themselves in second hand clothes, we must permanent lock them there to suffer and die in second hand clothes.  We must move to let them be properly dressed at the prices they can afford; this is the move.  

I want now to turn on the issue of road licences - the vehicle licences.  For now, the new charges of motor road licences are as follows: The motorcycles and private vehicles, the charges are based on engine purposes.  But for other vehicles, goods vehicles, tractors, engineering plant, and other unclassified items, the charges are based on gross weight.  It is possible that in changing a new basis of charging a fees and licences, there is a substantial increase in the fees.  But this is in line with the damage on our roads.  The bigger the trucks, the more damage they make on the roads.  The maintenance and repairing of our roads, constitutes a major constrain on the budget.  And it is only fair, that the road uses contribute proportionately, in order to continue providing and sustaining the existing infrastructure.  We have been given notice, Ladies and Gentlemen, that donors are going to be readily available to donate more money, and to build more roads for us; leave alone maintaining them.  Therefore, we must bear the cost of keeping our roads the way they are, and this is the issue of Parliament.

Hon. Members, you agree with me that a well-maintained road network is a saving on vehicle maintenance and loss of lives, through road accidents, and that we cannot continue to depend on outside support for the maintenance of our roads. 

I want to make two brief comments.  First; now on VAT.  Some people say why do we not introduce VAT now?  VAT is a complicated tax, which requires a thorough ground work, in addition to legislation, and policy issues, it has wide administrative aspects, like registration of tax payers, their education to make them administrate the value of record keeping in their operation, and setting up an effective tax administration in place.  

Obviously in our situation, where we operate on cash basis, the level of record keeping is still very low.  There are few registered taxpayers and Uganda Revenue Authority had a lot to do, to develop both the competence and capacity to effectively manage the tax.  This explains the two years programme to enable us to thoroughly look at all these problems I am however glad to report that work has already started.

On the next point, Sir, I would like hon. Members to recognise our revenue efforts.  Although we are still a long way from fully financed in the Budget, the establishment of the Uganda Revenue Authority has boosted revenue collection to a monthly average of now 33 billion.  This is not mini achievement, and explains the beginning of create your capacity, to provide the services necessary to uplift the well being of our people. We can only have freedom, to do this and this for our people, from our resources, other people’s resources if they are the ones we depend on, they tell us how to use them.  So, I want to congratulate the country for having everyday appreciated on how to handle on this problem of raising revenue. 

Another problem was raised on employment and even this afternoon, hon. Dr Luyombya raised it.

I would like to talk briefly about the effect of structural adjustment on employment. The results of the national manpower survey that was completed in 1989, shows that, the formal sector of the economy, employed only a total of 378,000 people as of 31 January 1988. On these, about two thirds were employed in government, and about one third were in non-government sector - parastatals; private establishments and cooperatives.  Of the total number of establishment covered by the survey, the private sector has the largest number of establishments in the 56 per cent; but employed only 15 per cent of the people.  Government had only 26 per cent of establishments, but employed 65 per cent, of the work force, and parastatals is 7.6; of the establishment employed only 14 per cent.  The cooper sector with 5.4 per cent of the establishment, employed on 4 per cent.  The average number of employees per establishment in Government, parastatals, private and cooper sector, worked out at 162,000 and 46 respectively.  The impact of structural adjustment is to promote private sector development, and it is through the privatisation process, to make parastatals more efficient.  As this sector fixer, also their implement opportunities are expected to improve, as measured by the number of employees per establishment.  

The important point to make, Sir, is that, Government before the Civil Service Reform, was the biggest employer in the economy despite its small size in production. But this should not be the case.  The role of Government is to guide the private sector into what areas are of priority for the economy, for the private sector to invest in order to creating a stable and conducive environment for private sector investment.  Once the private sector responds positively, then private sector investment would expand faster, any employment, which will be supported by production, will automatically increase.  And no wonder, I want to report now that, hon. Dr Luyombya is in charge of some enterprises, which are now employing thousands and thousands of people. That is what government wants to encourage. (Interruption)

CAPT. BABU:  Point of information. I would like to thank the Minister for his brilliant contribution and points.  But on this one, I think we should go a little bit further.  Some of these private sectors are employing a lot of foreigners, and these foreigners are brought, and our institutions of learning like the technical schools have got capacity of people who can be trained. Some of these investors and private bodies, must be asked by government to train indigenous people, in these areas, instead of bringing foreigners here, and what is very interesting these foreigners after they finish the contract, they do not read; they become shopkeepers here. So, I would like the Immigration Board, the Ministry and Government to look into this sector.  Thank you.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Okay, I will take note of this, and we shall ensure that the Investment Authority, does not allow investors to bring up those who do really exist in the country.  And I am glad some of the biggest employers like Dr Luyombya are here, they must have taken note of your concern -(Laughter)- but some of these investors just surprise you sometimes, when they are coming to invest in Uganda, they have a negative attitude about Uganda; they think nothing moves in Uganda. They think Uganda has no graduates, technical people and so on.  It is only that after they arrive here, they realise that the personnel they are bringing from outside, are expensive for nothing, because they could have got Ugandans who can do better, than outsiders. And some of them we find later on, they do not renew these contracts.  But I also talked to the Immigration.  A work permit should be issued really to cover areas where Ugandans cannot be formed. I think with these joint efforts, we should be able to influence this situation so that we can improve, using the private sector to create employment to our people. (Interruption)

DR LUYOMBYA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the issue of employment and employing forefingers - the enterprises are profit-oriented, and they do not employ for the sake of employing; and you look for schemes; where there are schemes in Uganda, Ugandans are taken. But I cannot speak for every establishment. The way I have knowledge, jobs are advertised, and people apply, and they compete for them.  There are also training programmes.  In fact, as far as I know, especially, where funds are borrowed from international organisation, there is that strange attach of training the local man power, and where I have knowledge, that is being followed.  Thank you.

CAPT. BABU:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I happen to have trained in a college like UTC; it is called a Kenya Polytechnic. The Kenya Polytechnic is supported mainly by industrialists in Kenya.  They bring clauses.  I would like any industry in Uganda, to tell me if they have a class, in Uganda Technical College? And whether Uganda Technical College has refused to tailor a course for any particular industry; it is not there. I would like to request that the Uganda Polytechnic be supported, and the people of this country be given a chance - they can be very good technicians, and they can work.  We have doctors, economists, and pilots here; we have everything.  So, we should not be told that we have no Muganda who can do certain jobs.  Those are lies.  Thank you.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr Chairman, I want to revert briefly to interest rates.  They move towards a full liberalisation of the interest rates in May and June led to a faster declare in interest rates to 11 per cent, by June 1994.  Government has now fully liberalised the determination of the interest rates; the banking sect is not fully responsible for setting the rates.

However, to avoid a ratio movement in interest rates, in the liberalised environment, the Bank of Uganda will influence interest rates through its liquidity management, and this will satisfy Dr Kiyonga for - this is what we call selective intervention.  The major single fact for the high real interest rates has been the high intermediation costs of the financial sector.  These costs being driven by a large proportion of non-performing assets and bad debts in the bank portfolios.  For this reason, therefore, financial intermediaries have intended to maintain high lending interest rates despite a downward adjustment in the deposit rates.  The large space between the lending and deposit rates, have used to cover the operating costs of the financial intermediaries.  

Although Government initiated a financial sector adjustment programme in 1991, to assist in the restructuring and development of the banking sector, progress has been slow.  However, the restructuring of the Uganda Commercial Bank has started; in staff retrenchment, branch closures, and rationalization of the operation of UCB are going on. This will result in a smaller spends, and lower interest rates in the near future.  (Interruption)

MR SIBO:  Point of information.  While I appreciate urge that the lending interest rates are governed by the cost of money, however, I would like to say that if that is true, that the lending rate remain high because of the cost of money, then the deposit rates also should remain high.  Because as I say, I should not be charged 30 per cent interest on a loan from deposits which are paying two per cent.  So, in that case, deposit rate should also remain high.  Now, I want to inform the Minister, that when you rise this point with a commercial bank, which he says the policy has been liberalised, the commercial bank says that, the deposit rate has been set by the central bank.  But the leading rate has been set by the Central Bank.  But the commercial bank still wants to double the rate that has been set.  

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA: Hon. Sibo knows very well because he is in charge of the Centenary Bank. So, what the government is saying, we are going to regulate the minimum a bank must give a depositor. A bank cannot give below that minimum but the bank to attract deposits can give as high an interest rate as a bank thinks it wise.  But the government is saying the banks must reduce the interest rates they charge and we are putting in place a scheme to help them reduce interest rates.  If they do not, after all this assistance given to them, we shall do what we call constructive intervention.  But for the time being we think these must be reasonable people, we do not want to threaten the privatisation of the banking industry.  They must respond to the market forces.  

But I am still glad to say that interest rates have dropped from 48 per cent to now 22 per cent in some banks.  That is a great achievement and hon. Kanyomozi who is in charge after he reports and you adopt and reconstruct UCB, we are looking to a further reduction in interest rates hopefully down to about 14 to 15 per cent to be in line with the rate of inflation.  If they do not, I think in those areas we can intervene positively but it will come I hope.  

I want just to briefly talk about the impact on the increase in international coffee prices which Dr Kiyonga elaborately put a case.  The impact of the increase in international price of coffee is to boost the profits of the coffee trades.  When profits increase, there is an increased incentive for the producers to even pay a higher price to the peasant farmer because of the increased competition in a liberalised environment.  The result effect is that the incomes of the coffee producers are increasing as they earn more income for the same quantity of coffee to sell.  The unfortunate thing is that Uganda at the moment has no large stocks of coffee to market and therefore, the gain from the increased prices is not likely to have a major impact in the long run unless coffee production can be boosted. But why have we put a coffee stabilisation tax?  

Regarding the coffee stabilisation tax that was introduced in the 1994 Budget, this was due to the fact that the present high prices of coffee threaten to exacerbate the current pressure on the exchange rate; which hurts the government cash flow and more especially the export sector. Continued appreciation would undermine the viability of diversification. It was then proposed that tax on coffee exports be introduced which would collect some of the windfall gains when coffee prices are very high. The yield from the tax would be used to permit the Bank of Uganda to purchase foreign exchange in the market and ease some of the pressure in the exchange rate giving relief to other exporters and producers of other substitutes. This is also what Dr Kiyonga would have liked to see some constructive intervention. If the money proceeds today are allowed beyond that level to be on the market, the exchange rate will fall and all the other crops will therefore, not break through. Tea will collapse, cotton will collapse and produce will collapse. So, you will have a bigger problem in the economy. (Interruption)
 
MR OPIO: Point of information. Mr Chairman, the point being raised by the Minister is acceptable but it contradicts with the statement by him on page 5, which says that the government has not and will not attempt to hold the market to any pre-determined exchange rate.  Now, when this statement is read clearly, he is saying that the government will not attempt.  He is saying at the same time that they will use the excess of what they think to intervene to hold to a certain rate.  Can we find out maybe as a clarification, if the government has foreseen a certain rate, which we could maintain to reduce uncertainty especially in financial risks about the exchange rates?

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA: You cannot understand me.  I was pleased because in my home area in Butambala, people are selling coffee now at 1,200/- per kilo.  Now, that is if the current exchange rate at around one dollar to 970/- is maintained.  If the rate became 600/= the peasant farmers would not be able to fetch one thousand shillings. That price would have to come down.  So, the intervention is not to say the rate is like this, but by determining how much dollar is on the market; not beyond a certain level within a given period. You can influence at least the sustenance of a particular exchange rate range.  It is not also strange, the bank rate we all know was going down so fast but since the Bank of Uganda had resources, the Bank of Uganda managed to buy foreign exchange at the going rate and created reserves for this country.  

So, this is what I say about calculated positive intervention. The prices can easily drop to 600/- per kilo if the exchange rate dropped to 500/- per dollar.  But as Dr Kiyonga has said, it is a big challenge.  When you do not let farmers get everything they can fetch, what if the bad days come? I can assure him that government will never desert coffee farmers.  The government is coming back now to prop up cotton because my Friends have had a problem saying, how can the economy grow when the people have no money?  It is true and I will show it. Our people have been poor.  Why? People who were growing coffee, their incomes dropped from 400 million dollars per year to 90 million dollars per year.  So, coffee farmers were getting that less money because of the collapse of the coffee. Naturally, they get poor.  Our people who used to get money from coffee, from cotton no longer have a cash crop now.  That is why we are putting up a cotton project again so that they can get cash.  But that does not mean that the country has not put up new industries, new roads, and that the country has not increased production in industries; and this is growth.  

So, it is possible to have growth but still the people, unless we put in place what Dr Kiyonga has said, a production system for them to produce for the market, as long as they remain subsistence, for stomachs, they will go without money and that is why we talk about crop diversification; bring new crops.   That is why we want coffee not to kill the export diversification of the other crops.  People in Toro, in Mbarara are already going into tea.  They must fetch a reasonable return on the tea.  This is the argument but government will never and always there will be resources to help cotton research, to help cotton development through the Uganda Development Authority.  

Now, Members were talking about credit, money for farmers, money for the bank.  It is not true that government has not been keen to providing finance to help agricultural producers in the country.  You may recall that government through the Uganda Commercial Bank introduced a Rural Farmers Scheme, which was closely monitored and supervised by Uganda Commercial Bank, but the project failed partly due to the uncertainty in the agricultural sector but largely due to the inefficiency of the Uganda Commercial Bank.  The problem of mismanagement of government parastatals is not only in Uganda Commercial Bank but also in other parastatals.  As was approved by Parliament, it was decided that most of the inefficient parastatals be privatised and this process is already going on.  

While government is trying to divest itself from direct production and commerce because of its failure in this area, and leave these functions to the private sector and hence privatisation.  You cannot at the same time advocate for creation of another government owned credit institution because we are selling UCB and we are privatising all this.  However, government will create conducive conditions to back up agriculture so that it is no longer seen in the risk which caters fear and this is to go into agricultural research, produce profitably and put money in agricultural extension service for farmers to produce reliably and also help the fishermen to fish more profitably and make money.  

Now, I want finally to explain this problem of economic growth but also poverty. Gross Domestic Product (GDP) is a measure of the total economic activities in the country including subsistence production in a specified period of time, say one year.  The major components of the GDP are agriculture, mining, quarrying, manufacturing, electricity, construction, commerce, transport and community services.  When we say GDP grew by 7 per cent in a particular year, it does not mean that people’s incomes have increased by that much in the same period.  But it means that economic activity in the country has increased by that much.  While some sectors of GDP such as road construction and building an industry may record a higher growth, because the value of investment is immediately captured in the national accounts, some of this growth takes a long time to transfer into a cash benefit of a direct nature to the people. 

When we say a road is constructed in a certain place, it has to attract investors, farmers to start planning for how to benefit from the road by say building some small industries along the road or opening up land for the production of horticulture like tomatoes but none of these investments can yield financial benefits to the people in that area in that short period. It can take five years for an industry to get well established and it can three to five years for an investor in coffee to start earning profits.  Another example is electricity.  When a dam is constructed, it is immediately captured in the national accounts as part of GDP but it can take up to ten years before the general population starts benefiting directly from the dam in form of attracting industries and therefore employment.  

The point to be made here is that all the GDP does not get birth to the population individually and therefore, cannot be felt personally in the pockets.  But that does not mean that it has not taken place.  It is also important to note that in the initial stages of growth, the distribution of income becomes more uneven except in the planned economies; with those people engaged in direct production like the middle class getting a larger proportion on the GDP while those not in production getting a smaller proportion of the GDP.  So, in the short run, the direct benefits of growth in some GDP sectors like commerce, manufacturing goes to those directly involved in production like the case of coffee now.  

However, when a reasonable growth is sustained for a long time, like in the case of the first growing Asian countries, then redistribution of incomes starts taking place due to a multiplier effect of the economy.  This reduces the gap between the poor and the rich and as the economy grows, the benefits from the growth are enjoyed by larger proportions of the population. (Interruption)

CAPT. GASATURA:  Point of clarification. I want to seek clarification from the hon. Minister.  In a recent public lecture at Makerere, somebody quoted figures from the World Bank that up to 90 per cent of Uganda’s population may be below what he called poverty line, 8 per cent making ends meet and two per cent better than making ends meet and the UNDP has been over the last five to ten years helping what they called the human development index factor in development.  So that when we talk of a growing economy, we are not just talking of money supply, tax revenue, interest rates and inflation and so forth.  But we are considering areas like literacy rates where Uganda is said to be increasing in school dropouts, life expectancy whereby Uganda has dropped from the 49 - 52 male/female to 42/43, GDP dropping from 270 to 170 and we are climbing the ladder in LDCs. 

I could go on but I wanted to seek clarification from the hon. Minister whether our Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning has developed a human development index factor because when you talk of economic growth, we want and our people want to feel it.  How are we doing? Is it by the per capita?

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr Chairman, as I said, all of you have a copy of the Recovery Development Programme and the way you debated throughout this budget, it seemed as if you are starting today.  This Parliament approved a Recovery Development Programme. We revised the Recovery Programme and we said we are going to start to recover by putting resources in making water available to industries, getting power back to industries, getting roads trunk roads done.  And now we have said, we better move now from this infrastructure to society. 

So, now we are putting money on feeder roads to make sure that the farmers are reached.  We are putting money in primary health to increase the life of our people, we are putting money in primary education to increase the literacy rate, we are putting money in agricultural research and extension service as vital areas to increase economic production.  That is how we are moving.  Nobody has said we have arrived.  We have not arrived but we are going there.  I want us to see this in this light.  The debate is not that when we have arrived, why are we not sitting down? We have not arrived but we are now on mile ten, we have left mile one and that is the recovery programme, which we are talking about.  

The last point here, which will answer him -(Interruption)

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Point of order. Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Is it in order, Sir, for the hon. Minister to completely evade the question put by hon. Gasatura, which was that ever since we started, we are actually going backwards.  The figures he quoted are saying we are not going forwards.  We are going backwards.  I am not talking about before the NRM came into power but when it came into power, it quoted certain figures that we are going back.  But he continues to evade that question by saying wee are going forward.  The statistics show we are going backwards.  That is the question he should answer.  Is he in order not to answer that question?

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr Chairman, I am not a lawyer but it depends on how you interpret statistics.  You are telling me you have gone backwards.  I am telling you we have sustained a recovery, we are recovering at the rate averaging five per cent since 1987 and we have told you, we have suffered a setback in the area of agriculture where we recorded the least growth in agriculture than the growth in population. (Interruption)  

I am just saying this economy is not any worth than it was last year. This is what to tell you.  But the speed at which the economy improves, the speed may reduce from one year to another year but when the speed is reduced, you are not back to the starting point.  I want you to understand this.  We are moving forward but one year, we move faster than another year depending on other factors.  So there has been no reverse at all.  

On this point to satisfy hon. Gasatura, when linking Uganda GDP growth with poverty reduction, it is important to understand the starting point for Uganda’s growth.  You will recall that prior to 1986, all the production units in the country had collapsed.  All infrastructure had almost gone and there was completely no economic action you could talk at that time. What has happened? We stopped that decline and we started climbing.  Today, there is not only production in industries, but there is every year increased production in industries. There is more soap produced every other year, okay -(Interruption)

MR ASIKU: Point of clarification.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I wanted to know from the Minister, we all agreed, and we started somewhere, now, since 1986, up to date, at this particular time, I want the Minister to tell me, re we still below the debt or are we now climbing on the mountain? Meaning, when we started, there must have been a base, was it negative or was it positive.  Definitely, it was negative.  Now, we have been climbing from that ground since 1986, right now where are, we and when are we going to the maximum?  I want somebody to tell me this, the Minister himself.

CAPT. GASATURA:  Point of information.  I do not want to be seen as if I am fighting hon. Kafumbe Mukasa, as hon. Kanyeihamba said, we want to understand not from 1986, but take 1989 as a zero line, because 86/87, we stopped the descent, we started climbing as hon. Kafumbe Mukasa, says and we want now to help the 90 per cent, but I look at his own good figures, page 22 and 23 of the Background to the Budget.  With current expenditures, to the rural areas in 1988, we were spending 3.9; in 1989/1990, 2.8; 3.4 in 1990/1991, 2.3; and in 1991/1992, 2.5.  Now, when we should be getting higher and helping our people have something in the human development factor, we are giving the rural 1.7 as opposed to the administration and social services and in development we have gone from 13, in 1988, all the way down to 5.4, this year. 

So, again when we should be climbing, we seem to be descending, we have cut off an engine start and I gave the GDP, something that most economists who understand it better than I, GDP should shoe whether we are in fact climbing; we stopped in 1986, climbed to 270, by 1989, now we are at 170 and that is what we want to understand, what are we doing to help the human factor?

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA: Mr Chairman, the way this Background to the Budget is prepared is to accommodate everybody.  Hon. Gasatura is finding problems with the figures; their graphs, graphs are even simpler presentation.  When you look at the graphs you will see this economy for about 10 years was in decline from the 1960s.  

Now, the recovery programme has helped us to stop the decline but also to start growth and we are telling you each year what is our targeted growth and after the year wee tell you what actually we have achieved in terms of growth and on average, over the last five years this country has achieved a growth rate of 5 per cent increased production, it has increased production in the country annually by 5 per cent every year, but 5 per cent in a population of 17 million when even some of the growth is road construction, new industries cannot be seen in the pocket.  

Now, Government has said, enough of the infrastructure, the priority now will see a bigger Budget going for the human side of development: health, education, economic production and these are areas which are core areas now.  All our available resources will first be applied in those areas.  Now, you cannot receive growth now until you spend this money into education, into Primary Health.

I want to end here by saying what Uganda has now achieved is to lay a basis now, for growth that will try to fight poverty.  That is what we have achieved but not that we have fought and completed the poverty.

Lastly, I want to talk about domestic arrears.  As you may recall, Government has embarked on the exercise of clearing all domestic arrears that is the local debts to our people in Uganda; for the goods and services Government has consumed.  In 1992/93 Financial Year Government paid out 33 billion and in 1993/94 Financial Year Government paid out 22 billion, some in cash and some with the issuing of promissory notes bearing interest.  Promissory notes, all they do is phase out cash flows, you can as well do nothing and pay your four months, but we can as well give you an assurance that you have a post-dated cheque; so that after four months you do not come back to us.  

In the 1994/95 Financial Year, there is a provision for arrears amounting to about 13 billion.  I want to assure the hon. Members that Government is committed to pay for all goods and services it has consumed; at the same time, I want to appeal to all accounting officers to live within the budgeted funds and not to take on new commitments beyond their Budget provisions.  

And lastly, it is the workers of the East African Community.  Mr Chairman and hon. Members as you may be aware, Government held a comprehensive negotiation with the workers of the former East African Community after a detailed study of the situation, it was established that Government owed workers about 1.7 billion. This was after taking into account the demonetarisation of the Uganda shilling in 1987.  But because the expectation of the former workers were very high, the Minister for Finance went beyond this legal situation and provided an extra 6 billions an ex-gratia making 7.7 billion this is a full and final settlement of the claims of the former workers of the East African Community.

I want to finish -(Interruption)

MR PAJOBO:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I want to inform the hon. Minister that the Government was not generous to the former employees of the East African Community; the Government in actual fact, refused to pay these people, their actual money it owed. The actual money which was given, which was shared was in dollars, the dollars cannot be changed of today’s money; if you had kept their money in dollars during that time, today they would get more than what you are giving them.  So, it was not a generous contribution to the Government to the former employees. So, it should not be taken like that, in fact, if at all we are paid little, we are still demanding more.  Thank you.

MR KABUUBI:  Point of information.  I want to inform the hon. Minister, the workers of the East African Community many of them were promised 7 billion, but as of to-date, very few have received even that whenever Government commits, something, it should be paid there and then, but you tell someone, a whole year, that 7 billion, people have been waiting, some are dying, some cannot even live properly, you see, this is a serious situation which should be -(Interruption)- 7 billion, let it be paid, but not to go on talking that we have agreed to pay.

MR KALULE SSENGO:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the information, we have about this East African Community money, is that the provision of 7.7 billion is only provision until Government sorts itself out; because the Agreement is, they will pay that money for the time being and they have left them to go to Court and charge the decision of Government; because this is money which Government actually got, they utilised it on certain assets like the buildings they put up, they invested it; having invested it, they are not prepare to pay who were the owners of this money.  

So, I want the hon. Minister to be kind enough not to say that this is the final settlement it is only part settlement and if the Government is not prepared to comprise with the workers, having paid that money, the workers are at liberty to take the Government to court; that is the position, Mr Chairman.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  This is very interesting because I do know who are the negotiators.  Among the people the people I negotiated with, I do not see any of these people who are giving me information. (Interruption)

DR HIGIRO SEMAJEGE:  Mr Chairman, the Minister should know that East African Community employers, Kenyans, Tanzanians, and Ugandans, and when  it broke, Tanzanians went to Tanzania the Kenyans went to Kenya, Ugandans here.  Now, ever since the breaking of the Community, Kenyans were given their pension and they have been paid their monthly pension; it is 18 years now and Ugandans who were working on the same desks, the Government of Uganda has hesitated and, in fact, they were arbitrate the whole idea; and do you know, what they are doing, they are saying that they are paying them as if they paid them in July 1977, what other kind of stealing can that be?

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr Chairman, I was reporting to you, Sir, and the House that Government reached an Agreement after negotiations with the workers and you as a House, I was reporting to you that 7.7 billion was paid in full settlement of these claims and I want further to add that these people were very happy because -(Applause and Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr Chairman, I want to inform you what made them happy.  What made them happy is that the Community collapsed in 1977 and there has been many governments, no government ever tried to settle their problem. So, they are grateful at least, this Government discussed with them, and formed at least 7.7 million dollars to settle their compensation claim.  That is what made them happy. 

With these remarks, I want to thank again hon. Members for the matters they have raised.  About PERD, a full - because it is not fair to reply to PERD in passive. So, a full comprehensive appraisal of the developments which are taking place in this exercise and what DRIK want Members to do next, is being prepared, we have looked at it, some of us who are on the Committee and we have recommended that this report be circulated to hon. Members to be appraised of what is taking place there.  It will do injustice for me in five minutes to globe around this very serious matter regarding the assets of Uganda.  So, a full comprehensive report is going to be circulated to all Members, then may be it will be wise to react and also give additional support. 	

So, with these remarks, I want to thank Members very much for the support they have given about this Budget and also recognizing the difficulties you are going through.  But I want to assure you that the future, the way you are working, if you work even harder, the future is open for our children and our sons because you are laying a foundation on which we are going to build economy and fight poverty. I beg to move, Mr Chairman and thank you very much.

ADJOURNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question on the Budget as moved by the hon. Minister for Finance and Economic Planning and seconded by the Deputy Minister for Works, Transport and Communication.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Hon Members, I now defer consideration of Ministerial Statements to two weeks from now.  In the meantime I adjourn the House to Tuesday next week.

(The Council rose at 6.10 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday 2nd August, 1994 at 2.30 p.m.)


