Thursday, 22 July 2004 

(Parliament met at 2.17 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala)

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you. Yesterday you said we should start early and I have done so but as you can see, it is pathetic. I do not really want to always repeat this matter of quorum because if I do so I am accusing you before the public. At the same time I have to remind you that we have to be here on time. I do not know what has happened to the Front Bench because even the Minister who is in charge of the motion is not here. Yesterday we agreed that it is important that when we deal with the Budget, the Ministers should be here to take note and react. Now that they are not here, I suspend the proceedings for an hour.
 
(The proceedings were suspended at 2.20 p.m., and resumed at 3.12 p.m., the Speaker presiding.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the visitors’ gallery we have pupils from St. Mugagga Nkozi Primary School obviously from Kityo’s constituency of Mawokota South. They are in the company of their staff. You are most welcome. (Applause)

I understand members of Standing Committees on National Economy and Budget and Sessional Committees on Finance, Planning and Economic Development as well as Trade, Tourism and Industry are reminded to attend a sensitization workshop on debt sustainability scheduled for tomorrow, 23 July 2004 at the International Conference Center starting at 8.30 a.m. You are encouraged to attend. 

3.14
MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Last week I raised an issue regarding the security of our diplomats working outside this country and the Leader of Government Business in this Parliament, who is actually in charge, promised that this week I would get a substantial explanation from the Minister of Foreign Affairs. But when I look at the Order Paper of today, and today being a Thursday, I do not see any ministerial statement from the Minister of Foreign Affairs. I am seeking your guidance on this issue.

THE SPEAKER: Well, since I did not have the statement, I could not have included it on the Order Paper. But as soon as the Minister is ready with the statement, I will definitely accommodate him. What I know is that some statement was made before a committee of Parliament on this issue. Since he is here then he can –(Interruption)

3.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE, REGIONAL COOPERATION (Mr Augustine Ssebutulo): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I know that the statement has been prepared and is ready; perhaps it is between our ministry and this House. I believe that if it is accommodated we shall be able to present it.

MR AGGREY AWORI: Mr Speaker, since yesterday afternoon I am happy to report that the weather has improved considerably and there has been a shower this afternoon.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you for that good news.

3.16
MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. For some time now we have been debating issues relating to Northern Uganda. I remember one time you led a delegation to Northern Uganda after we passed the resolution of declaring Northern Uganda a disaster area. Are we likely to get a report from you since you led the delegation of Members of Parliament and Ambassadors such that it throws more light on what you and your group discovered? I thought we would get a report from you, maybe to augment the efforts of the other committee of Parliament, which was put in place.

THE SPEAKER: As far as I know, the report made on this visit was also used by hon. Alaso in the comprehensive report she gave on the situation. 

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT RESOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

I) The Revised Revenue and Expenditure Estimates for the fiscal year 2003/2004, and

II) The Budgetary Proposals for the Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure for the fiscal year 2004/2005.

3.29
THE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Ms Beatrice Kiraso): Mr Speaker, I stand on a point of procedure. I do recognize that my colleagues want so much to debate the Budget Speech. However, considering that the general debate on the Budget Speech is a component of the whole process of approving the budgetary proposals for this financial year and that the Budget Committee report - well, people said it was comprehensive and I think it was, and to a very large extent it touched on almost all the sectors. The procedural question I would like to ask is that when sessional committees give their reports on the policy statements, Members will have a chance to again debate, in specific terms, the various reports and make specific recommendations. So, I want to seek your indulgence that much as we would like to talk, we should limit the debate and maybe wind it up so that we make specific recommendations when we are debating the sessional committee reports. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, I want to agree with the point made by the Chairperson, Budget Committee. We did a lot of work on the Budget already and indeed each of the reports of the sessional committees will be discussed even before we go into the Committee of Supply to pass the Votes. Maybe we could conclude this debate this week, I do not know what plans you have, so that committees can concentrate on their work and then we come back with committee reports and continue deliberating on the Budget in particular sectors. I am saying this also bearing in mind that this Parliament has a very heavy programme. Soon we shall be getting the White Paper, then the Amendment Bill to the Constitution and a lot of other things. So, I thought that it is better to make sure that we use the time we have as economically as possible. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Any submission on this? My understanding of what he has said is that we should abridge the period of this debate. Normally it takes six days or so but he wants us to abridge it, finish this debate today or tomorrow so that we release the Members to go to their respective committees where the serious debates with ministry officials will take place. Eventually they will come back to make their sectoral reports to us, which will be tackling the Budget again, so that the subsequent debate will focus on these sectors themselves and then we finish the process. We can then start with other programs, namely of the White Paper, the road map and things like that, because we do not have time. This is the gist of the motion from the chairperson of the committee. Can I have ideas on this? You have heard the position.

3.22
MR BERNARD MULENGANI (Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have no objection to that suggestion provided that at the time of the policy statements Members will be accorded time to debate fully. This is because if we come to policy statements, the issues of having a heavy workload may be raised again. Let us close this debate; it will be like we are pushing Members’ abilities to debate further and further. I have no problem with that suggestion as long as at the time of policy statements Members will have time to debate.

3.23
MR MARTIN WANDERA (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As you are aware, it may not be possible for Members to attend proceedings of the various committees, and my view is that committees stand to benefit from the submissions of Members during this general debate. There are key issues that can be picked and followed up in detail in the committees. So, I still find this general debate very relevant.

3.24
MR NELSON GAGAWALA (Bulamogi County, Kamuli): Mr Speaker, much as it is important for us to manage our time, it is very important for the general debate to go on for a period, which is acceptable to all of us. In the general debate everybody from whatever committee will be free to contribute freely whereas when we go into committees, a member from such and such a committee cannot come back and also debate in this House about issues, which have been debated in the committee. Therefore, this is the gathering point. It is the point where we pick momentum to go into our committees with ideas and the general feeling of the House, which each committee will focus on. So, this general debate is certainly a precursor for what will eventually happen in the committees and we think it should be lively and stimulate ideas, which the Seventh Parliament should focus on at this crucial time. 

It is the fourth budget year, we are going into the election year, therefore we must go to our committees with ideas, which will help us to conclude the Seventh Parliament with work well done. 

3.25
MRS JUSTINE LUMUMBA (Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We are 304 Members of Parliament in this House. Whenever we are debating committee reports, you usually limit the time allocated to everybody. Even then, not everybody is given the opportunity to contribute. I do not support the idea of saying that we keep the general debate short; let us keep this long as far as the Speaker can afford to give us. Thank you very much.

3.26
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When we were beginning the debate on the Budget, it is on record that our comments on the report of the Budgetary Committee were reserved because you said that we would have time during the Budget discussion to debate exclusively. 

That aside, this plenary session has a unique constitutional role to play in law making. So, whenever we collectively come together to talk about matters of Budget and finance, it is important that we fully analyse and monitor the details related to public expenditure. So, I also support the proposal that we should limit this. Let us leave it to your discretion to see how much time you can give us.    

3.27
MR WADRI KASSIANO (Terego County, Arua): Mr Speaker, the 2004/2005 financial year is very unique. It is a year in which we determine the destiny of this country and our own fate in this House. (Interjection)- yes. It depends on what we resolve and what we agree upon that some of us in our individual rights will either decide to come and condense and be here or not. Therefore, much as it will be good for us to prolong this general debate, I feel there is yet an opportune moment for us when we go into specific ministries and statements. That is the moment at which each respective Minister will be expected to respond to the issues that will specifically be raised. But as of now, it is a general debate. It is so amorphous and more so even the Front Bench members are not here every other time whenever a specific area that concerns their ministry arises, knowing very well that this Parliament is at crossroads, especially in its legislative duties. 

Why do I say so? Recently you know what the Constitutional Court did. You also know that there is an appeal and we do not know how long that appeal is going to take. Assuming this appeal drags on up to September and October and yet we have a number of Bills, more than ever before, to consider and be able to come up with in this transitional period; I think the longer we delay this amorphous, general debate –[Hon. Members: “The better”]- no, it cannot be the better because if we are going to continue here for all that long, it is going to be worse for us. In which case, therefore, it will mean that we have limited time to go to the core issues that affect and determine the destiny of this country.

Mr Speaker, I am of the strong belief that for now this debate should be brought to a halt at your discretion, but time should be given when we consider specific ministerial policy statements. Thank you.

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, I did not intend to raise a very controversial issue. Let me clarify. During the general debate we do not pick the recommendations like we do when the sessional committees present their reports. After the sessional committees have reported, the Budget Office compiles all the recommendations plus those from individual colleagues, which come from the Floor, and put them together. That is the basis upon which we put Government to task to say, “We recommended this, that, and the other and it was not implemented”. It is in the spirit of giving more time to debating reports by sessional committees that I thought the general debate could be concluded. We have been in a general debate on the State of the Nation Address; this is another general debate, I thought we would get more value when we go to the specifics. It is in that spirit, Mr Speaker, that I made the proposal. I thank you.

3.31
MR JACK SABIITI (Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think what is contained in the Budget Committee report is more important and will certainly guide us on how to handle the policy statements. This is because it touches on how policies have been worked on in order to arrive at the priorities that the Executive is going to include in the Budget. Therefore, in my opinion, this is the time to discuss in detail the important areas that touch on the budgeting process so that when we go to the policy statements we shall even identify that for example such money should not have been allocated to such an item because the priorities are another item. The problem has been there because of this document. But if we just look at the figures in the policy statements and we just come and approve them without analyzing this document, we shall not have done a good job. 

So, Mr Speaker, I suggest that we address ourselves to this document in detail. If we do not do it, I can see us just rubber-stamping the policy statements, and that is it. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think let us proceed; we shall revisit this matter in due course. Let me give chance to the Member for Koboko -(Applause)- and our time is – but I think we can give him seven to ten minutes.  

3.39
MR AHMED AWONGO (Koboko County, Arua): Mr Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity. I want to thank you in particular for the words of encouragement that you showered on me when I came to this Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, I am Awongo Ahmed, Member of Parliament for Koboko County. (Applause). I am also a former Resident District Commissioner (RDC), Pader District. (Applause)

I thank these Members of Parliament for the warm reception they accorded me when I first entered this Parliament. I believe this warm reception was as a result of your dynamic leadership and good guidance of this House. Therefore, I pray that the Almighty God bestows a lot upon you. We are all here to support you, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

I have five pregnant points to bring to this House now. (Laughter). The first one is a message from the people of Koboko. Two, is the security situation in the North; three, I will talk about a big problem that has never been attended to by any government in this country and I am glad that this Seventh Parliament is composed of very dynamic people and I am sure they will be able to solve this problem. 

The last point that I will talk about is our economy. I think it is a very important thing that I must talk about, and finally I will appreciate the meaning of vision because many times people have been talking about vision, and I want to give my personal views about vision, what it is in this country. (Laughter)

As I present these things, I want to request you and the august House to be patient with me because the issues that I am going to raise here are very important and I will definitely need your co-operation. I want to go to straight to point No.1.

The people of Koboko have asked me to thank the Government, to thank His Excellency the President and to thank all the arms of the Government, the Parliament, the Judiciary and the Executive for recognizing the contribution of my late brother, the late Attorney-General, Francis Ayume. The people of Koboko have asked me to thank you, Mr Speaker in particular and all those Members of Parliament who travelled to Koboko to bury the late Attorney-General, Francis Ayume. I thank you all. I also appeal to those of you who were friends of the late Ayume that I am also going to be your friend; and I want you to support me in anything concerning Koboko, and I thank you for that.

You are aware that the late Francis Ayume was a nationalist, a peacemaker, a principled politician who never minced his words, and above all, he was a friend to all. I, therefore, want to say that those of you, as I said before, who were his friends, please, automatically, I am going to be your friend.

Koboko County has a lot of problems and we believe that these problems cannot be solved by the people of Koboko alone; it needs the co-operation of all the people in this country. That therefore means that I will do everything possible to link Koboko to all the people in this country, and I need your support.

The second issue I want to talk about is security in the North. As you know, this war, which has been there for the last 18 years, has caused a lot of problems. It has displaced very many people; many have lost their lives, and many people have lost their property. Government and individual programmes, which were supposed to be in the North, have not been effectively attended to. 

I want to take this opportunity to appreciate the efforts of His Excellency the President towards ending this war. I also thank the UPDF and the Minister of Defence, hon. Amama Mbabazi and his deputy for a job well done. If this war is ended, we shall go a long way in improving so many things in this country. My view is that this war is soon ending and this is as a result of the on-going peace talks in Sudan and above all, the change in attitude of people working and living in the North. This change in attitude is a clear sign that very soon this war will be history.

I want to appeal especially to the UPDF that whatever people say about you, do not listen to them, because after all what they want is for you to put a lot of effort in so that this war can end. I also want to caution people who are sending double signals, telling Kony to stop the war, and then others say “no, continue”; I think that is wrong, because when you send two signals, what happens to that person? Definitely Kony gets confused, and that is why he is not coming out. So, whoever is sending wrong signals and these negative forces to Kony must stop with immediate effect. 

I believe we all need peace and peace can be achieved if we collectively work for it. (Interjection)- maybe I will accept clarification later as I was given very little time. Mr Speaker, what I think is very important after the end of the war, are the post-war programmes that we shall have for the people there. I want to appeal especially to Government that social-economic and political programmes should be arranged for the people in the North so that they are able to catch up with the rest of the people of this country. As we make arrangements for the people in the IDP camps in Gulu, Kitgum, Pader and others, we must be aware that there is yet another problem, and that brings me to point No.3. That is the problems that the people of West Nile have had since independence.

As you know, the people of West Nile have had a lot of destruction as a result of the very many wars that have either been fought in or outside this country. Mr Speaker, you remember that in 1964 when the Congolese had problems in their country, when Patrice Lumumba was defeated, all his forces were forced to flee to Uganda, especially to West Nile. That is why today in Arua District and Arua Municipality in particular there is a parish called Lumumba Parish, which comprises mainly of people from Congo. They are there, they have not been attended to; they are neither refugees nor aliens and they have been suffering and sharing the little resources that the people of West Nile have been given by Government. 

As if that is not enough, you also remember in 1979 we had the Liberation War and for obvious reasons this war ended in West Nile and Koboko in particular. In 1980 a war was launched by the Former Uganda National Army (FUNA) and this war ended in Koboko. In 1985 when Gen. Tito Okello took power with the support of people from there, this war also ended in West Nile and in Koboko.

In 1996 West Nile Bank Front also ended in Koboko. Mr Speaker, why did all these wars end in West Nile? They all ended in West Nile for about three reasons. One; the location of West Nile and Koboko in particular. Koboko is located between Congo and Sudan, and the north extreme west of this country.

Two, these wars ended there because of the abundant and vulnerable military power, which exists in that part of the country.

Three, the enemies of every government that existed in this country had to misuse this abundant military strength that is in that area.  

I want to take this opportunity to assure the people of Uganda that the position of the people of West Nile has changed from being a warmonger to a peacemaker. We should not be misunderstood for any confusion in this country. We want to join hands with the rest of the people in this country to ensure that this peace that the Movement Government brought in is sustained. I also appeal to all peace-loving people in this country to ensure that they support the efforts of the people of Koboko so that we remain peaceful. That is why the West Nile Bank Front people had to sign an agreement with the Government. That is why Bamuze of UNLF II had also to sign an agreement with the Government; that is why Idi Amin’s son, Taban Amin, had to come back home.

I also want to take this opportunity, Mr Speaker, to thank the Government for being patient especially with the people of West Nile, particularly those of Koboko. If it were not because of the patience of the Government, I am sure there would be a big problem between West Nile and the Government. We want at the same time to assure the Government that we shall do everything possible to ensure that the good relationship that we have already built with Government continues to prevail.  

Mr Speaker, one other problem that we have also faced as the people of Koboko especially now is the problem of ethnicity. While in Arua District all the tribes can understand each other and can have a common language, we in Koboko have a problem of language. In Arua the people can understand each other with the Adjumani people, the Moyo people and the Nebbi people. But we have a problem, which has been compounded by the fact that our infrastructure has been destroyed by the wars. 

I, therefore, appeal that Government makes a special programme for the people of Koboko so that we are able to catch up with the rest of the people of this country. We think this is possible if we get a district of own, Mr Speaker, and that is the only way we can come out of these problems of West Nile. After all Koboko was a district of its own and it has all infrastructure in place. 

Permit me now to say something about the economy. If you want to improve the economy of this country there are two things that in my view can be adopted. One is what people had already talked about, that is linking agriculture to industrialization and marketing. Two, we should ensure that there is total peace for everybody in this country.  

The North is such a potential region for production and this is because there is vast land, which is very good for mechanization. Secondly, the North is the most suitable for growing cash crops that cannot grow in any other part of this country. Thirdly, we have a lot of rain, which can be used for growing the types of crops that cannot grow elsewhere in this country. 

Finally, the peculiar soils of the North can also be suitable for growing peculiar crops. For example, the white simsim, which is grown in West Nile, if it were to be planted in Toro it would never produce the white simsim and instead produce the brown simsim. That therefore means that the soils in West Nile, the soils in the North can be able to produce very peculiar crops that are not grown in this country; and above all, the abundant human labour.  

Mr Speaker, you remember very well that in Kakira and Lugazi, Kinyara, all the labour comes from the North, and this is, by the way, semi-skilled labour. That is why in Kampala now we are eating cassava because most of the people who are working in matooke plantations have gone back home, and that is why matooke is gone. If we are to achieve all this, let us consolidate the security in the North. We must also mobilize our people so that they are able to ensure that production in this country improves.

I want to talk about vision. Many times we have been warned about vision by friends, relatives, in laws and so on. Mr Speaker, a lot has even been said about vision in this House. The first time I arrived here I found people talking about vision. I was wondering what they were really talking about. The word “vision” is a very unique word, which has to be analyzed very seriously by all in order to understand it well. 

Mr Speaker, what is a vision? In my view a vision is the power to shape the future. Two, a vision is the transformation of humanity. Thirdly, a vision determines destination, and it must be initiated by somebody. And it must be – (Interjections) – wait; be patient please –(Laughter)- it must be positive and inspiring and above all it must be shared. (Laughter and Applause)

Mr Speaker, why must we share a vision? We share a vision so as to seek support. Therefore, when there are people who are sharing or talking about their vision, they are asking for your support, which support must be given. Yes, it must be given. (Laughter)

A vision without action is a mere dream. It is a mere dream; there must be action.

Finally, a vision is long term. You cannot say five years, ten years you are talking about a vision. It must be long term. (Laughter)  

THE SPEAKER: Order!

MR AWONGO: Mr Speaker, having defined what a vision is, I want without fear or favour to thank His Excellency the President, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, for his ability to shape the future of this country. (Applause).

In order to attain the central objective of transforming humanity in this country, in my view the political and economic prerequisites must be pursued and these prerequisites include: infrastructure development, economic and institutional transformation, capacity building and above all these must be done in an environment of peace and security. 

Let us give a chance for the people of this country to benefit from the vision of this gentleman called Museveni -(Applause)- for he has got very vast, tested and proven experience. Why can’t we take advantage of this? Mr Speaker, it will be only those who do not wish this country well to cut down the fruit of a mango tree in exchange for an unknown seed yet to be planted. (Laughter). I thank you Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Awongo.

4.00
MRS WINFRED MASIKO (Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker – (Interjection)  

THE SPEAKER: Order!

MRS MASIKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to speak after that moving speech of the vision. I hope I will also keep being in vision as I give my speech.  

I thank the Budget Committee for the report and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for the Budget Speech and the Background to the Budget. I will use these three documents to give out some of the ideas I think would be useful to the different committees that will handle the areas that I am going to focus on. I am just going to look at the sectors of Education and Health and make some observations, which I think would be useful for policy formulation as they discuss them in their respective committees.

I thank the people who wrote the background to the Budget. If you look at it and study it carefully you realize that it is very analytical and it captures most of the issues that the committees raised.

On the issue of Health, the disease burden is the root cause of poverty in our population and especially the rural communities and the background to the Budget recognises this and talks about it in detail. It goes on to talk about an issue of the abolition of cost sharing, which indeed is true. When they abolished it they decreased accessibility to health services by the poor. But still, it acknowledges that the basic services have not been given to the satisfaction of this country and it is these that have actually led to the vicious cycle of poor production, of low resources, which leads to illness, which in turn leads to poverty. So, we have been caught in this vicious cycle, which has been quite common in our rural communities, and it is this vicious cycle that we need to break. 

The only way I think we can break through, amidst all these problems that we have, which have already been talked about: the high fertility rates, which do not match the economic development, the high percentage of children in the population who are mostly dependants and also the fact that the majority of the population depends on agriculture and are in the informal sector; all these create such a situation that providing social protection for the population is very difficult. Therefore, I think if we are to work towards improving the provision of social protection to the population, we need to vigorously work on how we can break this vicious cycle. 

Still we should realize that even the market forces themselves act against the improvement of this status quo because the demand and supply in the community does not auger well when actually most of the transactions that are done in the population are non-monetary. So, there are a lot of problems that hinder changes in the population to access better health and better health services. It is against this background that I think as policy makers we need to introduce some of the important components that will help us to overcome such. 

One of those components that I think is very important is introduction of community health financing. I am aware that the Government has started on it in the study form, but I think we also need to understand it and make sure that we vigorously work on it so as to improve the conditions that I have mentioned. Indeed, community health financing has not been quite practiced a lot in this country though to some extent it is there in rural areas, but it has not been recognised as an important component. However, it is high time we all realized that in order to break this vicious cycle this could be the only way out. 

I am aware that we have burial groups in our areas, which really, in a small way, do help out. But it is up to us as policy makers to make sure that the costs and the risks are shared across the board. And I am sure if we looked at it as a policy and we worked towards subsidising these small contributions that come from communities at a small level, we shall certainly improve the health service delivery and the social protection of our population will be improved.

Mr Speaker, I would also like to talk about an issue that has been a problem and which is even looked at in the background to the budget. Under the Health Sector Strategic Plan we come to the Ugandan minimum healthcare packages, and one of the components in the Ugandan minimum healthcare packages is reproductive health. The report goes on to say that to improve reproductive health we need to improve the referral systems, we need to equip health units, we need to improve the expertise of the medical professionals. And it sort of assumes that these would be some of the issues that would improve the reproductive health issue. But we are all aware that in the last many years there has hardly been any improvement as regards reproductive health. My thinking is that although these issues have been improved, the health services delivery has to a great extent been improved but this reproductive health issue has not. It has not been analysed properly to look at what the causes are and how we can overcome them.  

I think it is common knowledge that most of the pregnant women actually do deliver in their homes. The idea and the interest to make these people go to health units is a gradual process. Therefore, if we are going to improve on it, we need to go slowly. That is why we should not completely shift from the use of traditional birth attendants and completely go to these establishments because people still use them. The traditional birth attendants are still there. I would imagine that it would be up to us to equip them, to train them, even to make sure that they are part of the health systems so that they can even be taught how they can use the referral systems that feed into the health establishments.

Therefore, I would really ask the members of the committee and the ministry to refocus and still work with traditional birth attendants up to such a time when everybody is aware that they should go a health facility for deliveries. Otherwise, if we do not do that, I do not see ourselves overcoming this problem of reproductive health.

Concerning education, Mr Speaker, when you look through these documents you realise that the Government has actually achieved something, for instance the Shs 10 billion that is going to be injected in. If you look at the textbook to pupil ratio, the 3:1, that is a big improvement. If you look at the desks and infrastructure, you will realise that there is some improvement. But these improvements, without supervision, are not going to work.  

I find it quite strange to find out that actually the Ministry of Education has not even put the legal instrument for the autonomy of the Education Standard Agency (ESA). It is very strange because we think this is a body that should be supervising these schools, both primary and post primary institutions. But at the moment you realise that there is no legal instrument in place, even their autonomy is not being realised. Even when you interface with them you find that actually the ministry itself is working very hard to sabotage the work they are supposed to do. Therefore, I wonder, how do we imagine we are going to improve the standards of education if there is no clear supervision? So, I hope that the committee concerned will make sure that this one is put in place because we are not going to see any good results without them.

Lastly, aware of the time constraint, there is an issue on science and technology. Although I appreciate the approach of having the awards in place, trying to sponsor students at the higher institutions – and it is like a drop in the ocean - I do appreciate it. But I would like to see the ministry pursue a line where they would make sure they identify students right from the secondary school level, they train them and they focus them towards some of those technologies that would be of interest to us. These should be especially those that are geared towards agriculture so that they go step by step in developing them and focusing them in the right direction. Whether they are few students or few schools that would be focused on, but at least start this issue right from the beginning at the secondary school level, take them through and make sure that something tangible is got at the end of their academic career. It would be nice to have the awards but I think the whole system should be revised.  

The institutions that are handling these students doing sciences should really be strengthened and I am sure if you do that, if you are focused then these limited resource envelope we are talking about, with these limitations of staff and teachers, we would use the little we have to get maximum benefit for us and for our population. Therefore, I hope this is an issue that can be pursued. Let us just not look at the awards only when actually we know we do not have the foundation that will keep this system sustainable. I will hope that this issue will be considered by the Ministry of Education and I am sure if they do that it will go a long way in improving the status of our country and improving the science and technology that we think we need, which is a prerequisite to development. I thank you, Mr Speaker.      

4.13
MAJ. BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (Isingiro County North, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a few areas about which I am uncomfortable with the Budget Speech. We know very well the priorities of Government and what we want to see is that these priorities are translated into plans, consequently the budgets, and we want to move away from the traditional way of talking and talking without solving the problem.

Mr Speaker, the productive sector remains starved. We would like to urge Government to make sure that these areas, particularly those that are in line with the Poverty Eradication and Alleviation Programme (PEAP), are adequately catered for in the Budget.

Point No. 2 is strategic intervention in the economy. Mr Speaker, it is a welcome idea for Government to intervene in the economy strategically. The assumption is that this is affirmative action Government is taking, but I want to say that this intervention should be on a sector-wide approach, and let it not be discriminatory.  

In developed countries there are little incentives offered to farmers; here in Uganda we do not have them. My prayer to Government is that we should have a development bank here and we also have the East African Development Bank. We need to see these banks capitalised so that African entrepreneurs, so that any other businessman here in the country can accesses this money competitively and fairly.  (Applause). The tradition of sampling a few businessmen and business entities is not healthy as this creates grounds for conflict and occasionally has propelled petitions here in Parliament. It is my prayer, therefore, that the Government should look at a possibility of capitalising a Uganda development bank, since we have the East African Development Bank, so that we can improve the business sector.

As we speak now the interest on loans remains very high. In East Africa here the cost of capital is higher in Uganda and unfortunately Government has got a hand in it. When Government comes and borrows money and we sit here and approve money for Apex I, Apex II, Apex III and Government lends it out at 16 percent to micro finance institutions where the people we represent are going to access it, when it had actually got it at one percent, you are setting a precedent. Therefore, those who are going to lend it out are going to lend it out at 25 percent plus. Our peasants, with their rudimentary knowledge, are not going to compete with multi-nationals who bring here money at two percent and go and trade with us.  

I am uncomfortable with the employment policy here in Uganda and unfortunately the Budget Speech does not come out clearly on employment. The assumption with Government was that since we have promoted investment, since we have privatised then we are going to create jobs. The people who are investing here are coming with their brothers and sisters some of whom cannot speak English or even the local languages.  

Mr Speaker, we thank Government for having promoted investment and created enabling development but our people need jobs. We have a lot of skills in this country. It is very important that those who are coming here to work in Uganda should have skills that are not available here. If not, let us set standards, give out work permits to everybody who wants to come and work here, but let us say, “Since you are coming here the minimum you must pay is so much.” We need income tax from these people. They need to pay because they are taking the jobs of our people. We have been in hotels. The sweepers, the cleaners, somebody who fixes a microphone - they are all aliens. It is my humble request that Government intervenes in this area to bring about change.  

I want to talk about per capita income and the impact of a fast growing population. So, it is about the resources we get and how we share them. Even if you register economic growth, let us give an example of a small family where we come from. If you are living on ten acres of land and you have ten sons, if you do not empower them with capacity to acquire land, when you are no more each of them is going to have one acre. Mr Speaker, we cannot develop unless we try to check on the growing population. I have heard of the unfortunate incidents; when I turn on my radio I hear some leaders telling people to produce and explode. It is very dangerous; we have limited resources. For us to improve our standards of living we must check population. In business we say, sometimes it is necessary to stop, go back in order to run very fast.  

I want to talk about Universal Primary Education (UPE) in relation with the population. I again want to thank Government for a good programme. But, Mr Speaker, this UPE has no legislative framework. How many children should we take per family and after primary 7 what next? I want to assure you, we cannot afford secondary education unless we get manna from heaven if our internal revenue consists only of 52 percent and our indebtedness is increasing. I would like to urge the minister concerned to make sure that UPE has got a legislative framework. We need to limit the number of children per family beyond which the father or the parent should pay.

Mr Speaker, transport is very important in our economy and if we do not improve on our transport we are heading for doom. South Africa is moving up to Southern and Eastern Zaire. We have a railway transport that is not in use at present because we have no money to rehabilitate it. But let me tell you, when you have one train carrying 60 wagons, you have silenced 60 engines and because you have silenced 60 engines, you have saved on road degradation, you have saved on pollution, you have saved on foreign exchange in terms of fuel and machinery.  

I was privileged to attend an African Railways Transport Conference. We have to rehabilitate our railway network to capture the market in Southern Sudan and Eastern Zaire.  (Applause). If we do not somebody is going to do it and if they do, we will lose because this is the nearest corridor to those markets. If we push our railways transport to Pakwach, that means it is very easy for Southern Sudan to access goods through Uganda because they will use the Nile valley. There are no hills; it is just smooth. So, why do we not move? Nobody is going to do this for us. 

Finally, Mr Speaker, I want to thank you very much for creating this enabling environment here. I want to say that we hold public offices in trust and nobody here is representing people for waste. When we make recommendations year in year out, people should take note that there is a problem. If 30 people talk about something, look around you, there must be something wrong. It is against this background that I urge our colleagues in the Executive that some of these recommendations we have made in the Budget are out of good faith and are well intentioned. It is good that if there is a problem we share it and find a way forward. I thank you very much.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of order. The motion being debated was moved by the Minister of Finance that Parliament should resolve itself in Committee of Supply for consideration of revised revenue and expenditure and budgetary proposals. Members are contributing to the motion moved by the minister in expectation, as a matter of courtesy, that the minister would be listening and hoping that he will respond to the issues being raised by the members in the debate. Is it now in order that we have six ministers in charge of finance, but none of them seems to be in the Chamber to listen to the contributions of their members in expectation of the reply? Is it in order?

THE SPEAKER: Well, it is out of order because this is in the name of the minister, and if there are any queries, the minister should be here. We do not know, suppose we are to end the debate now, who is going to make the final reply? So, I did not realise that the minister was not here. You have now drawn my attention to that -(Mr Didi entered the Chamber)- (Laughter) Oh, he is the Minister of Finance!Okay. But, I think there are merits because there was no minister. 

4.28
MS ROSEMARY NAMAYANJA (Youth Representative, Central): I thank you very much –(Interruption)

THE SPEKAER: I will try to cover you, but let us stick to the time, which we gave you. It was seven minutes but people have extended it to ten minutes and beyond. Seven minutes, please. 

MS NAMAYANJA: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to also thank the members of the committee and the Government for a good budget proposal. In the last session we amended the National Youth Council Statute and I stood here and said that the youth were losing their revolutionary patience due to under-funding. But I want this time to thank Government that before the young people lost their patience, Government came in and provided for funding of the youth councils. 

It did not stop there but it also decided that money for youth councils should be in form of conditional grants to the districts. That is a very good gesture and my prayer is that this should be continuous and should not stop in the middle of or after 2006 -(Interruption)

MS KABONESA: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker and thank you, honourable member, for giving way. This gives me an opportunity now that the Minister of Finance is here, to tell you that yes, we did get the money but there is a problem. The Minister of Finance took a decision and wrote to all Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs) in different districts to open up one account to cater for all the sectors in the district, including the district youth council grant that will be given to the different districts.  
However, like she has informed us, sometime last year we amended the National Youth Council Statute and we recommended and it is in the law that all district youth councils will be getting their money directly from the Ministry of Finance and they will be self-accounting. Now there is a problem that Ministry of Finance has directed all CAOs to open up one account, all their money is under the CAOs and it is a problem because we need to reconcile their decision with the law that we passed last year. So, it is our prayer that the Minister of Finance responds to that such that we avoid problems because it was because of that that we recommended the district youth councils to be self-accounting. I thank you.

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you, my colleague, for that information. I think the Minister of Finance will help us with that administrative hiccup. 

My other concern is on Universal Primary Education (UPE). According to the statistics we got when UPE was being started, the enrolment in primary one was 2.14 million pupils but when they reached primary seven, it was only 4,600 pupils that sat for PLE. That meant that the dropout rate is so high. Actually, those who sat constitute 19 percent of the students that enrolled or that started in primary 1. Either the figures that were given were inflated or there is need for Government to put in place a mechanism of reducing the dropout rate after looking at the causes. 

Mr Speaker, my other concern is about sports. Government has taken so long to put in place a sports policy even when money was provided in the last financial year. It is because of this reason that we are witnessing a lot of confusion in the sports department. I want to thank the Minister of State for Sports for being visible. At least he tries his level best. But because there is no formal framework, because he is operating in an environment that is not formalised, that is why today we get problems especially in the football or soccer fraternity. 

When we get confusions in FUFA, when we get referees boycotting, when we get forged International Transfer Certificates (ITCs), when we get the national league being suspended every now and then, when Ugandans lose interest –(Interruption)

MR KATURAMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank the member for giving way. On the question of lack of a sports policy, the honourable member is right. I am a member of the national organising committee for the campaign of the Uganda Cranes presently, but it is really absurd to find that the lack of a sports policy is leading to under-funding. The FUFA administration undertook to mortgage FUFA House, the property of all the people of Uganda, to individuals, and we as an organising committee now are undertaking with pain to pay back the individuals who are holding the certificate of title for FUFA House. So, all this is emanating from lack of a sports policy and, therefore, inadequate funding for sports and football in particular. I thank you for giving way.

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you my colleague for that information. Actually, that FUFA money –(Interruption)

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and my colleague for giving way. I have two pieces of information here. One is about the UPE, which was mentioned previous to the point on sports. I am glad the Gallery has got many UPE children this afternoon. UPE children are those aged between six and 12 years and their learning at school and monitoring and maintenance depends on the level of mobilisation of communities. UPE implementation is decentralised right to the home of each individual child. So, when we say in a forum like this that Government should make sure – I am only giving the information that each home is supposed to make sure that the children go to school and stay there.

Whatever rules and laws can be in place might not produce the impact. At primary level, it is the level of the interest of the parent that prompts the child to continue. So, I am only saying Members of Parliament, let us mobilise the communities to send their children to school. Some people think if there is a law, but the tax has been collected and people are still running to the forests whenever they see a tax collector. So, I am only taking the opportunity to say that each one of us should mobilise from the individual homes, and then these kids will stay in schools.  

On the sports policy, let us make a distinction between the management of sports and the resources available for sports, because most times we tend to put the two together. The policy might be in place without having adequate resources. But in this regard, we are looking at both. If the policy has to come out, we must have the costing of that policy. Otherwise, one without the other might not produce the results we are expecting. I thank you.

MR WANDERA: Mr Speaker, I am a Member of the Committee on Social Services. I just did not want to interrupt my colleague lest she misses her points. But following the submission of the minister, I would like to say that we should not lose focus on the point that hon. Rosemary Namayanja raised. There is a serious problem with the data touching on the numbers of UPE pupils. Our sister told us that 2.1 million pupils started but only 406,000 registered for primary leaving exams. For the last two years we have tasked the Ministry of Education to explain very specifically what –(Interruption)  

THE SPEAKER: But was that number in the same class? 

MR WANDERA: Mr Speaker, in one class. When UPE started in 1997, the information from the Ministry of Education was that there were 2.1 million pupils –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Who registered them?

MR WANDERA: The Ministry of Education, Mr Speaker. Nationwide and –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hold on, it can be nationwide but in different classes. It does not mean in –[Hon. Members: “In P.I”]- in P.I?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.  

MR WANDERA: It was in primary one, Mr Speaker and following the recent census we were informed that our growth rate is 3.5 percent. That means every year about 840,000 children are born. But you find that even now information from the Ministry of Education indicates that there are classes that have 21.3 pupils. Now where are these pupils coming from? Most of these pupils are ghosts. I also did inform the ministry last year that Kampala City Council gives out money to schools without accompanying details. But for one reason or another the ministry did not follow this up. 

So, what we are saying, honourable minister, there is a problem with your data. You remember when we were considering the MTF the ministry could not tell us exactly how many pupils were there. At first they were telling us 6.8 million, then 7.3 million, then they projected 7.8 million, and now they are talking of a different figure in the policy statement. So, we request you to carry out a serious census otherwise the way things are, we are losing a lot of money. UPE is the biggest scam in this country.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Mr Speaker, in fact, according to the census and according to the statistics of the Ministry of Education, half of the population of Uganda is under UPE because this 7.5, 9, 8 million, nearly half of the population of Uganda are all under UPE, so we do not know what statistics they are actually using.

THE SPEAKER: Well, it means the alarming dropout may not be real. It may be because of exaggerated numbers of entry, because when you talk about 2.1 million in class one, I think this cannot be true.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, as a matter of fact, I am amazed by the answer given by the minister. The answer given by the minister shows that Government is not concerned about the grave matter of more than 1 million children dropping out of the school system. In financial terms it means that somebody somewhere must account for the money for those people, because Government has been telling everybody that there were 2.1 million children registered in 1997. To the total amazement of everybody, only 400,000 registered. Even donors are wondering.

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable member, the 2.1 million was the total enrolment.

MR MWANDHA:  No, enrolment in primary one.

THE SPEAKER: Enrolment in class one? It is not possible.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, the information we have is that 2.1 million children were enrolled in primary one in 1997. The total enrolment was about 7 million. So, really Government has got to account for the colossal difference between 2.1 million and 400,000.

THE SPEAKER: Could the minister assist us with this?

MR WAMBI: Mr Speaker, I also happen to be a Member of the Social Services Committee of Parliament, a long-term serving educationist, and I have been attending many of what they call Educational Strategic Investment Plan seminars. And the last time we met Government appeared to have given the donors, or they call them development partners, an impression that the numbers you are talking of, of 2.1 million were real and in terms of money Government submits to the donors higher figures, using even the private schools’ enrolment.

When it comes down to the Ministry of Education, disaggregating the money to Government schools and leaving out the private schools, you will see the difference and yet many of us have been saying, the services provided by the private schools may be private but the students are national. So, if this money comes, why does it not also go in this sub-sector to alleviate the problems that are in that area? Government says no and when it comes to accounts, books are not balancing. Now, whom should we blame? (Mrs Bitamazire rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Incidentally, before the minister comes up on UPE, in the Gallery are our children from Nyange Quality Primary School Nansana, Wakiso District. You are welcome. (Applause)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, PRIMARY EDUCATION (Mrs Namirembe Bitamazire): Thank you very much Mr Speaker and I thank the members for the points of information they have given in response to the statement by our colleague. I should clarify on a few issues here.

One, really we are also analysing the figures and when we say the figures we have are these or that, it depends on what you are looking at because we have figures in Government public schools and then we have got figures in private community schools and so on, and then we have figures in the non-formal institutions under UPE. So, when you take the total it depends on which category of those figures you are referring to: the overall total, the total with private and community schools or the total with only Government public schools. So, the variations can be accounted for on that basis. 

But what I want to say is that there are some irregularities, which require our attention in these figures and I am taking this opportunity to say that we have made a draft paper where we want to suggest that each pupil registered should get a number and then we can trace them. If the pupil is number one in Shimon, if she/he moves to Nakasero, we should trace that number and be able to trace her/him throughout the school system. That might help us.  

Another mechanism we have put in place is the school registers. For some time the school registers were not generalised and they did not give the right figures. So, the matter of irregularities in figures has been identified but we are addressing that figure. 

But then, Mr Speaker, you were asking whether the 2.1 million were in primary one in 1997, or the general total. The answer is that they were in primary one and other classes. When UPE was launched, parents sent their children to school from the age of three –(Interjection)- yes, even now we are fighting this. From the age of three, each one went to school “bonna basome” then up to 18 or 20 years, everybody just rushed in to school. But as the year proceeded, the small ones went back crying for their mummies and the big ones felt that there was no business for them. So, the drop out started at that level. Those 400,000 who completed primary seven last year are those who persisted and continued but the rest, many of them dropped off as we went along.

Honourable members, really it is very important that communities do not pull their children out of school before primary seven. There is a high rate of dropout at that level. The big boys went out, the big girls married off, others got pregnant, the small kids went home where mummy is and this is the trend, which we are trying to address. That is why we are insisting that please do not bring those kids below six years because they will have to repeat classes before they can go through the tunnel. Now, we are getting problems again, the rice scheme is again pulling children out from school, the drought is pulling them out and we are getting all these social issues.  

Mr Speaker and fellow members, we have to mobilise the family. The fact that you have put up a rice field does not mean you pull your son or daughter out of school. The fact that you move to look for where you can graze your animals should not result into taking your family, pulling out the primary seven child from school to go with him/her. So, these are mainly social issues, which we must not overlook in the interest of other reasons. Let us look at the family moving away and how many kids it is moving away with, and when they come back when rain comes, what happens? Go to Karamoja and tell me, what does one do, today you have a full class tomorrow if there is no food for lunch there is no class. So, these types of things are social, community-based, household-based and we must address them right from there. But as I said, and I repeat it, we are also concerned about this high rate of dropout and concrete measures are being put in place to address the matter. I thank you.

MR WANDERA: Mr Speaker, I have great respect for hon. Bitamazire but I think she is downplaying this problem. Let us take it that there has been dropout as she says. Now, the question that comes to mind is that, why has there not been correspondence decrease in the amount of money we are spending? On the contrary, information from the Ministry of Education shows we are spending more money and this is the dilemma we have. Maybe we give the minister time to go away and she comes back with a serious statement on this.

MR MWANDHA: In view of the fact that the minister realises that there is a very high dropout rate in UPE, does she intend to bring a law in this Parliament so that there is a legal framework for Universal Primary Education whereby even parents would know that once your child is following a normal school system, you do not withdraw the child to go and work in rice fields? This business of appealing to people, “communities should do this”, is it good enough? Government should actually come up with a law and guide the public as to what should be done, rather than making these sorts of appeals.
CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Since we have Government census, I think we should study it, and the Ministry of Finance should study the census too. In a population of 24 million people, can we have 7.5 million in UPE? Can all those be in UPE, because we have to study all those statistics and the age brackets. These are the figures we give the donors that “UPE has progressed.  Now we have registered an increase from 2.5 million to 7.5”. Are the 7.5 million all under UPE? These are the statistics we should bring out clearly so that we do not deceive our donors and we do not deceive ourselves.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Capt. Byaruhanga. The information I want to give you from this preliminary census of 2002 is that the population of children below the age of 12 years, that is, from age 0 to 12, is 6.8 million. In the recent census that was concluded; this was the report, which was disseminated.

MS NAMAYANJA: Mr Speaker, I want to thank my colleagues for the information. But as regards UPE, in the event that the minister has acknowledged that there is a high drop out rate, minus a corresponding decrease in the funding, I want to agree with hon. Wandera that the minister be given time to come back and enlighten the House more about the same.  

I want to conclude on the issue of sports, Mr Speaker, with the point hon. Hood Katuramu raised that FUFA had actually mortgaged the house, which house was built using donor funds. It was money given by FIFA to construct that house, but FUFA went ahead to mortgage the same house. I was saying Ugandans have lost interest in local football to an extent that at one time there was a match between Villa and Express in Namboole, at the same time there was a match between Manchester United and Arsenal but Ugandans opted to go to the bibandas on the TVs and the match officials in Namboole became the spectators. So, the situation is as appalling as that. We are also losing national talent when Ugandan footballers go for greener pastures in neighbouring countries, in Rwanda. Most of our players have gone to APR for greener pastures because we do not have the same here. 

We are getting problems, we always hear of confusions, wrangles between the Uganda Amateur Athletics Association and the Ezra Track Team Board. All this, Madam Minister, you said there is no funding, at the same time you are looking at the policy. But I think it is important for the policy to be there such that Government funding is properly directed. Otherwise, whenever Government comes in to give a little money, when the Cranes are going somewhere, when boxers are going somewhere Government puts in some bit of money, that cannot solve the problem unless we have a proper policy. 

I want to end –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: You are talking about sports. I just wanted a clarification from you or from the minister whether goat racing is part of the sports activities, because it is a very prominent sports game these days.

MS NAMAYANJA: Mr Speaker, I am not competent enough to answer that one, maybe the minister can clarify on the same.  

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Mr Speaker, really when the policy comes out, Government approach is that we should encourage the private sector to participate in the provision of recreation and sports. So, while goat racing might not be in schools or formal institutions for sports, the private sector is free and doing very well to bring in diverse games and sports to our country. It might belong to the private sector, Sir.

MS NAMAYANJA: I thank you, honourable minister. Mr Speaker, I want to end with an issue concerning Parliament here. The configuration of the Chamber is the same in most Commonwealth countries and we all know this Parliament was constructed at a time when it could accommodate 89 Members of Parliament. In two years’ time we might go multi-party and in such a situation we expect to have two sides, one opposition and the other government. In the event that we have say ten members of the opposition or vice versa, or if there is no opposition and the number of Members of Parliament is still the same, what will happen? What are contingency plans that Government has put in place? I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Well, what happens in the House of Commons, do they all sit? I think you find some of them standing. This will happen. Therefore, if the Government is having the majority two-thirds, they will stand.

5.00
MR JACK SABIITI (Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairperson and her committee for the good report and I thank the Minister of Finance for performing his statutory and constitutional duties to present the budget for the year 2004/05. I intend to touch on just a few issues, which are general because I hope when we start the policy statements, that is when we shall go in detail to question certain areas.

My first observation is the way the Budget is handled. In our Constitution, Mr Speaker, paragraph 8 of the Objectives and Principles states: “The distribution of powers and functions as well as checks and balances provided for in the Constitution among various organs and institutions of Government shall be supported through the provision of adequate resources for their effective functioning at all levels.” So, my first question is, when you look at our budget and you look at the three organs of state, that is, Parliament, Judiciary and the Executive, Parliament is given very little money. Many areas that should have been handled properly, like creation of certain offices in this Parliament, cannot be done because much of the money goes to the Executive. In the Judiciary it is the same. The Judiciary has now only been helped and given the law and order sector, and the new management that has come in. You find that actually there is an imbalance.  

I request, therefore, that this Parliament should address itself to this matter. Until we have sorted out this problem we are going to continue having this problem and the two organs of state will not function normally as they should. 

Number two, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR WAMBUZI: Mr Speaker, when hon. Jack Sabiiti says that the Executive is getting a lion’s share of the money, which is being appropriated in this budget, is he referring to the concentration of the money or the volume of the money? I would like to be clarified on that. Is the difference the per capita concentration or is it the volume?

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, I am talking about both. Secondly, even under the Executive organ of the state, the way funds are allocated to it is amazing and at times stinging. I would like to give an example. If you look at our budget and you look at sectors like agriculture, education, tourism, trade, energy and minerals, these are the sectors, which are very important for the country. But if you look at the way funds are allocated, the priorities of the Executive, it appears as if we are not interested in the development but we are interested in simple administration, hence bigger public expenditure.

Look at Office of the President; we are all aware of what this office is supposed to do. In 2000/01 it received Shs 27 billion, in 2001/02 Shs 35 billion, this financial year Shs 32 billion. Compare that one with energy and minerals which in 2000/01 got Shs 2.4 billion, 2001/02 Shs 2.1 billion, 2002/03 Shs 4.8 billion and this year Shs 2.4 billion. One wonders where our priorities are, Mr Speaker. Come to State House, in 2000/01 it got Shs 22 billion, in this coming budget it is going to get Shs 40 billion. Look at Trade and Industry Shs 2.9, Shs 7.9 and now Shs 4.1 billion! 

I am wondering whether we are really serious when we are talking about budgeting. This is why I request the chairperson that this is a very important report for us to address these issues of how we should handle the taxpayers’ money. It is high time these anomalies were addressed and some adjustments made. We should have a year where we are going to say, “From this year we want to revisit the entire budgetary process” so that ministries, which have for a long time failed to function because of the inadequate funding, are provided with reasonable funding. 

I request that this Parliament addresses these three issues: one, the organs of state should be provided with reasonable funding; two, within the Executive our priorities must conform to what value we derive from these particular institutions; and thirdly, Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

MRS ZZIWA: Thank you very much, hon. Sabiiti, for giving way. From the perspective of the Budget Committee and the process we have just gone through of the indicative budget process, which culminated into the report, which the Chairperson of the Budget Committee read, it is clear to me that some of the observations you are making are the very observations, which are supposed to be addressed. I think the chairperson tried to explain at length that there has been some effort towards that. Recognising that the whole system or the whole budgeting process is embedded within the MTEF framework, which we may not have an opportunity at present to change, how best are we going to change these priorities within the sectors of Government or ministries to be able to accommodate what you are saying? I appreciate your concern and it is a very big concern because several other committees feel that there is a lion’s share for some while others are starved. I want your comprehensive proposal on this.

MR SABIITI: Thank you very much for that –(Interruption)

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, I did say from the beginning that we received two documents from the Government. One was on the preliminary, indicative revenue and expenditure estimates for this financial year, which started when the Budget was read. The other report is the three-year macroeconomic plan for the medium-term expenditure framework and this Budget Act mandates Parliament to analyse programme and policy issues that affect the national budget and economy and where necessary recommend alternative approaches to Government.

So, in light of what, hon. Sabiiti, is saying - I am actually answering hon. Zziwa - our hands are not completely tied because of the MTEF. Our proposals here and recommendations can be accommodated in the medium-term expenditure framework and these percentages played about with to conform to exactly what you are talking about.

MR SABIITI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. You have answered it very well and I would advise my sister the Commissioner that when we are looking at these budgets and even before, as Parliament it is our duty to point out the anomalies being reflected in the proposals from the Executive. And even further, when we are discussing policy statements, I am sure we are empowered under the Act to shift money proposed to certain areas where we think these things are not balancing properly.

Thirdly, Mr Speaker, very quickly, I thank Government for striving to fight poverty. They have tried basically by improving on the economic growth of this country, and secondly by bringing about macroeconomic stability and to a certain degree improved resource allocation; but stated poverty continues in the villages. If you go to Rukiga, I do not know how we are going to handle this problem. A Mukiga in Rukiga is poor and yet when we look at our budget, much money, which we allocate, seems not to percolate, seems not to go to these people! Why? Yesterday, the chairperson touched on a very important issue, which I think Parliament should look at. The leakages. That is the issue I want to talk about. 

Once we allocate money to these big ministries or departments, which get a lot of money, not all this money percolates. It goes somewhere else and this is why my colleague, Wandera, was talking about the Ministry of Education - and my sister here said the same thing. All this money goes somewhere else. The money does not go deep down. For example, if I have a wedding – I am not being personal but I am just giving an example. If I invite the 60 ministers to Rukiga to attend my daughter’s or son’s or uncle’s wedding, every minister goes with a vehicle forgetting about depreciation, but 200 litres from here to Kabale and back, on a private matter! This is part of the leakages we are talking about, Mr Speaker.  

Secondly, we seem as a government not to adhere to the rules of the game regarding finance management, Mr Speaker. You find there is an encroachment on the Consolidated Fund without the approval of Parliament. In 2000/01, over Shs 36.6 billion was withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund without authority. That is the leakage I am talking about.

Number two, in 2001/02 Shs 4.5 billion collected by the Revenue Authority was never remitted to the Consolidated Fund. Where did this money go? Two years later Shs 20 billion was not remitted to the Consolidated Fund. Where did this money go? Mr Speaker, we have problems in many areas and that is where the Executive should really take note. If you look at how much the economy has lost in the last five/six years in the form of leakages, you cannot believe it. Under civil litigation you find that we lost US $4.4 million to the Bank of Alube due to our negligence; in Transload Vs Attorney-General, we lost US $16.6 million; the Yugoslavia case, all these are stated in Government reports and in the Auditor-General’s reports.

Take, for example, the junk helicopters. We have been talking about them. You know it appears as a simple matter. Government came up with a White Paper and they came to explain everything that came out of the report. They said X and Y was the problem. Some people stole this amount of money and they said they should be prosecuted. No one has ever been prosecuted, and as far as that report is concerned, we lost over US $7 million. Suppose that money was injected into Rukiga County, what improvement would this money make on the people of Rukiga? Mr Speaker, we have a big problem. The way we are managing public affairs, it appears the Treasury belongs to one person or two. 

We have lost governing, finance management in this country but we are not following the rules of the game. That is why the Committee on Budget should first address these issues. It is not a question of, “I love my government” or “I hate this government”. It is a question of, “can that person who loves the Government and that who does not love the Government have his/her right share and he/she lives happily in this country”? 

So, I am saying, Mr Speaker, that if the leakages in our budgetary process are not handled properly, we are going to have a problem. We are going to continue with poverty as we think there is peace and everything. Peace cannot be sustained unless that child in Koboko or that child in Kabale is well fed, educated and he has a job. If these things are non-existent, you will expect conflict, you will expect wars, you will expect many things to follow.  

So, Mr Speaker, as I conclude, I thank the committee for the good job well done. I request Parliament to seriously look at this report and when we come to the policy statements, surely we should be able to identify where money should go without fear or favour. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.17
DR DAVID MATOVU (Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will also start by congratulating the committee for a good job. 

Secondly, I would like to comment them on three points. The first one is the recommendation that the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry is being recognised and is being supported very well indeed. I think this is something that we should really clap for.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, PMA is good but I suppose industry is very crucial if we are going to process what has been produced in the good and modern farms and so on. As much as we need the export sector to be improved, just as we have to improve on the marketing, a strong and well facilitated Ministry of Trade and Industry is the ideal sort of body to handle or to streamline these kinds of facilities. We have to think in terms of having a schooled trade negotiating team. This can be built in this ministry of ours.

My second point, Mr Speaker, honourable members, concerns the HIV/AIDS issue. The committee came up with a fantastic recommendation and that regards the Global Fund. I think it was a very sensible recommendation that the money given by the Global Fund should be outside the ceiling of the Ministry of Health. This is a very sensible recommendation because it is this kind of signal that we are going to give to our partners and NGOs. Bilateral arrangements should be encouraged to put more money into this sector to fight HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria. If this is done and more people are encouraged to put money directly into these fields, this will be very good because I think human life and welfare should not be sacrificed for the sake of having beautiful inflation rates.  

My last point concerns another good area that the committee handled very well indeed, and that is the Orphans and Vulnerable Children programme (OVC). I think this is a fantastic recommendation that the committee came up with. It is very unfortunate that very few people are directly concerned or are directly involved in this kind of programme. We have got a crisis on our hands in the country. The devil is attacking Uganda on two fronts. One of the fronts is the HIV/AIDS war, the second war is the insurgency and these are sources of these orphans and vulnerable children, and other groups too. 

So I think that when the report says something about that and there are very few people who are involved, this is a good indicator that now we are waking up and we are doing something that is going to be useful for the whole country. And I think the policy on OVC is long overdue. So, I strongly support the report on those three issues and hope that they will be carried to the next level of implementation. Thank you very much indeed, Mr Speaker.

5.22
MS ALICE ALASO (Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Two days ago I did state something that interested me most when the Chairperson, Budget Committee made her remarks and that was the question of policy contradictions. I want to restate this for purposes of emphasis and probably hope that it will merit an explanation at the end of this debate. 

Mr Speaker, I am very concerned because in the Budget Speech the minister talked about - background to the budget instead - human resource development for this country and the emphasis was put on quality. And when you look at the various aspects especially basic education and you explore that element of policy contradiction, in a situation where you put children in a class and you expect all of them to pass and go to primary seven and go to senior four and then stop there, I think this is deliberately shooting down the quality of human resource development.  

I think that the ministry should be very serious while looking at the factors in play when we are talking about human resource development. We have been lamenting about high dropout rates, we are also lamenting about absenteeism at primary level. Perhaps we should also tell ourselves that part of the reason, part of the factors that propagate absenteeism in our schools is the very knowledge that we put into the children, that after all if you do not come to school from Monday to Friday, you will still pass and go to primary two. So, there is no motivation to stay in class throughout the week. We are also the same people telling our children “you will not be disciplined for being absent”. There is, therefore, also no motivation to keep coming, we cannot even force them to come to school and we cannot keep them there. At the end of the day, we have a vicious cycle, high dropout, no repeating classes, no quality and the whole thing ends up in a mess and a real frustration. 

I almost want to ask the minister, at the end of the day, what is the key question that we as Ugandans want to answer using the UPE programme? Is it just that we have numbers, or is it that we have people who will be productive at the end of the day? Because if they do not know how to write their names, they do not know how to count, but they are going to senior four, then there is a big problem.  

The other linkage to this UPE question, Mr Speaker, is the question of grant-aiding the secondary schools where these children are going. Last financial year I think grant-aiding was for about only 34 or 35 schools. Nobody even understands the criteria by which these schools were selected. Probably the ministry does and maybe they will tell me also how it was arrived at. But I know that there are counties in this country where you cannot find a single grant-aided secondary school. I will give you an example of Soroti County in Soroti District. If you remove Teso College where the UPE children cannot afford to go and they will never go owing to first of all the quality that we generate, at least in the UPE schools in Soroti, they will not get the four or five aggregates that is required to get in this school and then the poverty, they will not be able to pay the school fees. So, if you create an exception of Teso College, you remain with seven sub-counties in Soroti County without a grant-aided school.  

I am so disturbed that even with this budget we are discussing, I do not see any seriousness. Maybe I did not read it, but I do not see anything about granting-aiding our secondary schools. Where are we sending the UPE children? UPE, a programme which we all want to support, which we are all boasting about, what is the intended outcome at the end of the day? I hope it will be useful. (Interruption)

MR NYANZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I thank the honourable member for giving way. I am also perturbed because in the Budget Speech, on page 16 the minister is saying the bursary schemes for the bright but poor secondary students is to be strengthened with more funding to cover six science students. We have already heard that in some sub-counties there is not even a single secondary school. How is the minister going to get these numbers from these sub-counties when there is not even senior one up to senior four? After all, to get to know that somebody is a science student, he/she has got to be either in senior five or senior six.
 
MS ALASO: Thank you very much, my colleague, for that information - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think the two are not related. Her case was that each sub-county should have a grant-aided school. It does not mean that because there is no grant-aided school, students from that particular sub-county cannot go to other colleges and then qualify for the award.

MR NYANZI: Mr Speaker, in such sub-counties, students who manage to go to those secondary schools elsewhere are for the rich people but here he is talking of poor students from poor families.

THE SPEAKER: I see.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The other thing I want to talk about is the resolution of this Parliament, talking about the quota system for admission to public universities. Again, I am so disturbed because if you look at the admissions, take Makerere University for purposes of illustration. This year’s admissions, I will give you an example: Kampala District had 379, Bushenyi had 106, Luweero had 74, Kumi had 31, Nebbi 23, Bugiri 14, Kamwenge 10, Kotido 5, Moroto 1, and my own Soroti, 28. My problem here is that these districts at the very end of this table have children who qualify for private sponsorship to these public universities.

MRS MATEMBE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to give a small piece of information that surely when we are considering these figures, we must not forget that in Kampala there is balance because the 300 who were admitted there they reflect all of the –(Interruptions)- yes, let me finish. I have the Floor. If we were to ask how many of our sons here - it is of national character, they come from all of us. When you talk of Bushenyi, Kumi then I understand but let us leave Kampala out because it will mislead us if we are including it.

MRS ZZIWA: Supplementary information to hon. Matembe’s –(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, the issue of numbers taken at public universities should also correlate to population. I will take an example of Mbarara District. When you compare Mbarara District of a population of 1.6 million with a district of a population of 260,000, really you are not being fair.  

MRS ZZIWA: Hon. Matembe’s point, which tries to look to Kampala as cosmopolitan and definitely with an aggregation of all of us, a reflection of the whole country, was ably presented when we were arguing the quota system but it was looked at in the perspective of a special class of people who come to Kampala.  I think, now hon. Matembe has put it very categorically that definitely in Kampala we have so many people who come from the various parts of this country and they should be looked at as such.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, let me thank my honourable colleagues for what they have put to me. First, let me say I have read it generally, I did not sample Kampala, but if you want my view on Kampala, I am still convinced that the people who constitute Kampala are from all over this country. 

Two, they could also be the very ones who can afford private sponsorship. You should know that these are the people who can afford to take their children to the best schools in Uganda, and they are the ones who should afford to pay for this education. We are talking about the poor people of this country, what justification do we give Moroto District when they have only one student getting admission on Government sponsorship? Why would we not go ahead and admit all the four children from Moroto, because if Moroto has three on private sponsorship, why do we not get the three plus these other ones and give them at least one? I still believe that if we are talking about human resource development in this country, Cabinet needs to help us and give this resolution the due attention that it requires.

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, I am seeking clarification from my colleague, hon. Alice Alaso. She started developing her point very well, talking about quality and not quantity and actually even went ahead to criticise the mass promotions in UPE. The clarification I am seeking is, if in Moroto one person has got the grade to qualify to go to a government university and those other four you are talking about, for example, have got EEE and the cut off point for the university you know is a certain higher point, how then will you reconcile the two, the quality and the quantity?

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to tell hon. Kiraso that these public universities take those other children on private sponsorship for the same courses. They will admit one for the education course at a certain cut off point, then they admit three for education privately at the same cut off point, same lecture room, same lectures, same everything. If we want to help these districts, let us do affirmative action, let us give them support and let the children come. Otherwise, I have a feeling that this type of thing if we continue to sit on it will lead to the type of argument and the type of documents that Dr Nabwiso presented to this House. 

I want to say something about agriculture –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: The document is being investigated so what guidance do you want?

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to talk about agriculture and my only concern is because in the Budget Speech we are talking about increasing output. If you look at what is happening in the agriculture sector, there are so many gaps, many missing links. The Minister, in the Budget Speech told us that the micro finance sector has about Shs 86 billion outstanding loan portfolio, Shs 129 billion in terms of savings and I get the impression that he was trying to convince this country that while we have that level of micro finance, then the agricultural sector automatically has some money, which will be used to develop it. This to me does not seem to be the case.  

Agricultural credit in this country has to be looked at. Micro finance institutions do not find agriculture a lucrative business, at least in the district where I come from. They do not even want to lend to farmers and the farmers cannot afford the high interest rates they charge. I think we should find a way of making those linkages. I will give you an example of NAADS. Every year we pass money for NAADS and NAADS is doing a good job. They will come talk to the farmers, tell them to form groups and they walk away, the farmers remain without any opportunity to illustrate what NAADS taught them. At the end of the day, if NAADS left a district like Soroti, there would be no physical way of ever anointing what they have done, until we give agricultural credit. I do not see modernisation coming through the hand hoe. I do not see it coming through rain-fed agriculture, which we waited for this year, the first harvests failed. Is this modernised agriculture anymore? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.39
MR HARRY KASIGWA (Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is every Ugandan’s desire to live in a vibrant economy. By that we mean reduced poverty, enhanced wealth, job creation, among others. However, to achieve that vibrant economy a country ought to be managed strategically, and that one I emphasize. It should be guided by sound macro-economic policies, appropriate sector policies and above all a vision that is shared by everybody. If these policies are known to everybody and Members of Parliament inclusive, then calling Members of Parliament ignorant would not arise; that is assuming these policies do exist. 

Mr Speaker, it is not elaborate sector policies that will enable a country exploit its niche. For example in Uganda today we are talking about AGOA, which offers a wide range of opportunities. As Ugandans, what do we want out of this wide range of opportunities? So, it would be prudent for us as a country to develop an AGOA policy. It would be prudent for us to develop a vegetable oil policy; we would not be having problems with BIDCO and the Vegetable and Seed Oil Producers’ Association. 

These policies should be well integrated then we shall move ahead in leaps and bounds. There is no doubt about that. But what I have seen over the times that I have been in Parliament here, we are running a State House based policy and this does not mean well for this country. If we had clear-cut policies well designed, backed by institutions that are strong and resilient, we would not be talking about poverty today in this country. But what do we see? I am a businessman, I get problems, just because I know I am linked to the President, I can easily raise Shs 31 billion to rescue me. But assuming we had a national rescue policy for business people in this country here, then I think many businesses that have been put under receivership would still be surviving today. 
 
In Jinja where I come from there is a gentleman by the name Mr Baliddawa. He is the Chairman of Civil Aviation Authority Board. He set up a modern milk processing plant. At one stage he needed capital of Shs 200 million to survive and be able to pay his loan. Unfortunately, he moved around and nobody was there to rescue him. He was forced to sell his lifelong savings because he had worked and saved by building that industry, which was no more. It made him sell his cows to pay back the loan because there was no business rescue policy in this country. 

Secondly, I want to draw the attention of my colleagues and the frontbench to one of the core issues in the Budget and in the vision, and that is export-led growth. Mr Speaker, I want to inform this House that our foreign exchange earnings are less than six percent of our market price GDP. That is the magnitude of the matter. With no clear-cut policies, we cannot transform. If you look at the amount of the monies being allocated to the Ministry of Trade to promote exports, you shudder. How do you allocate the Ministry Shs 300 million to develop exports for a nation? That sounds ridiculous absolutely, and as Parliament we should demand that Government should come up with policies that are geared towards stimulating this economy here that we all know and we should appreciate and participate in their formulation.  

I have managed to read a policy document for a sector that was distributed to the House and that is the Meat Policy for Uganda. I read it and I found it extremely wanting. We have got superior animal population as compared to Botswana but we cannot develop a meat policy. Let us just go to Botswana and copy from them and come and have a beef policy in this country. Botswana today has got a quota of 19,000 metric tonnes of beef to supply to the European Union market. What do we have in Uganda? It is because we do not have clear-cut policies for that sector!  

Thirdly, Mr Speaker, on page 11 of the Budget Speech the minister talks about setting up an industrial and business park in Namanve. At what cost? I am meant to believe it must have been a deal because the additional cost of setting up an industrial - because you are beginning from zero building infrastructure, building roads, building railway lines, servicing of power everything. But, in Jinja there lies a well-serviced industrial location but it is dead. If we are to be focused as a country, we would just have to put a little more money into that area there and we would not be spending billions of money. I have been reliably informed they carried out a study that cost the Government US $6.0 million about four years ago and today we are borrowing money to begin investing in infrastructure -(Interruption)

MR OFWONO: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. Thank you, Mr Speaker. The information I want to give is of establishing the dry dock in Namanve here. I happen to come from the border, that is Tororo, and we have a small dry dock, which is not yet open due to some technical problem. I really do not imagine leaving the whole of Eastern and you come to establish a dry dock in Namanve, because we could clear goods right in Tororo, we could clear goods in the North and even eliminate smuggling and others. So, I really do not see the reason why you bring everything here to congest Kampala. You are going to congest Kampala with everything, with industries et cetera; why do you not take this facility upcountry? It is really unfair and this is the way we can reduce poverty.  

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, I think the member should not mislead the House. It is normal practice and it is a concern especially on revenue leakage that even goods destined for Mbarara are cleared at the border. The only reason to clear at the border in Tororo when the goods are destined for Kabale and Mbarara, is simply to avoid contamination.

MR WAMBUZI: Mr Speaker, when our colleague is articulating the issue of Jinja, we must focus carefully on what he is talking about. At the moment all the roads lead to Kampala and unfortunately the colonialists did not advise the Kingdom of Buganda on how to use the land. So, all the roads enter Kampala but then they are not allowed to cross Kampala. So, you find even when you are leaving this Chamber at times you cannot get to your home. Kampala is slowly degenerating into Harlem, which in 1920 was a town as beautiful as this one but because of the mishandling and what was happening at that time in America, Harlem today is a city of violence and is unusable. 

Due to lack of planning and lack of control of the development, Kampala city is slowly migrating. At night you will possibly find the whole city quiet, then in the morning you find you cannot cross it and at the end of the day, we are actually slowly killing what should be a vantage point for development through unplanned location of industrialisation and through uncontrolled developments. Hence, we are going to end up with Jinja dead and Kampala dead. This situation is not going to be tenable because this is supposed to be the capital city.

If you want the best office in town, it is no longer here in the centre, you have to go to Clement Hill road and I am told the centre is moving to Kololo, the executive houses are in Kireka where actually there is no plan. Even MPs are developing houses in Kireka but when you go there you can really cry. You cannot buy a quarter of an acre and you put up two bungalows and then you put walls side by side such that even if there is fire you cannot even run out. So, we are slowly killing both Kampala and Jinja. This situation is terrible at the end of the day.

MR KASIGWA: Thank you very much for that information –(Interruption)

MR NYANZI: I only want to give information as a former Minister of State for Industry. When I was still a minister I tried my best to persuade investors to go to Jinja but many of them were telling me - in fact, I was forced because hon. Migereko used to come to my office almost every week. The investors told me they are after market and a source of raw materials. And in fact, when I got some to come they told me, “Unless you improve your incentives we would rather go to either Nairobi or Rwanda.” So, now what the Government is trying to do is to improve some incentives in order to persuade these investors to come to Uganda.

MR OFWONO: I want to ask the previous speaker that we have the railway line, we have good roads, we have the airports; what requirement do you need? We have telephones, everything is there. So, I do not see other resources required -(Mr Nyanzi rose_)

THE SPEAKER: No, let this not be a debate really. You gave the information.

MR KASIGWA: Mr Speaker, I want to thank the colleagues for the contributions they have made. When we talk about the cost of setting up the infrastructure we are talking about in Namanve today, it will not be less than US $30 million. But if we invested less than US $30 million in improving an already existing industrial area that has scanty facilities like telephone lines, roads, drainage, a pier; it is better.

It is a pity. I feel sorry for this country. When we look at self first before looking at planning as a process, setting Namanve as a new facility is going to be a white elephant. Because initially the dealer was a South African company who would come and force all the bonded warehouses - the ICDs - to relocate to Namanve and invest afresh in Namanve, which they objected to because they had spent billions of shillings to develop ICDs like Maersk, Ken Freight, Inter Freight Panalpina; they had all spent billions of shillings to develop facilities. So, they said no, there is no cause for them to go back to Namanve. So, honourable colleagues, that is the situation as it obtains. But the principle here is that we should not build white elephants.  

Finally, I would say that we desire requisite policies that we are conversant with that take into account all variables that exist in the international market. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.55
MR HERBERT MUNTUYERA (Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will confine myself to the agricultural sector. Our agricultural sector contributes 40 percent to our GDP in terms of income and employment but unfortunately, when it comes to resource allocation, it receives only about 2.5 percent of the public resources. When I look at the theme of the budget of this financial year it says, “Promoting Economic Growth and Reducing Poverty through Public Expenditure”. I would rather think that it should have been “focused public expenditure for equitable economic growth” so that you are able to reduce poverty. As you know, our budget still needs a lot of donor support, but I think if we had focused public investment in productive areas, we would be able to harness some of our internal resources and be able to reduce that dependency. 

An example is what hon. Kasigwa had talked about, of our livestock. It is almost a wasted resource other than for the milk and beef we get for the local market. Currently, our national herd stands at about 6.5 million head of cattle. When you look at the background to the budget on page 14, there is a table of Uganda’s exports of goods and services of the years 2000/01 to 2003/04. When you look at that list, down the line you will only find that what comes out of our livestock industry that is listed here are hides and skins only. And because we lack value addition, you will find that in 2000/01 we actually earned about US $22.7 million from a volume of about 17,000 metric tonnes of hides and skins. 

When you go on to 2003/04, you will find that the volume of the hides and skins has actually increased to 21,000 metric tonnes. Unfortunately, the revenues have fallen to US $5.43 million. When you look at an example like Botswana, which hon. Kasigwa talked about, it is true they have a quota of about 19,000 metric tonnes of beef to the European market, which they get out of 3.25 million animals only. That is actually less than what Uganda has, and yet we get almost nothing out of these. It is like that because we have not been serious in looking at livestock as a resource and we get money out of it. If these people have been able to get about 150 million Euros from their beef exports to the European market, what would we get if we have more than twice their national herd? And what do we need in order to access the European markets or even the American markets for our beef? It is simple; let us eliminate disease because -(Interruption)

MR KATURAMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank hon. Muntuyera for giving way. I wish to inform the House that the lack of planning to increase our animal production was also manifested when His Excellency the President alluded to supplying 1.9 million goats and sheep to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. We could not lift our expectation and that deal could not take off. Thank you.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the member for giving way and I want to say that what he is talking is absolutely right. However, the problem we have is that when you are selling shoes in your shop, it is very wise to also sell socks and laces and possibly shoe polish, because they go together. But the way we are packaging our things is very interesting. The water for production, which we need for animals, resides in the Ministry of Lands and Water. Interestingly, the diseases that attack livestock come from the wild animals. The department of veterinary is scattered, the diseases that attack animals attack cows, and yet the wild animals’ department resides in the Ministry of Trade. So, how do you synchronise the two? 

It is high time that we really packaged our things properly. Let the department that deals with animals deal with livestock and get water to where it is needed. I thank you.

MR NUWAGABA: Thank you for that information. As the honourable member has been saying, in order to exploit our animal resources all we need is provision of water so that we minimise animal movement. Once you minimise that you can control disease, then the rest will follow. 

The second area I want to talk about are markets because we have been hearing a lot about Government going outside to look for these markets. I think the markets do exist and they have existed for a long time. What we need is to conform to the quality in those markets –(Interjection)- quality and quantity, that is true, thank you for that. The European markets, the American markets do exist and they need products particularly from the agricultural sector. What we need is to have sustainable production of those and then have products that conform to those markets. So, what we need is to get the information from those markets and tie it into our production chain here and then we will access those markets. 

When you look through the Budget Speech, again you will find that there are two commodities from Uganda where you have consistent supply literally throughout the year and these are flowers, which are produced in green houses and then fish, which are got out of the fresh waters of Uganda. But when you look at other agricultural products without harnessing water, you are at the mercy of the heavens and, therefore, if you are given a contract to supply and you rely on rain, I am afraid you will not be able to perform. So, Government must look into irrigation as a way of accessing these markets in addition to the other factors I have talked about.

The third and last one is agricultural credit. Hon. Alice Alaso talked about that. I always get a bit worried. Whenever we talk about agricultural credit you hear the Ministry of Finance talking about micro finance outreach plan. I want to challenge Government; can they name just one country in the world, which has transformed its agriculture through micro-finance? Micro-finance is actually for speculative business and agricultural production has its own peculiarities. So until Government puts in place an agricultural credit institution that will look at the peculiarities of agricultural production, I do not see us quickly transforming our agricultural production. 

So, hon. Minister of Finance, we are not saying that you should not go on with your micro-finance, but that will be for another group of people. If you want to target farmers, then you must package another institution that is going to help our farmers. I thank you.

6.06
MS MARY AMAJO (Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to start off by thanking the Budget Committee for a thorough analysis of this year’s budget. I would like to appreciate that this budget tries to take into account the goals under PEAP. But like a number of Members have mentioned, especially the comments from hon. Sabiiti, when you look at the prioritization of the sectors, we still see that the real sector of the economy is not given its fair share of the Budget. If you take agriculture, for example, which contributes 40 percent to GDP, although there is a rise in the percentage allocation of the Budget from 2.2 to 3.5, this is still not commensurate with its contribution to GDP and also the contribution of agriculture to human resource development in this country including resources that contribute to say, education and the quality of life generally.

In addition, when you look at the intra-sectoral analysis in allocation, take any particular ministry, you find that the allocation gives more of funding to things like administration, capacity building and recurrent expenditure generally. Much less proportion is given to the kind of infrastructure and equipment that help the people who are involved in these ministries to do their work. For example, like some members have mentioned, we have a lot of people in the Ministry of Agriculture or Health, but the laboratories are not equipped. The laboratories are not equipped with the needed reagents. Therefore, you find staff members of the Ministry of Health are frustrated because they cannot do their work effectively. So, the intra-sectoral analysis of the Budget indicates irrational allocation in terms of where priorities should be. 

Also related to that, when you analyze the budget for gender sensitivity, there is a lot to be desired. Gender sensitivity relates to how exactly the budget should be allocated to get the maximum output in terms of targeting the key areas from where you get maximum output, taking into account of course equity, especially addressing the marginalized groups, women inclusive. For example, when you analyze the budget allocation to the Ministry of Agriculture, how much of that is supporting actual production in terms of who the key people are in production and what the key inputs that they need are? For example, what kind of credit is there for agriculture? Instead you find situations where for example NAADS, which to me is a very cost ineffective programme, is. If we are to sit down and really analyze NAADS, there is a lot more that we could do with the money that goes into administration, moving around in Pajeros and just targeting maybe one sub-county. It is a very cost ineffective programme and that is not a very gender sensitive budget.

These are reflected for example in indicators, which show that for example our poverty levels are actually growing. There is an increase in poverty from 34 percent in 2000 to 38 percent in 2003. One would ask, if we are really pumping all this money into agriculture and other sectors, why would poverty be growing? Among other things, it is because of this irrational allocation of our budget into these sectors.

Another indicator is that agriculture is actually shrinking in absolute terms. In development, agriculture should be shrinking, but it should not be shrinking in absolute terms. It should shrink proportionately to industry. But in our case actually agriculture is shrinking in absolute terms, which is very dangerous.  

Therefore, I recommend that we should have made a deliberate effort to build the capacity of the Budget Committee in budget analysis, including the gender-based analysis, because all our budgets are gender blind. 

I also noted with gratitude that for the areas that are coming out of war, there was an allocation for tractors to help uplift their production capacity. I would have loved also to see an allocation for simpler equipment especially the ox-drawn equipment, the ox-ploughs and related equipment. I am very familiar with the tractor hire service. Even if it is at zero cost, I know what it means; I know how durable it can be. It is very delicate and yet, Mr Speaker, most of the areas that are in war situations are expert areas in intermediate technology especially in the form of ox cultivation. So, I would recommend that we pay equal attention to supporting these families with intermediate technology, especially ox cultivation. We are all familiar with the Teso farming system and actually the people from Teso and Lango are experts in this area. We all found other areas going for courses in ox cultivation, but the expertise is in Teso. Why not have that which is more sustainable? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

6.15
MR NELSON GAGAWALA (Bulamogi County, Kamuli): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity this evening to make a few comments on the Budget. In the Budget there is an issue about food but I think it was mentioned in a casual way. In real terms we are having a crisis of food in Uganda, which is really a shock because we should be having stocks of food as a country, which is supposed to be a net exporter of food. As of now I am told very many areas seem not to be well stocked with food and the harvest is also going to be poor. That means the colonial strategy of having food silos and marketing boards, which was the only group that ensured we had food stored, has been lost. I think if we get such a season twice next year, we shall have a problem.

It is a pity that the Minister of Finance did not come out and moreover he was arguing that inflation was being controlled because of our capacity in producing our own foods at subsistence level. That means in this coming budget inflation is likely to skyrocket, which he did not predict. But the weather being a vagary of nature, it is clear that we are going to have even super inflation as a result of not being prudent enough to save food throughout the country. Even in a place like Mbarara where we think there is supposed to be food, I am told the soil fertility is declining. These bananas have got a tendency to suck out of the soil most of the nutrients, leaving the area depleted such that banana production, which used to be high in Bushenyi, has reduced. So, we are heading for a crisis because we lack mobilization and planning for the peasants to make sure that there is one area where we should not be defeated, the area of food.

My next point is about exports. Cotton is supposed to be one of the exports but as of now cotton is not linked to the AGOA project. In fact, it appears that for the next three years these people from Malaysia or Thailand, in Bugolobi, are going to use material, which is coming from outside in spite of the fact that the Minister was arguing that we are using our cotton. No, we are not producing enough cotton. The highest peak of cotton production, when Nyanza textile in Jinja was doing very well, was about 400 to 1,000 bales per year. As of now we are still looming at 100 bales, a good percentage of which is being exported. That means we are still not focused; we are still running a disorganized economy, basically a mismanaged economy, and if we go on like this we are likely to lose out even the next 15 years of AGOA, which we have been given. 
So, it is very important for the Minister to assure us that if we want to export we must first have done the nursery for organizing ourselves, because unless you have assured us on this nursery - the only minister who has really been successful in creating a nursery is -(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. I would like to inform you that the cotton we are producing, although we cannot turn it into a fabric because we lack the machines to process our cotton to the fabric that is required to supply for instance to these people of AGOA, we are exporting unfinished products. What is available, we are able to make these school uniforms because of lack of those machines again. So, we are even actually having cotton we cannot utilize.

MR GAGAWALA: It is a pity that in fact this group, which came here, did not come out clearly because the neighbour to that factory, which used to be UGIL, that is Phoenix - that man in Phoenix could be a very good expert in that we produce the best cotton in the world. We should be able to get ten times the amount of money we are getting now by exporting cotton. But I think what the President has done is to bring what they call a pilot project, making it possible for it to be multiplied to all the areas of Uganda, maybe apart from the mountainous areas of Mbale and Kabale. But all the other areas of Uganda can grow first class cotton and if we concentrated on it for five to ten years, we could actually come out of poverty without even touching the milk. 

If we wanted to go via milk we would have said, “Okay, let us make a programme for milk countrywide”. We can kill all the diseases in the country, control the wildlife centres and then produce milk so that even school children have milk, that is, for local consumption. And our neighbours in Nigeria and Sudan; there are so many areas that would die to buy this milk. So, if we were organized - the problem we are facing is that we are running a disorganized situation. We do not know where we are going, we do not where we are coming from and we do not know where we are. This sort of situation is not good and we are leaving it to one man to struggle it out, the President alone. 

Leaving one man to do everything is going to break this gentleman’s back. We love him, we would like him to continue leading us but we need to bring in a spirit of teamwork and make sure that so and so should be blamed for this. It appears some people are just kukongola, which is not good; everybody must be on board; all Ugandans must have a role of some sort for the economy to move –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek clarification. The speaker holding the floor says “we”, you and who? And then when you talk about “this man”, which man? Thank you.

MR GAGAWALA: When I say “we”, I mean we in the sense of leaders; the leadership from LC I to Parliament and the President. But when we leave it to the President, then we are leaving it to him alone. I hope I have clarified myself -(Interjection)- “kukongola” is a situation where a man appears to be working yet he is just cheating. He holds a hoe and you think he is digging but actually he is holding it in the air. So, he is doing nothing and reaping where he did not sow.

MR KASIGWA: Thank you colleague for giving way. Thank you, Mr Speaker. The information I want to give hon. Gagawala is that we are living in an environment where we would not like to bother ourselves with skilled and objective manpower. I will give you an example. The man behind India’s economy is Manmohan Singh, the current Prime Minister. Manmohan Singh is a brain to reckon with that the BJP Party retained him as their Chief Economic Advisor. If we could only do that in Uganda and use objective people - I do not want to appear to have one bull in the kraal - then we would move forward.

MS KIRASO: We are here in Parliament debating and making recommendations to Government on the policy and programmes.  I think we are doing our job. I do not want to believe that it is only one person in this country who is working and all of us are just sitting back and doing nothing. We have got three arms of Government; here we do the legislative work and I think we have been doing our job. The President does not sit here to make laws for Uganda. The Judiciary is doing its work against so many odds. The Cabinet, we have got 66 Cabinet Ministers; I think they are doing a good job. 

So, the clarification I am seeking from hon. Gagawala is, what do you mean when you say that all of us have just left one, very good man to do all the work for Uganda?  

MR GAGAWALA: The comment I made was apparent and when you make apparent comments, you do not clarify them. I think if I am going to clarify I could spoil the argument. So, I would like to leave it at that. 

Allow me to move to the issue of technology. Unless we embrace technology we cannot develop. If you want to localize technology, you do not start by importing. Mr Speaker, you remember when our President visited Cuba, Premier Fidel Castro advised him that, “You cannot succeed by depending on other people’s scientists and technologists”. It is a pity we have not taken this seriously. The idea that we are going to import experts here - we should import trainers of trainers; we should import people who can train our local entrepreneurs in the skills of being enterprising businessmen. I think we should not import actors but we should import trainers of trainers so that business, technology and industrialization picks up in an avalanche. We need seeds of trainers of trainers. If we do not do that, it will be very difficult to catch up. We shall import people who will cheat us, do something half way and leave us in the cold. But if we import seeds, which can train other people to train others, we will have done the correct thing. 

The best example in Uganda would be the Vocational Training Institute (VTI) in Nakawa. That institute appears to be a joke but it is getting down slowly. If you go to our garages now, you will find first class mechanics who do not understand what is in Japan nor English, but they are working in their local language, just Luganda, but because they have been exposed to very simple programmes by trainers of trainers, we are driving cars made in Japan without a care.  

Mr Speaker, if we are serious about technology, then we should have a Ministry of Technology here, above everything else. If we really want to industrialize quickly in the next five to ten years, the first thing we should have put in place is the Ministry of Science and Technology.  

On the ICT policy, we had a seminar recently and the experts in ICT from the Communications Commission said we, Members of Parliament, have not helped them to design policies that can make this sector to grow. 

I think it is our responsibility to push the minister in charge of this sector to bring the policy initiatives he wants so that we pass them and arm him so that the communications sector actually takes off. It is doing well - only six percent. We want the other 94 percent to be picked up.

When you go to agriculture – I will not talk much about agriculture -(Interjection)– are you ordering me to stop, Sir? (Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER:  No, it is time really.

MR GAGAWALA: I will stop there, but it is a pity if you do not allow me to remind this House of the long-standing need for –(Laughter)- the people of Bulamogi. Mr Speaker – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member, the good thing is that you have got a comrade here from Koboko, hon. Awongo, whose case is like yours. I think you will be able to push it.

MR GAGAWALA: There is something very urgent, which I thought I would, with your permission - maybe I will present it another time. We have a problem of Shs 3 billion stolen from the budget of Kamuli. The paper is here and the accounts have been compiled by the Auditor-General. I will maybe present it at a later stage. 

I have got a full file of teachers who are not being paid. Some of them have not got their salaries since 1996, 1997 and some from 2000 to-date. Others have not been paid salary for twelve months. All this is being done to make sure the people of Bulamogi cry. Therefore, I am very anxious that this issue of allowing Kaliro District to be formed is very important. Some of our people are really crying very hard and it is only this House, which can actually put pressure on the Ministry of Local Government to come and table a motion that these people have suffered enough. Fifty years of bondage is enough. We need to be released so that we start doing the things we want to do, Mr Speaker. I thank you very much.

6.31
MS AANIMU ANGUPALE (Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to contribute to the report of the Budget Committee on the Indicative Preliminary Revenue and Expenditure Framework of the Government for the financial year 2004/2005.  

I am going to contribute on only one sector though I had wanted to remark on the mineral resource – that is, energy and agriculture but to my dismay, the whole Ministry of Agriculture is not present. Given the fact that agriculture has been a chronic disease in the budget performance of this country, and yet they are not here, I will reserve my comments on that sector. Maybe I will mention it on Tuesday when the ministers are around.

On the Budget Speech, I had actually wanted to be informed whether the performance of this country’s economy had increased. Did our GDP perform well in the last financial year or it was badly off, and how do we intend to improve it?  

I put this question as a preamble because we have listened to Budget Speeches and reports of the Budget Committee on several occasions. They normally sound so sweet, so convincing, but it is perturbing. Mr Speaker, I would like to assure you that even some sectoral budgets might be blocked from being passed because we need them to exactly explain what happened to the funds, which were allocated to that sector. If it is not properly explained, then the budgets should be blocked so that they explain it properly and the people of this country get satisfied with it. We have had several examples where some sectors had so much expenditure, in others there were too much releases irrespective of fewer people to consume it. For example, in UPE all these explanations will need to be answered properly before this House passes the Budget.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to comment on rural electrification on page 60 of the committee’s report. I thank the committee so much for their recommendation on the rural electrification where they stated that, “Rural electrification is among the major pillars of PEAP, but funds have not been allocated for it. The Government should take this issue seriously and therefore consider it in the medium-term review”.  

Mr Speaker, why do I zero in on this particular point? Yesterday we had a motion trying to request Parliament to borrow funds for electrification, for access of power to mineral areas, and -(Interjection)- yes, if you were present yesterday that was the case. I think some of you were not present, so you listen. Let me explain it first - and the issue was passed. It brought to my mind one question - actually I expect the Minister of Finance to explain this:  

Some two years back this House passed a motion requesting this House to allow them get a loan from a Saudi Arabian Bank, worth about US $500 million, which was meant for rural electrification and Nyagak Electrification Project was focused on. We quickly passed that loan thinking that Nyagak would take off, and as I am talking now it is about two years and Nyagak is bushy, there are foot paths there; yet financial year 2002/2003, the money –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the Minister for Energy is standing here.  

THE MINISTER OF STATE, ENERGY (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you, Mr Speaker and the member for giving way. The hon. Member from Arua has asserted that Government came here seeking endorsement of Parliament to borrow US $500 million from Saudi Arabia for rural electrification. I thought I should correct the record. 

One; we never came here to seek permission or endorsement to borrow funds from any of the Saudi banks. We came here to seek endorsement to borrow from the World Bank monies for rural electrification; and the sum was not US $500 million, it was around US $450 million in total. 

However, regarding the issue of the Nyagak Project, this work has been progressing, albeit in phases. We started with a project to do with stepping up the supply of electricity in the Arua area from four hours of power supply to 18 hours of power supply, based on the geo-thermal stations. As I speak now, the generators are on the ground in Arua.  

Secondly, distribution lines in that area was a component of that Rural Electrification Programme. As I speak now, the bulk of the network has been put in place. It was deliberate that we start with the distribution network to take advantage of the power generated from the diesel generators as we work on the Nyagak Project such that when the Nyagak Project is completed, it will be a question of switching on and the community benefits from power generated from Nyagak.  

Mr Speaker, it is also true that contractors for the Nyagak Project have presented their bids, and the bids are being analyzed. It is fairly clear that Government has not reneged on its commitment to ensure that under the Rural Electrification Programme we extend or we provide electricity to the Arua area. And I can see by the member raising this very point, she is doing her work such that her constituents are assured that they have a strong voice in this House such that services can be delivered to the constituency. I thank you.

MRS ANGUPALE: Thank you, honourable minister. I expected you to answer me that way but I have not erred at all. I think my point here is clear. Yesterday we were meant to get loans and yet earlier on we were also meant to get some loan from a bank, which I said may be Arabian, I did not conclude my statement. All the same you have consented that we gave you permission to borrow US $450 million, which I think if you round it up, can come to that amount. I think that is not an issue. 

The issue here is, are the funds properly utilized? I was bringing up the example of Nyagak. Right now it is not taking off and the Minister has ably explained that the verification takes two years of a financial year; and the funds, which were borrowed, are not reflected anywhere in the ministerial statement. So, you can see where the confusion is. I request him to explain it in terms of budgetary provisions so that I understand. 

The minister and I are doing our jobs as leaders to make the people benefit from the resources of this country. I do not want to stop there. Honourable minister, I want to assure you that even the project by the Wenerico people has been frustrated. As I talk now, even if that generator is completed, they are bound not to proceed because of one thing; the poles, which were put there, are now rotten. 

I am talking from experience. One and a half weeks ago I was in Arua with the Weneriko Contractors and they personally told us that the frustration would come from the poles. If you see the poles, which the ministry put in that area, they are all eaten up by termites yet the ones that were put up by the Europeans in 1935 are still very strong. Is there value for money? That is the debate we are after. The question is, are we really utilizing the funds, which this House is passing for this nation? 

You can see that money is given but the sectors frustrate the Government’s efforts. How many Members of Parliament go to the ground and see the performance of sectors? The whole Minister stands up to challenge it. I wish the Budget Committee has got time, even tomorrow, in my absence, you go to Arua and touch those poles, they are going to fall down. I am not praising myself that I talk a lot, but I am also crying for the beloved country on how the resources are misallocated year in, year out. We are talking of budgetary increase but there is no performance. I think that is the area of debate. 

I hope that the ministry in charge of that particular sector tries to rectify its problems and corrects such a scenario so that this country moves and the areas in which these budgets are allocated benefit fully from those allocations. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to limit myself to the area of energy. Maybe you will give me chance to have more contribution tomorrow when the Minister of Agriculture is present so that I also pre-empt what I have seen in my area about agricultural production and how it sabotages the economy of this country. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

6.44
MRS SALAAMU MUSUMBA (Bugabula County South, Kamuli): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am glad to be contributing to the debate on the Budget for now nine years. 

To me this particular year seems like a continuation of lamentations other than resource allocations. Mr Speaker, for all the years, since we made the new Constitution, we have preoccupied ourselves with lamentations, thereby failing in our constitutional duties to allocate and reallocate. I am yet to see a Budget in which Parliament exercises the power of allocation and reallocation. I thought that the Budget Act was arming this House with such tools so as to ensure that Budgets are properly guided to fit the needs that we keep lamenting about, year in, year out.  

So I would like to say to the Committee of Budget that, can we for this year make a difference and actually reallocate? Can we reallocate the resources of this country as envisaged by the powers given to us by the Constitution? (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I thought the Budget Act empowered us to participate in and influence the allocation. It may not be complete but I think now there is some improvement that we can influence the allocation.  Isn’t that the case?

MRS MUSUMBA: Yes, Mr Speaker, to some extent but I think we should always annually, be adding value, quantum to the way we are allocating the resources. In the Budget meetings of this year there were proposals of how cuts should be exercised because that is the only tool we have in our hands, to cut, not to increase or to make a charge on the Consolidated Fund. But even in these debates there was resistance to have any reallocation. So I think in future if Parliament as an institution is not able to improve or to even shift any little money, this is a wasted exercise. 

The Government would be quick to want to use Parliament as an institution in the governance of this country to make sure that resources actually go the priorities as collectively defined. I am sure if we did that, my colleague hon. Gagawala would not be talking about the President working alone and us doing the thing he said, which I cannot pronounce. But I think we all want to make sure the country in which we live and the country in which we have been made leaders, we can make a contribution.  

Mr Speaker, the structure of the Budget was a big issue because it is the Budget, which determines or which sets out in the modern style of management, which shows the efficiency of a Government and its effectiveness. How would you measure efficiency of a government? For everybody who has done a Budget whether at CBO level, NGO level, even at Government or public level, you should know that the admissible percentage that you should put on overall administration is 15 percent of the resources and so, every ministry should be evaluating itself. If your administrative cost, overheads, vehicles, fuel, allowances and salary goes beyond 15 percent, then that is a very inefficient Government. 

And our Government is getting grossly inefficient because all we do is to service administration, travel abroad, travel inland, fuel, machinery, what – nothing trickles down to the people. For me, this is a big shame for all of us leaders, to allow this to go on unchecked. I was hoping that this year we would say, “Well, Government is spending 60 percent”. In some areas like the Office of the Prime Minister, 60 percent is servicing the administration so when you complain about Northern Uganda not having anything, you must know why. It is because we must service the titles; Prime Minister, First Deputy Prime Ministers, what – all these things, they are just eating into the resources of the poor people who pick the bill.  

Mr Speaker, effectiveness of Government; is our Government effective? (Interruption)

MR GAGAWALA: Mr Speaker, I do not know why the Minister wants that first.  

THE MINISTER OF STATE, COMMUNICATIONS (Mr Michael Werikhe): I thank you Mr Speaker and my colleague for giving way. I want to correct the impression because hon. Salaamu Musumba is saying that what we do as a government is just spend money on administration. I think that is not correct. As we talk now, the road from Jinja to Kamuli was recently or is being rehabilitated and that is one of the projects. As we talk now the road between Jinja and Bugiri, this is within Busoga region, is being rehabilitated, to mention but a few of the projects that are being done. Therefore, it is not correct to say that we spend money on servicing administration alone. That is the wrong impression I wanted to correct.

MR GAGAWALA: Mr Speaker, I want hon. Salaamu Musumba to clarify to me and possibly to the House. The Ministry of Gender, which does not collect revenue, is really a service ministry. The Ministry of Health is also more or less a service industry; the Ministry of Education is really mainly a service industry. Are you now saying that these ministries should also put out production like the Ministry of Works, which tenders roads and will see that they have used Shs 300 billion to do some roads and of it five billion is for administration? Are we saying that all the ministries must actually show us goods in quantity so that if they are – 2.6 billion of Ministry of Gender, if they use all of it, it is a crime and yet actually they do not have anything to sell apart from the administration and mobilization. Can I be clarified about what hon. Salaamu Musumba is saying about the different ministries?

MRS MUSUMBA: Thank you very much my colleagues for asking for clarification. I wish I had more time to elaborate. But let me say this to you, hon. Gagawala. I am not talking about just contribution to GDP of each ministry. Of course every ministry should be coming to this House to demonstrate, not to talk to us how they contribute to the GDP. If they did that, we would have no questions whatsoever; but I have saved them that today. All I am saying is that when you are making a budget for a ministry –(Interruption)

DR KEZIMBIRA MIYINGO: Mr Speaker, contribution to GDP can be done in many ways. If the Minister of Health provides hospitals and drugs, in a way by providing health services to our people, that is contribution to GDP, though indirectly. If the Police controls law and order in this country, it is contributing to GDP.

MRS MUSUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the honourable minister because he has answered the question. All I am saying is that, can you package yourselves differently, demonstrate to this nation that all that you are doing is to generate wealth for all of us? Yes, the Police does contribute to GDP, and if you use that to demonstrate to this House, they would be no questions whatsoever; actually you would receive more resources; likewise the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Education and all the service providers.  

But the point I am making is, when you bring your budget, the budget is showing – I will give an example of the budget of the Prime Minister’s Office, which has six ministers with big entitlements, all of which must be serviced. And there is a ceiling of how much money can go to Prime Minister’s Office as compared to the Office of the Vice-President, which is constitutional and the Office of the Prime Minister, which is not in the Constitution. So, when you are sharing resources and you have to service all the six ministers with big entitlements, and there is what you know, protected votes, unprotected votes. The protected vote takes 60 percent, which means that you only have 40 percent for the rest of the officers and for the rest of the work like disaster management or anything else. 

What I am saying is that, can we improve - by looking at the structure of budgets - the efficiency of Government? If you were coming to me to look for funds, the first thing I would say to Government, is that, “Your budget is inefficient because it has 60 percent administration. Go and ensure that it is 15 percent or less, that will show how efficient you are”. Of course there are so many technical people that you work with who would help you improve the picture of the structure of the Budget.

Mr Speaker, for a long time Government has said that they are using Results Oriented Management (ROM), but that only ends in words; there is no result. It is just management, there is no result, to a large extent. So, I would like them to visit, when they are doing the next budget, this thing they call Results Oriented Management, what does it mean in real terms? They have instituted new codes, they call them international codes now, but those codes are not adding up. Can we see results based on those codes because I am sure Government is also working very hard to better itself so that it can endear itself to the people by delivering services? I am saying this in the hope that it will help you do that, better.

I am running out of time but I would like to also note that there is very little relationship between last year’s Budget Speech and this one. And I think in between the Budget Committee should find a way of auditing what was said last year and how disjointed it is. For example, last year the President said that he would set up a gold refining factory in Entebbe; do you remember that? This year there is no gold and there is no factory. What happened? Are these just statements for the day? We should be able to take Government up and ask, “You said you wanted to set up…” - first there were airports, then there was a gold factory, now there are scientists. How are we auditing? This is our country. How are we helping ourselves to track the things we say and the things we do, and the things we allocate resources for? 

I think we are losing the public in the things we say, which are disjointed. I have a feeling that the people who are doing the budget are throwing away the diskettes for last year and this year. If they were comparing them, it would be so easy technologically for them to follow through.

Finally, Mr Speaker, where are we investing for the future? The wealth of 2011 must be created yesterday. In this budget, do you see anywhere where wealth is being created? I have not seen any wealth creation for the future in this budget, and I worry that we are just on a credit card; as a country we are just on a credit card and when the owners of the money ask for it, there will be no wealth, there will be just debts. So, I am really so worried that –(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, I think when we come to Parliament we must have reached a level of knowing what is good and commending what is right. I do not think it is true to say that there is no wealth created at all. I will give an example of social capital that is being created in the whole country. This is something that you cannot measure but it is growing, the money we are putting in education. I think we are moving; there is something being done. I thank you.

MRS MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, I thank my colleague. I hold a Masters Degree in Social Policy and Administration, and when they say wealth – because we have been lamenting about quality, the stock of Universal Primary Education (UPE); it was not me lamenting, it was this House lamenting. Are we competitive globally with UPE? We are not, Sir. I am not saying there is nothing being done; I am saying are we creating wealth? Because you may create investment but your population outstrips it; that is not wealth. So, please do not misunderstand me. All I am saying is that, can we look at the variables for our future?  

Mr Speaker, the people of Uganda are suffering and I am hoping that this Budget is going to address all the different facets of suffering. The children in UPE go hungry, those are suffering; their teachers go hungry, their orphans go hungry, the Kyeyo people are going hungry, they are being chased all over the world yet we are told that they are the ones who bring in wealth. In fact, I do not know what percentage they constitute of this population, but I do not think they even make 1 percent; but their contribution to GDP is bigger than all of us 24 million people back home. But what safeguards have we put in place for their stay wherever they are to do kyeyo? It is A.O.B; there is no structure. If you can successfully sneak out of this country and coin a story, it is up to you. But if you are caught, there is no government remedy, there is none whatsoever to help our Ugandans that are coming back with handcuffs on the seats; we abandon them. 

Can we really do something to help our people who we have failed in the first place here? We have failed them and so they have sought to run away and make a living, and when they get into trouble they are not assisted. We only help through Interpol, through hon. Kezimbira Miyingo, through Interpol to compound their fate. So, can we be kind and reduce the suffering of the wealth creators in this country? Thank you very much, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Salaamu Musumba for your contribution. Honourable members, I had recognized the Member for Tororo Municipality but I think this is the convenient time to adjourn. We shall start with him when we resume. The House is adjourned until Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.03 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 27 July 2004 at 2.00 p.m.)



