Thursday, 29 July 2004
  
Parliament met at 2.22 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you. Yesterday we had agreed that we should start at 2.00 p.m. and I was around to start at 2.00 p.m. Unfortunately, nobody was in the Chamber. That is why personally I did not fulfil my promise. But now you are here, we are able to start.  

Honourable members, this afternoon on your behalf I received a memorandum from religious leaders of an association known as HURA. Copies of this memorandum will be distributed to all Members of Parliament. But the gist of the memorandum was their concern about the problem in the North and Eastern part of Uganda; a problem that you very well know we have been dealing with here. Their memorandum indicated to me that now many Ugandans of various categories are concerned about the problem in the North. With that kind of unity on this issue, there is no doubt we shall be able to overcome it and as for me, I see light at the end of the tunnel. The major problem of killing will end so that we have the problem of reconstruction, which cannot be started until the area is pacified. 

The other point in the memorandum as you will see, was the doubt about the transparency of transition in the multiparty system, which everybody is aware is coming. But I assured them that as far as Parliament is concerned it will do all within its powers to ensure that this is so. 

The other issue was about corruption, and I said everybody is equally concerned about this and we are trying to put up measures and organs to really fight this problem. That is the brief reply I made; we shall study the memorandum. They gave me a copy, which I will take to His Excellency the President.

But one surprising issue that surfaced in the memorandum is the issue, which hon. Patrick Mwondha raised yesterday, fear about land grabbing in the areas. But I hope those concerned, be it local and central authorities, will make sure that this does not happen. But it surfaced surprisingly; you will see the memorandum.

Then the other good news I have is that two of our members namely hon. John Nasasira, Minister of Works, Housing and Communications and hon. Johnson Nkuuhe were recently recognised by the Communications Commission of Uganda for the work well done. As you know, hon. Dr Nkuuhe has especially been our teacher in ICT and many of us are products of his efforts. Therefore, his role was recognised and a plaque, which was given to him in recognition of his work reads as follows: “Presented to hon. Johnson Nkuuhe in recognition of your invaluable contribution to the development of the communication sector in Uganda.” I take this opportunity to congratulate hon. Nkuuhe and hon. Nasasira for these achievements. (Applause) Thank you.  

2.26
DR JOHNSON NKUUHE (Isingiro County South, Mbarara): Mr Speaker, I thank you very much. With your permission I would like to say that the honour actually belongs to the Members of Parliament, because I was just a disciple and there are many people who followed, especially the Chairman here on the Communication Committee, and many members who actually passed the laws. As a result the Uganda Communications Commission is quoted as one of the shining examples in the area of information technology for development. We hope we can use this to alleviate poverty and actually transform our society from a backward to a progressive one. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

2.27
MR DANIEL OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): Mr Speaker, I am happy that we have two distinguished colleagues who have been recognised by the Uganda Communications Commission, and I do hope that their contribution will go further to ensure the affordability of this technology. I want to say that something funny seems to be happening with some of these companies, MTN and Celtel, and I think those of you who use these phones may have seen the costs. I exclude Mango, but I do not know why Mango is slightly cheaper. 

Possibly with our two colleagues who are there, their contribution will not only be in terms of what they have done as ministers and Members of Parliament to privatise the sector and leave it to the private sector to do whatever they want; but I think something should be done to look deeper into the charges of these companies and compare it globally. We also need to look at their profit margin. Because if you are saying you are going to fight poverty using this communications system, then at the same time these people are charging a rate, which actually is causing poverty; I think to me it is not right. Thank you.

2.29
MR BASALIZA ARAALI (Fort-Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on an issue of public and security concern for Members of Parliament and our visitors. There are so many activities, which take place at the conference centre and at the same time at the National Theatre, and we get many visitors coming this way. I have noticed quite often that vehicles passing via the conference centre are very speedy, and many of our members prefer to leave their vehicles here and cross without going with their vehicles. Similarly, they even go to the National Theatre and there are so many school children that come here. Then crossing becomes a problem for them.  

Mr Speaker, some time back a police constable was knocked down by a motorcycle - one of our officers here I understand - when he was crossing from the National Theatre. So, is it possible to find ways and means of putting there a zebra crossing? Because of our poverty we cannot put a flyover but I would like to request that we put there a zebra crossing.

THE SPEAKER: Well, what I can say on that is that we have a limited territory over which we have control and other territory is in the hands of other people. But since it is also of common interest to us, the best we can do is to liase with other authorities, namely the city authorities, to look into this problem and find a solution. That we shall do.

2.31
MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU (Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am equally thrilled to see that hon. Nkuuhe has finally been recognised in his efforts to promote ICT in Uganda. I happened to represent him in Zambia on a UN panel, which works in African countries as far as the banking sector is concerned, and I just could not stop hearing how people globally praised Dr Nkuuhe at this UN meeting in Zambia. 

On top of that, about four weeks ago the same thing was echoed about him in Washington DC when we were again having a meeting concerning the ICT programmes in Africa. Again there was only one person, Dr Nkuuhe, and it made me feel very thrilled. 

Recently I attended a course in my diploma at the school for international training, with his dear wife. And all the people at that point were not even talking about his wife alone, who is also extremely outstanding again in ICT, but they were also talking about Dr Nkuuhe. He is extremely inspirational and I really feel happy.

Finally, Mr Speaker, in support of the work, which others and Dr Nkuuhe are doing, we are also doing a lot of work in Masaka for your information. As I speak now, Masaka District is becoming the powerhouse in computer technology. We are working so hard to ensure that we have at least 1,000 computers installed every year in high schools. One of your schools was one of the beneficiaries, St John Kabuwoko, where we installed about 20 computers. So, the work is going on and on. Hon. Nkuuhe is not going to be alone. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Well, I think what you have said is that hon. Nkuuhe has a global connection, therefore, we are proud of you.  

2.33
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, I would also like to pay tribute to hon. Dr Nkuuhe and to hon. Nasasira. They have achieved a lot, they are very diligent, in fact I want to add that when I wanted to update my computer credentials hon. Nkuuhe assisted me. I want to recommend to hon. Aggrey Awori to update his computer credentials. (Laughter). 

MR AWORI: I would like to assure the Rt hon. Prime Minister that at the moment Dr Nkuuhe’s daughter is teaching me computer knowledge. (Laughter)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think next time when recognising computer wizards in this country, I am sure hon. Nsambu is next on the list because he has brought us several computers from the United Stated of America. However, I have something to say regarding quorum of committees.  

Mr Speaker, it is my request that since the standing committees have now a task of looking at Bills, we would get a day like Thursday to let standing committees have their sessions on that day because you find somebody has a meeting in a sessional committee, then is supposed to have a meeting in a standing committee at the same time. I really beg for your indulgence that you assist us have quorum in standing committees. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: I think we should end this.

MR AWORI: Just a little concern. Thank you, Mr Speaker. Sometime back we were assured by the Leader of Government Business that from time to time he would update us on matters of national security. It has been sometime before we got any report from the government benches on the state of security. From time to time –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Maybe let me inform you. That is the subject I was going to comment on. I was going to request you that we shall be adjusting the Order Paper, after we have concluded this matter pending before us, to enable the Ministry of Defence to make a statement on security issues, this afternoon. So, it is there. Maybe he is preparing it but he rang me to say he wanted to be accommodated on the Order Paper. So, there will be a statement.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

(i) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2003/04 AND
(ii) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2004/05

(Debate continued.)

2.36
MR ANTHONY MUKASA (Buikwe County South, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will address myself to three issues. One is UPE. Like my fellow colleagues, I am satisfied with what we have achieved under UPE. But I have got three important shortcomings I have noticed in the operations of UPE:  

One is that the releases of UPE funds are not regular. I would have thought that the releases would be on a monthly basis but from the experience I have in Mukono District, in term 1 the releases were made once in February; this second term the releases have been made once and it was in the month of June. This makes the operations of head teachers in schools uncomfortable. I would like to see a situation where the releases are made on a monthly basis. That way we shall be able to consolidate the achievements we have registered under UPE. 

Two, today I read in the papers that over 300,000 ghost pupils have been identified in our UPE schools. That is a very big discovery. Whereas the UPE pupils are there, I am not satisfied with the way UPE funds are handled in primary schools. There are guidelines, which lay out the expenditures and there are rules that UPE funds should be displayed on notice boards. But when I move around my constituency the UPE funds are not displayed in schools and even most of the funds, which go to these schools, are either mismanaged by the head teachers or by both the head teachers and the members of the management committee and PTA. 

I would like to see more vigilant action taken by the Ministry of Education to ensure proper utilisation of UPE funds.

Secondary education: I am one of the teachers who have grown through the ranks from Grade III to a Masters degree, and very soon to a PhD level. (Applause) When I was being taught as a Grade III teacher, my tutors told me that for every lesson you must have a teaching aid - during those days we called them “teaching aids” which they call “instructional materials” today. When I read through the report of the Budget Committee, I noted that this year we are not likely to grant-aid any secondary school, yet there are a number of sub-counties, which lack secondary schools. In such a situation where we cannot grant aid to a single secondary school, the best we could do is improvise. If the appropriate teaching aids are not there, let us improvise and see what can be done. 

My suggestion towards improvisation in this matter is, at one time we had the practice of seconding secondary school teachers to private schools. Is it not possible for us, as we look for funds to take over more secondary schools in sub-counties, to revive that practice of seconding secondary school teachers to those community schools in sub-counties where Government has not yet taken over any secondary school?

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I want to address myself to the presidential promises and pledges, which are not reflected in the President’s manifesto. In 1996 when the President was going out to campaign, when he found the going very rough he made pledges and promises. These promises and pledges do not feature anywhere in his manifesto and they have not yet been fulfilled to-date. Similarly in 2001 he also went out, he campaigned, he made pledges, he made promises but they have not been mentioned in the last four Addresses to the Nation and in the last four Budget Speeches we have received. 

I would like to call upon the Minister in charge of the Presidency and Government in general to come up with an inventory of all the presidential promises and pledges that the President made in 1996, 2001, which are not yet fulfilled, so that the country could know how many pledges remain to be fulfilled and when they are likely to be fulfilled. (Interruption) 

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank the honourable member for having given way. I also want to thank him for upgrading his academic credentials. Regarding the question of pledges, I am going to ask the Minister in charge of the Presidency to handle that matter and to inform Parliament because I am aware that the President has fulfilled many pledges, but there are also those, which are outstanding.

I want to point out that he has a lot of pressure, and being a father of the nation, he does not want to disappoint any area. So, there is a lot of pressure and I want us to be understanding; it is not easy to fulfil many of these pledges. I am also finding it difficult because I have made a number of pledges but we do not have money. Of late I am extremely rough; to anybody wanting money I say, “I have no money”. But I did pray for two people and they got money from another institution. This may sound funny but it actually happened. But there is a lot of pressure on His Excellency the President and I want you to be understanding. The Minister in charge of the Presidency is going to handle that important matter. I thank you.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, though my colleague on the Floor, the Rt hon. Prime Minister is saying the President does not want to disappoint anybody, is it more comforting to people to give them empty promises or not to give pledges at all?  

Secondly, in view of the fact that there is shortage of funds, is the Rt hon. Prime Minister going to advise the President not to make any further pledges?

DR STEPHEN MALLINGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This culture of making empty pledges is a new thing in the politics of this country. We have had leaders in this country who never made pledges. Idi Amin never made any pledges; Dr Apollo Milton Obote never made any pledges but fulfilled his functions as a Prime Minister or a President who served the whole nation equally. When 100-bed hospitals were built, they were built in every district. When roads were constructed, they were constructed all over the country. A tarmac road was constructed –(Interruption)

MR WAMBUZI: Mr Speaker, is hon. Dr Mallinga in order to defend some of the past leaders that they fulfilled their pledges, when history is full of actual incidences where they did not honour their pledges? You take the incidence when the Prime Minister went and knelt before the Kabaka of Buganda and pledged that –(Interjections)- -[Hon. Members: “Were you born then?”] I was born; my father saw him, the late Lubogo saw him. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, history is full of instances where pledges, which were made by even the British Government - it is not only our presidents who made pledges. The British Government had made an agreement, it also reneged on that pledge, which was made first. So, is he really in order at this late time to say that presidents have never pledged and actually failed to honour their pledges?

THE SPEAKER: I had taken into account the lapse of time and lapse of memory. You see, as we agreed yesterday, it is better that you take time and you respond to everything at a go.

DR MALLINGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was just emphasising that we should not create a culture of pledges and donations, which we cannot fulfil. For example, in 1996, His Excellency the President went to Pallisa and promised that the road from Tirinyi to Pallisa to Kumi would be tarmacked. He went back 2001 and repeated the same pledge. The road, which goes from Nakaloke, Kakoro up to a place called Akadoti was supposed to be taken care of by the central government. Up to now those pledges have never been fulfilled, plus quite a number more. 

I am one of the people who have been responsible for the election of the President in Pallisa and I get extremely embarrassed when I go to the people nowadays as they ask me, “The person you told us to elect, why has he not fulfilled his pledges?” (Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is the honourable member in order to speak as if he does not know what has been happening in Uganda? Nearly every year we have had to adjust the development budget to fight insurgency. Can roads be built, can many things we want to be done get done, when hon. Mallinga knows that we have insurgency and we have recognised this fact here? Is he in order to be unaware of a reality that this country knows?

THE SPEAKER: Maybe he has not taken that into account. Let us proceed.

MR ANTHONY MUKASA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Rt hon. Prime Minister for the information he has given me. I am happy to note that His Excellency the President has tried to fulfil most of the promises and pledges he made, but what prompted me to make that proposal was the promise he made to the people of Buikwe County South in 1996 and 2001. When he was looking for votes he promised the people that he would tarmac the roads from Kyetume through Kisoga, through Nkokonjeru, through Ngwogwe, through Nagonga to Buikwe and Njeru. This is the old Kampala-Jinja Road although some people tend to believe that the old Kampala-Jinja Road is the road from Lugazi to Buikwe through Nyenga and Njeru. This is the road, which serves the most prominent vanilla growers in this country and serves the leading fish landing sites in this country.  

I am only appealing to the Leader of Government Business to echo to His Excellency the President when he was addressing Moslems in Kibuli when they were celebrating their 50 years of the existence of Emir. He was reported in the Monitor newspaper of yesterday as having said that he is not an “air supplier.” I would like to call upon the President to make this statement more realistic by making a start on fulfilling the pledge he made to the people of Buikwe County South. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

2.52
MRS BEATRICE RWAKIMARI (Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity to contribute. I would like to support the motion moved by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.  
Mr Speaker, my biggest challenge in this year’s budget is to relate this budget to poverty eradication in this country especially in prioritising public expenditure across sectors. When you look at the budgetary share of agriculture of this year, although it has increased to 3 percent from 2.2 percent in last year’s budget, in my view it is still very small. Most of us know that agriculture is the backbone of this country, contributing 40 percent of our GDP, employing over 80 percent of our people and also contributing to over 80 percent of our exports; yet this sector continues to be under-funded.

In my view, I think the under funding is a result of the Sector Wide Approach (SWAP) which scatters the budget of this sector into other ministries, undermining its priorities. For example, most of its money has been allocated to the roads to ministries of Water, Environment and others such that at the end of the day the Ministry of Agriculture remains with nothing to carry out its activities. Yet in my view the Ministry of Agriculture presents an opportunity for improving the livelihoods of our people and thereby reducing poverty in this country. I would, therefore, like to suggest that –(Interruption)

MS NAMAGGWA: Thank you, for giving way, my sister. I would just like to inform the House that actually if the sector of water was given some funding, that is a blessing because agriculture cannot survive without the component of water, the irrigation. A lot of plants are drying because of lack of sufficient water. If water is supported financially, agriculture would prosper. I thank you.

MR SEBULIBA: I would like to inform my honourable colleague that the total outturn of the budget of agriculture incidentally has been 1.6 instead of 2 percent. Even the 2 percent does not come in. The 3 percent you are talking about has never been realised. I remember the government has just signed what we call the Mozambique Protocol where ten percent of the Budget is supposed to be allocated to agriculture. But even in this year’s budget it has not been realised. We thought it could jump from Shs 99 billion to Shs 116 but even it is less than Shs 99. So, I just wanted to give that information. It is far less and it will never help in the eradication of poverty.

MRS RWAKIMARI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my colleagues for the information given. However, I want to say that although the money is doing a good job in other ministries, the Ministry of Agriculture would be in a better position to prioritise its activities and thereby plan accordingly. Because when you scatter the budget of the Ministry of Agriculture in other budgets of other ministries, I think there is a problem of coordination, planning and implementation. That is why in my view. The Ministry of Agriculture should be given the support and all the necessary funds to prioritise its activities, plan, co-ordinate and implement their plans accordingly.

Therefore, whereas SWAP as a policy is good and a good tool for economic analysis and review, it should be reviewed and I feel it has done more harm than good. Therefore, I call upon the Ministry of Finance to look into this policy and see how it can benefit other ministries that have been undermined such that they can also start planning and implementing their plans accordingly.

On the issue of education on page 11 of the Budget Speech, on higher science education I would like to know how this policy or statement is going to be operationalised. I am already getting calls from my constituency, from people asking me whether they should go for further studies in science subjects and whether the government is going to sponsor them. So, I would like the Ministry of Education to clarify how this higher science education policy is going to be implemented. 

On the issue of roads, I would like to know why the small stretch of about 25 kilometres from Ntungamo to Mirama hill has not been tarmacked. Mr Speaker, this is a very important alternative route and a short cut to Rwanda. In most cases when the bridge at Katuna is broken or out of operation, this road would provide an alternative route to Rwanda. Even then, on the other side of Rwanda, all the roads are tarmacked. Therefore, I would like to know from the Ministry of Works and Housing why this road has taken so long without being tarmacked, and yet the President promised us in 1996 that it would be tarmacked as soon as possible? (Interruption)

DR KASIRIVU: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Rwakimari, for giving way. The clarification I am seeking is, since that road the honourable member is referring to seems to be a historical road where the RPF passed when they were to attack Habyarimana’s government, why can we not have some collaboration with Rwanda so that they tarmac it up to Ntungamo? It is a historical road for them. Can there not be some way of discussion?

MRS RWAKIMARI: My colleague, thank you for that clarification but I think it is addressed to the relevant ministry, not myself. 

Finally, Mr Speaker, I would like to mention something about corruption. Most of my colleagues have been talking about corruption and all of us agree that there is some corruption in this country. I would like to inform my colleagues that while we talk about corruption, we should also know that there is waste and mismanagement. So, we should not confuse waste and mismanagement with corruption. Although I know that Uganda as a country is suffering from the three issues I have talked about, if we continue confusing corruption with mismanagement and waste, we shall not get a proper solution to our problem. Therefore, let us differentiate the problems we are facing as a country so that we can get appropriate solutions to them. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  

3.02
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (Kabula County, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have some few observations to make about the Budget Speech.

The Budget Speech of this time has been good in theory and the challenge remains in implementation. I feel that 54 percent of the domestic revenue being sponsored by our basis of collection is very okay because this means we are running away from donor funding of 48 percent, which was of last year’s budget. But the problem and the challenge is on us and I appeal to donors of the 46 percent to be timely, giving resources at the right time so that programmes can be effected. Because when you read the Auditor-General’s report, it is one of the recommendations that when these funds are not given in time, there is stifling of government programmes, which affects the way they are run.  

My second observation is on water. I think the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment has tried to do a lot. But you find that all the piped water, which is introduced in trading centres, has no lagoon – the sewerage systems. So, you find that this water stagnates in pits and in these areas Malaria is very rampant. I would like to appeal to the ministry concerned that they put a mechanism in place so that this problem is wiped out from the areas where piped water is introduced.  

My next observation is on bullet 59, on page 17. I find making a Tax Identification Number (TIN) as mandatory law, unnecessary. However, I would have expected the Ministry of Finance to introduce a new system of national identity cards as a measure of widening the tax base as recommended by the Finance and Planning Committee in last year’s budget. It has got an advantage that most of the people who come to be employed here can be known to the government. Even the number of people whose income is taxed can be known and then it helps the Ministry of Finance to plan very well for its revenue collection –(Interruption)

MRS NYOMBI: I would like to inform the honourable Member holding the Floor that as much as he is talking about this TIN problem, I want to put it on record that I have a TIN but I was sent a letter from URA to the effect that my TIN is not reflected in the URA database. I have been with this TIN for so many years and I have been using it to clear so many things. So, I do not know. I think there is a problem with coordination in the Uganda Revenue Authority. Thank you.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you for your information but I think the honourable member is not aware that since last year’s budget there is “Scala Plus”. When you are transacting any business with any URA centre, it must be updated from the headquarters of URA. That is why you have a problem. You might have got it before last year but they placed advertisements that people should update their TIN numbers because the transaction of business in URA is now by “Scala Plus” so that you can update your TIN number.  

Mr Speaker, once we get national identity cards, it is a basis to know the number we are targeting in our budget. 

Secondly, when you go on revenue collection of non-URA revenue, which is one percent contributed to the Budget, you find that there are loopholes because we do not have national identity cards. You find that after knowing the number of people from whom you are going to collect tax, there are some foreigners who come in here and they are not targeted. For instance, there could be an alien peoples’ pass for example for students. If you target a number of almost 20,000 students here, you charge them Shs 50,000 that is already a billion as a base to collect revenue. I appeal to the Minister of Finance to look into this so that it can help us to identify people we can target. As we are entering the East African Community we should note that our neighbours have national identity cards.

Another observation is on the East African Community. In this Budget they said that by the start of the year 2005, we shall be integrated in the East African Customs Union but I feel that the remaining period, depending on the legal framework, which we are supposed to do, the Minister of Finance should look into this because we are still using the Customs Management Act of 1974. I feel that with the remaining three months we cannot complete it and it will be a complication within tax administration. So, I appeal that you bring this forward to the Parliament so that it can be looked into.

I would like to talk about the tax measures. I think the Minister on page 22 talked about the dumping of goods. It would be good if the dumping of used goods – for instance we should say motor vehicles of ten years instead of seven years. When he says seven years that means a vehicle imported here should be of 1997, and a new vehicle of 1997, taxes applied on it, it is expensive. It costs about Shs 7,768,000. So, you find that people cannot afford it. It would be good if they introduced this measure but also reduced the tax tariff rates on new vehicles so that people can drive new vehicles instead of old vehicles.

Mr Speaker, I would like to talk about the withholding tax. I think this is too much. Two percent increase on withholding tax I feel it is tampering with the cash flow of the business community. I imagine when you import three times using US $50,000 that is about Shs 50,000,000. You are leaving behind Shs 2 million for each importation on a file, which is not utilised and when you know that the business community is borrowing money from the bank, you leave it on a file in a year and by the time you submit your accounts, when you are demanding tax returns from URA, it is offset. So, there is a problem on the cash flow in the business community. 

I feel that instead of increasing the withholding tax by two percent, it could stay and stagger this two percent; where we can tax like property tax and other consumable goods and services. Thank you very much.  

3.11
DR JOHNSON NKUUHE (Isingiro County South, Mbarara): Mr Speaker, I thank you very much. I would like to also support the motion and to make some observations.

One, I think we should put the Budget Speech in context; put it in the context of where Uganda stands vis-à-vis other countries, vis-à-vis itself. Poverty is rising, it has been rising since 2000 from 38 to now 44 percent and this rise is also not even. You find that those who are rich have grown richer and the poorer have got poorer. You find the rural areas have grown poorer and urban areas richer, and the North and East have grown poorer whereas the Central and West have grown richer. That of course is a cause for concern.

Secondly, our major lenders are IMF and the World Bank and these are called lenders of last resort to economies in crisis. These are lenders of last resort to countries and the economies that are facing problems that are facing crisis. So, we have a problem. Let nobody kid us that we are doing well economically. If we were we would not be borrowing money from the World Bank and IMF. We would be borrowing from other sources where we are able to pay back. In other words, it is like in my language where we say, “If you are a charcoal burner, you cannot say you are going to a fashion show” and similarly “If you are carrying clay, you cannot say you are very smart.” So, we are in that poor category.  

Thirdly, the population growth is unsustainable. It amazes me to see leaders like the Chairman of Luweero saying that if you produce twins he will give you a bull. It is really sad because in the mind of a peasant it is okay to produce. The population of Uganda is projected to be 101,000,000 by the year 2040. Can you imagine 101,000,000 by 2040! Some of us will be around. So, you can imagine and yet infrastructure is not expanding, schools are not expanding; hospitals cannot expand at that same rate. The tax base is not expanding, the budget deficit is not sustainable and the external debt is also not sustainable. This is from the minister’s speech. The rate of savings, as my colleague pointed out yesterday, hon. Omach, it is supposed to be at least 15 or even 30 percent in some countries. We are I think at 6 percent. In other words, we are consuming and not saving and that is going to hurt our children and our grandchildren.  

As far as the millennium development goals are concerned, Uganda is on target only as regards UPE, gender and maybe water and sanitation but otherwise, in things like child mortality, maternal mortality most of those other things like poverty and hunger, we are off track. In fact you will be amazed because 39 percent of our children in Uganda are stunted! You will be shocked to see that even Rukungiri, where the Minister of Health comes from, has one of the highest population of stunted children in Uganda! So, we should not boast that we are really very smart. 

In fact, when I look at our budget, I sympathise with hon. Ssendaula. If I were him really, I would have a plan B. 

For the general reports, I would like to thank the Prime Minister. I have looked at most of the reports and they are very good although they are operating in a very difficult environment. But, hon. Prime Minister, I want to quote one of the reports: this is from the Presidency, figure 1 stretches from page 26 all the way to page 30, page 40, page 50, page 60 to page 72. What sort of table is that? Can one really read it? I think you should take it up with the Minister -(Interruption)

MR MULENGANI: Mr Speaker, I stand on a point of procedure. This afternoon we are debating the Budget Speech. I remember very well I was among the people who were trying to oppose the Chairperson of the Budget Committee to deter members from debating the issues regarding the Budget. Is the member procedurally right to continue referring to the policy statement from the Presidency, yet we are well aware that time will come for us to look into these policy statements? Some of us are eagerly waiting to contribute towards the Budget Speech. Is it procedurally right?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think the question you have asked was raised the other time. We wanted to curtail the period of debate, but the two things are the same. Actually, we are doing exactly the same because those policies are related to the Budget; we are talking generally about the Budget. I think your complaint is that we are going to duplicate the work. I agree.

DR NKUUHE: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. In fact the Budget Speech is actually related to all these policy statements, and we derive this summary of the budget from these policy statements because these budgets are actually used in the various sectors.  

I would like to talk about the pledges. For me the presidential pledge is what is in the ministerial statements because that is a promise the President is making to the nation. So, every ministerial statement, every ministerial budget is in a way a pledge. I would really like to see a situation where the President does not make further pledges outside these budgets, unless they are small things, tokens like gifts and so on. Otherwise, these pledges actually distort the budget. In fact, pledges are very archaic, these are feudal type of systems where you go to a King and the King is happy with you - but since we set up institutions we should respect institutions. In my view pledges really undermine institutions. That is why you see in Saudi Arabia half the budget goes through the King.

MR MWANDHA: Thank you. As a matter of fact, we have been holding a series of workshops and inviting experts on matters of the budget. I recall one of the experts said that these pledges are actually unconstitutional because the only authority for appropriating money is Parliament. So, if you appropriate money to build headquarter buildings in Luweero for the district, which is not within the appropriation itself, you are actually appropriating outside Parliament. So, it is important for us to appreciate that these pledges should actually be restricted to mere, small “thank you” gifts to dancers, to students, and people like that; other than giving pledges to build headquarters of districts, pledges of building roads, because all these must be monies appropriated by Parliament. Thank you.   

DR NKUUHE: Mr Speaker, these pledges actually encourage dependency thinking. I struggle with my constituents because they say, “We want to go to Rwakitura.” I say, “What are going to do in Rwakitura?”  “We want to see the President”, they reply. I say, “What for? The problem you have can be solved by your LCIII Chairman. If I cannot solve it, it can be solved by the LC V Chairperson. Why do you want to see the President?” That to me encourages dependency thinking, which is one of the causes of poverty in our rural areas. Because you do not want to do things yourself, somebody will go to do it for you. If I cannot solve it, the President will solve it. Why? The President is solving problems through the normal budget. I do not see why they should have things outside institutions.

Mr Speaker, the last thing is about the National Planning Authority. (Interruption)

MR WAMBUZI: Mr Speaker, it is very important for hon. Dr Nkuuhe to clarify to us that pledges are such a sin, that we should not – because I am one of those people who is waiting for this government to honour that pledge of the district. (Laughter) I cannot take this sitting down because even at one time an American President stood up and said, “Look at lips, not tax.” The campaign of the Democrats today, people are standing up. He says, “Ten million jobs, you vote for me” he is pledging. This type of political game has got to be played. You must pledge in order to play politics. You cannot really start telling us that we are going to have politics where leaders do not actually commit themselves publicly. Politics is about pledging; it is the centre.

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable members, if the President goes to an area and they present problems and he says, “Okay, I am going to make that road” that means he is going to influence the planning of the ministry concerned. So, how does it become unconstitutional? That is how policies are formulated. That is why a pledge, which was given two years ago, maybe has not entered the planning; is still outstanding. But that is the way of telling you that, “We are going to plan for it within the budget.”

DR NKUUHE: Mr Speaker, I respect your ruling, but a pledge should really come through the normal channels. Otherwise, it will undermine the normal institutions and the normal budget.

The National Planning Authority (NPA): A lot of us tend to see it as a silver bullet. “This will be solved by the National Planning Authority” but when you look at their budget, there is no way they can solve a lot of outstanding problems. For instance, with a budget of Shs 3.0 billion recurrent, and even less than a billion for development, what can you do?  

Finally, my suggestions are these: To tackle poverty we should start thinking outside the box. In fact, the NPA here talks about thinking outside the box, which is, think in different ways. Do not think the usual way. Otherwise, you will never solve these problems. Poverty is so overwhelming we have to think outside the box. For instance, we should revisit Vision 2025 because in my view, not many speeches refer to Vision 2025 and yet it is our guiding document. We should revisit it and if possible revise it. We should simplify it so that even my grandmother can understand it. What is Vision 2025 about? If it is going to be a guiding principle everybody should understand it; even somebody in primary school, somebody in nursery, everybody should understand Vision 2025.

We should set priorities linking agriculture to industrialisation so that we see that we are growing in industry. But the industries that are growing now are not related to agriculture. If you grow in water bottling and Coca–Cola and all that, those are not helping your industry because they are not getting even the sugar from here. So, we should support industrialisation that has a backward linkage to agriculture, and we should invest in areas that have a multiplier effect such as power, communications and marketing infrastructure.  

I really feel so ashamed that much as I talk about ICT, my people cannot benefit from ICT because I know ICT can be a problem. It can be a nuisance if you do not have power, if you do no have communication. It can actually be a liability. I have been training my teachers, I say, “The moment we get power, the computers….” So many of my friends give me old computers and what have you but what is the point of putting a computer in a place with no electricity, it will cost them so much to run with solar power, to use generators and so on.  

So, for us to fight poverty, we really have to put those things that have a multiplier effect. Power helps everybody, it helps the rural areas to grow, it gives them energy, it gives them light, it helps the small agro-processing all these milling plants they set up. The moment you put power everything starts moving. So, that kind of investment is worth more - not these other pledges. I hope that we can think outside the box, revisit the Vision 2025, set our priorities and invest in those areas that have a multiplier effect. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.26
MR BRUNO PAJOBO (Workers’ Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing me to contribute to this Budget Speech. First of all, the theme of this year is so appetising, one thinks that really we are coming out of poverty. But when you see the distribution of poverty some sections are completely left out because, me as a worker, the way I can eradicate my poverty is by increasing my salary and getting a minimum wage. Years are passing, and we do not have a minimum wage for workers of this country. As a result we cannot purchase what we produce and, therefore, I think by doing so we are losing market.  

This Parliament sat and passed a resolution here that a minimum wage should be given to Ugandans but Mr Speaker, up to now the government does not give a minimum wage. At the same time the system of administering wages is so bad that unless you go on strike, they will call you in a corner, “peasants want to sit with you and negotiate.” I do not know how we are going to come out of this system. If those workers do not go on strike or they are not most corrupt, they cannot be given a pay increase. This is very unfortunate. It is high time that the nation came out with a wage policy, which should address everybody.  

During Amin’s period we had a salary scale for parastatal bodies, for government employees and then the private sector was also given chance to negotiate and sometimes their issues were addressed through the minimum wage. In those years we used to have industrial courts, which would mediate and solve industrial problems. Here the Ministry of Labour is completely marginalized and, therefore, the industrial court is not operating, it has no budget. I do not know whether we are now going back into 1960s so that we go on strikes, destroy whatever we contribute then we can get a minimum wage. I think this is not the way. So, our appeal to government is to come out and give a minimum wage to our people.  

I have been listening to the American campaigns; the man is promising a minimum wage for his people. The man is promising to work on retirement benefits, social security of his people. For us we will go to America we get the policy, which is oppressive, we import it to Uganda, the one which is for people we leave it for Americans. So, why can we not import the American policy, which is pro-people?  

Mr Speaker, there is also the issue of taxation. My sister, hon. Ssentongo, handled it. Raising the threshold is difficult. Parliament passed the law, it is in place but the ministry has refused to implement it. We do not know why. In fact, nowadays even if you get Shs 150 they deduct more, they even enter into the Shs 130 they have left. Therefore, workers are really suffering and instead the government has left people outside.

Pay-As-You-Earn is paid mostly by us, the ordinary people do not in actual fact suffer, as much as the workers are concerned. Even gratuity is being taxed. A person who is going away, the gratuity is highly taxed. So the product of the workers is also taxed.  

Mr Speaker, some of these taxation policies are very hurting and they are hurting business as well. You now go to districts, they have an environment tax on industries and these industries in fact are even environmentally friendly, like the ones for tea and sugarcane. They are not against the environment but you find that employers are taxed and then it is causing a problem. Our people are going to lose, even our own investors, because of this unrealistic taxation. –(Interruption)

MR BIKWASIZEHI: Thank you my colleague for giving way. Honourable member, you were saying we need a minimum wage and as far as I know, Government gets revenue through taxation but at the same time you are complaining about taxes. So where will the government get money to pay minimum wage if you condemn taxes?  

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. I would like to clarify the matter that one of the major canons of taxation is equity and flexibility so that it is very friendly. But the moment you overburden and overtax, you are causing a distortion in the economy itself. For instance, Pay As You Earn was instituted in 1977, it has never been revisited, it is on Shs 130,000 and you are encouraging people to save. So, it is better that people can invest those resources if they are not taxed and then invest more and you get more revenue. 
For instance, the threshold of VAT by 1997 was Shs 50 million but now the valuation of a shilling, US $50 million, it is about 30,000. By then it was 50,000. That means you have to uplift so that people can have internal rate of returns in their performing and then you tax more and you get more revenue.

DR MALLINGA: Regarding a minimum wage, this can be a disadvantage in that there are small industries, which are employing people in this country and can only afford to pay negotiated wages to their workers. If you force those industries to pay a minimum wage, which they cannot afford, then they will go under and you will lose jobs. Thank you very much.

MR PAJOBO: Thank you very much for the information. I would like to disagree with my brother, hon. Mallinga. That is not true because even if you do not pay you will not get enough from these people. The workers’ production will also go down and you must give incentives to workers to produce. So, it is not true that once you underpay people you are creating jobs, which are never feeding the people. In the end you will lose what you have. So, even this lack of a minimum wage is chasing away serious business people, investors, because they do not have a clear way of –(Interruption)

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you hon. Pajobo for giving way. I would like to give this information that actually in those countries where economics is understood, workers themselves have voluntarily reduced their wages in order to get more people into the employment brackets.

MR PAJOBO: I think I have not come across that one because at least I am a member of International Labour Organisation (ILO) and every year I attend ILO and other international organisations’ meetings, I have not found out where workers reduce their wages. Contrary, in our philosophy you cannot reduce wages. You increase wages; that is what we have. I have not heard of that one. It is very unfortunate if it is happening.

About the industrial and business park, Mr Speaker, the issue is that it is only on one side of the country and this causes envy in this country. Why can we not spread these industrial parks and the business parks across the country? Why do we have it in one area, which will cause a problem? That is why many people were opposing Federo; they think that they will not get jobs. If they have the industries in their areas, they will not come here and start envying Baganda of Federo. Therefore, to spread this thing, we shall be able to stay in harmony. Thank you very much.

3.37
MRS BEATRICE MAGOOLA (Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion. I would like to start by saying that I am very grateful to the Ministry of Finance for the Budget. I would also like to thank the Minister of Health for the good work that is being done to fight the burden of the various diseases that people are suffering from. They have done it so well in that there is a lot of information given to our people over the radios and in the papers, and from such sensitisation, people have picked a few things here and there and they have looked after themselves.  

I would also like to thank the Ministry of Health for having increased the availability of drugs in health centres. I have visited my health centre III in Buseesa, to cite an example, and there are enough drugs. I was only surprised when my doctor said, “Member of Parliament, please sensitise the people so that they can come and receive treatment because the drugs are available”. 

But my problem now remains that Malaria is a menace. I would like to request the government and the Ministry of Health that before the DDT thing comes in, there should be some efforts made to decrease the burden of Malaria. The Ministry of Health has a mosquito net programme but it is so small that even if we get the mosquito nets we shall not cover most of the vulnerable groups like the pregnant women and breast-feeding mothers. May I ask that the programme is increased and Members of Parliament are made able to take mosquito nets to their constituents? Then those on sale –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, honourable member for giving way. The information I want to give is that before you apply DDT, because of its environmental hazards you have to go through the appropriate law. Namely, you have to ensure that you produce an environmental impact assessment report as articulated by the Environment Act 1995, section 20.

DR NKUUHE: DDT is going to be spread in the houses, not the environment. In fact, I am ready to pilot it in my constituency because it has worked everywhere and it has reduced Malaria. If you want your people to die in Lubaga, where you have swamps, go ahead. (Applause)

MRS MAGOOLA: Thank you very much for the information. I would like to inform my colleague that we are receiving that paper here soon and we are going to debate it. So, put that in when it comes.  

Mr Speaker, I want to go to what they call the roll back Malaria programme. I have heard of it, it is in some districts but just a few. I am wondering whether it cannot go to all the districts because everywhere you will find that people are suffering from Malaria caused by mosquitoes.  

On agriculture, we want to thank the government because the programmes have reached the people like NAADS, the Hunger Project and PMA. But my problem is that information is not reaching people enough to make these programmes be felt by the people. May I request that those who are concerned with these programmes make the extension workers go right to the grassroots and inform people what all these programmes are about?  

Mr Speaker, I have a concern about the coffee seedlings from the Coffee Development Authority (CDA). I remember in 2002 there was a good programme where we used to go and get seedlings to take to our people. But recently I was told that the programme is collapsing because Government has failed to pay for the seedlings. I want to urge Government that the programme is a good one because it helps the peasants to get the seedlings freely, and after a few years we can get coffee. 

Another concern is about the new animal breeds that we are getting in the country. May I request the ministry concerned to give us information when those animals come so that we can collect a few shillings and buy some for our constituents and even ourselves? If we intend to export goat’s meat, I mean we cannot do it when we do not know that the programme is here. Only a few people are able to learn that it is here and benefit from it whereas it could be beneficial to many of our people in the country.  

There is a government poultry programme, which I have learnt about in Iganga District. I do not know what it is all about but I would like to say that it is important that whenever new programmes come on, we should be informed because we are nearer to the people than the ministers. If I am in Iganga, I think I am closer to the people than the minister who will be running the programmes.  

Then on water, Mr Speaker, I must say I am grateful that at last Iganga has been promised water. We have not had water for donkey years and I remember in 2001 I was telling you that the pipes, which were there were the ones that maybe Mzee Zirabamuzaale had installed, and they are useless now. But I hope we shall be able to get factories and add value to our grains that we grow.  

Finally, on education, there is the adult education programme. I am not quite conversant with the programme and I get concerned when I run into people and they say, “MP, we want books, we want teachers et cetera, for the adult education programme”. May I know who is in charge of that programme and who gets what? Is it the teachers who have to volunteer or is it Government that looks for these teachers? I thank you.

3.46
MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA (Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the motion by the Minister of Finance regarding this year’s budget. But before I embark on my presentation, I would like to comment on GDP. Most members have complained about the figure - that it seems to be concocted. But as an economist I think that this figure is genuine. GDP means Growth Domestic Product. It is the value of all goods and services within our economy, and this one includes even foreign investment. So, if this figure is big, it could be that we have fewer foreigners but with a lot of investment. So, the figure should remain high even if on the ground you may find that our local population is growing poorer and poorer.  

My argument is that the figure is not wrong but it is that this figure is very representative and does not have anything to do with deception. The whole argument is that Government should empower our local investors, because we are told that the private investments have over 60 percent of locals and then the other one is maybe by the foreigners. But look at investments like Shoprite, it may not be owned by the local investors; look at MTN and all that. So, that figure of 5.8 percent of GDP growth still stands. It should not be thought that the economists are cooking it. So, Mr Speaker, that is the clarification I wanted to make as an economist.

About privatisation on page 9, I would like to seek clarification from the Minister of Finance. He is saying that we have had 117 private enterprises divested, and we are remaining with 31. So, may I know how much money ever since we began privatisation, we have on our account for all enterprises divested? And if this is on an account, is that money being utilised or it is really waiting for maybe the fighting of poverty in this country? I would like to know because most Ugandans are really concerned.  

The minister talks of a joint concession of Uganda Railways and Kenya Railways. He was saying that there is going to be an undertaking, and as far as this is concerned, the two countries are going to enter into a concession and ensure that our railway network works. This is very commendable that we are going to reduce the costs of transport in as far as our merchandise is concerned. And maybe in a way it is also going to reduce the road accidents created by the bigger trailers.

At the same time I would like to urge the Minister of Finance and maybe of Transport and Communications, last time people were complaining that Government had given them a corrugated road from Bugiri to Busia and maybe Malaba. And we have a road from Busia to Musita and Mayuge. If that road is tarmacked, it would be an alternative route to ensure that we do not have the Namayumba road corrugated like it is - hon. Awori has always complained. Let us have that one put in place and I think it is cheaper because if that road is tarmacked, the maintenance of a tarmac road is not like the maintenance of a murram road.  

The other issue I would like to touch is communication. In his Budget, the Minister says that we are likely to put up 20 multi-purpose community tele-centres in order to ease communication. My question is, where are these multi-purpose tele-centres going to be set up? Can we know the places where they are because you have talked about it? Is it in the rural areas or most of them are going to be concentrated within the urban areas?

The other issue is regarding our export processing zones within Namanve. A lot of water, electricity and some other utilities are going to be put in place to ensure that industrialisation takes place in Namanve. My argument is that Jinja should be also on course. We have a lot of infrastructure that may really facilitate the exportation of our merchandise. We have infrastructure like buildings, we have a port so the Ministry of Finance should think twice. Aside from Namanve, we should also empower Jinja and ensure that the place is utilised. There is a lot of infrastructure in Jinja, which is better than constructing the new ones in Namanve.

On promotion of science and technology, this is a very welcome idea. But my argument will be that as long as we talk of rewarding scientists, these scientists are not only created by God, they begin from the grassroots. So the Ministry of Education and Sports should ensure that the issue of putting up science laboratories becomes a very major issue. From 2001 up to now we have always had a lot of writings about construction of labs, but nothing has taken place. In every policy statement we have seen “construction of labs, construction of labs”, can we be a little bit more serious and focused? We should ensure that as we would like to reward scientists, we must begin from the grassroots level.

Mr Speaker, last Friday I was trying to raise funds for the construction of a lab in a certain school. This is a government-funded school but it does not have anything in place and here we are. Where are we going to get scientists to be rewarded if we do not begin from the grassroots?  

The other issue, Mr Speaker, is financial management and accountability. According to the Minister of Finance, he says they are going to strengthen this. As far as I am concerned, my argument would be that we have had public officers convicted of embezzlement but nothing has been done. Let whoever is convicted and found guilty have their property attached because others have accounts that are very swollen but nothing is done.

Two, let us decentralize the chief administrative officers and all heads of departments because other districts do not have the capacity of employing those technical staff. In any case they are somehow threatened by the semi-illiterate people who are managing issues at district level. So, it would be okay that these people are answerable to the centre, and since Government contributes 95 percent, I think this would be okay.

Mr Speaker, as I wind up, I wish to comment on environmental management. Recently we approved a loan in order to improve on our environment on the shores of Lake Victoria and other places. So, I urge the Minister of Agriculture to ensure that we have a deliberate policy of sensitizing the masses on how the environment is good and how reforestation can fight the drought that we are experiencing. The Minister of Agriculture should sensitize the masses through the mass media.

In the Budget Speech, they say Shs 9.9 billion has been given to the Ministry of Education and Sports in order to fill vacant posts. But I would like to inform this House that last financial year we gave Shs 4.6 billion to the Ministry of Education and Sports but up to now no teacher has accessed the payroll. Some teachers have of recent died before they could get on the payroll. We would like to have a chief whip between the Ministry of Education and the Education Service Commission because since we approved that money, nothing is on the ground, our teachers have not accessed the payroll. The Ministry of Education should be a bit more serious and ensure that the Education Service Commission speeds up the process.  

Lastly, about health, the Ministry of Finance says that Shs 38.6 billion has been given to the health workers in order to maintain the enhanced salaries for these workers. Yesterday we were amazed when the Minister of Public Service said that, “You know, because of the single salary spine, we are going to use part of that money to employ more health workers.” I think this is unfair because the President negotiated with the health workers, but the Ministry of Public Service says we should move at the same pace, and at the same time we are talking of rewarding the scientists! So, we should not have a lot of double standards by the Ministry of Public Service for the sake of the single spine system in as far as salaries are concerned. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU: Mr Speaker, with due respect to fellow politicians in this House, I would like to mention my concern about the language we sometimes use when we address the people, who actually send us to this Parliament. The word “peasant” refers to the very backward, colonial way of addressing people. “Peasant” means people, who worked on farms, especially during the time of slave trade, and their only place of confinement is in the villages and they have no step upward. 

So when we address our civilians, especially those who give us jobs, I think we should give them the respect by saying, for example, “citizens”, “fellow Ugandans”. Even the word “masses” is also inappropriate. Mr Speaker, that is what I wanted to mention as a procedural point. Thank you.

3.56 
MS SAUDA MUGERWA (Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank Government for the budget statement and for the progressive work done in almost all the sectors during the previous financial year.  

Mr Speaker, allow me to talk about Universal Primary Education (UPE). How many pupils are taken into UPE? What figure does Government have in terms of budgeting for them? Saying that all children in any family could go to school, from the financial background, I do not know whether Government can budget for something like that; a non-qualified figure. We need to know, like it was originally, that maybe a family has got four or five children so that when we are budgeting financially we stick to that number. But to plan for everybody, I think that is where Government has gone wrong in terms of catering for UPE.

I would also like to propose that we come up with a definite figure so that we give some allowance to the higher institutions of learning, especially the universities. Thank you.

MR MOSES KIZIGE: I thank you, hon. Mugerwa, for giving way. Mr Speaker, I would like to inform hon. Mugerwa that we had the population census in 2002, and the population figures are classified by age.  So, from the figures you can tell who will be going to primary 1 in which year, and it is on that basis that Government can predict what will be required for UPE, not just looking at individual families.

MS MUGERWA: Thank you very much, but as somebody who majored in Finance I am telling you that we need an exact figure when we are budgeting.  

As I was saying, we really need to assist the students who should be going to higher institutions of learning. Most people in university are from urban centres because they go to the best schools here and they would be taken in - even if ten of them passed from a family, they would be allowed to get sponsorship for university education, yet children who do not have access to good schools in the rural areas are not given assistance. So, I would like to propose that probably in the future, we come up with representative sponsorship per district so that even those students from slightly poor schools can be given assistance.

Mr Speaker, as far as page 3 is concerned, the performance of the economy, I am not surprised that the Minister states that actually he could not reach the targeted rate of growth of seven percent. Why? I have been complaining for about two years now that actually there is no good velocity in terms of the currencies in the economy. We do not have the small currency denominations to allow easy exchange of economic transactions. Mr Speaker, if I wanted my child to buy a pancake of Shs 50, he will not be able to buy it. The Minister has set the minimum price at about Shs 100 because it is the easiest lowest currency that is available. A child, who is in UPE, a child who is on the street, cannot buy even a piece of sugarcane at Shs 50 because the currency is not there. As a result the minimum price is about Shs 100; that does not allow easy transactions of economic exchange.  

So, I would like to propose that actually small currency denominations be introduced - as many as possible - so that even poor people can do exchange whenever they want to buy something. The Shs 50,000 note is among a certain class. If you went with it to a village in Masaka where I come from, you can spend a whole month without buying anything or even getting somebody to exchange it. That alone does not allow for economic growth; it in fact hinders the velocity of currency, it hinders making transactions.  
Mr Speaker, most of the Shs 1,000 notes are too old.  In fact a lot of people reject them. As soon as somebody gives it to you - first of all, it is dirty; secondly, it is too old, and they are not enough in the economy. So, I appeal to Government to increase the small currency denominations in general.

As far as food and income security are concerned, Mr Speaker, these two items complement each other. If there is no food in a family, there is no money, and as such I would like to encourage Government to put some focus in terms of planning for these two items. For food, about two seasons ago Government was very excited and came up with a list of trees that can be planted, but one wonders what happened. We need to plant a lot of fruit trees, both for cash and for food security, but these things have now phased out. Government is working on an ad hoc basis in terms of what should be done in our areas, and this is not surprising because as I am talking and even the Prime Minister is not taking any note, he is just - Mr Prime Minister, I am talking about food income. Mr Speaker, I was giving a message to Government that we need to plant trees every rainy season so that we can increase on our food and income security.

We also need to emphasize rainwater catchments to the families. Without rainwater catchments as a mandatory issue we are not going very far because if we introduce irrigation, many people will not be able to abide by it. So, I would like us to ensure that every house can catch some rainwater. Because of the shortages in food and income, which I see in my constituency, I appeal to Government to emphasize this kind of planning.

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask the ministers to respond to the points raised?

4.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE, TRADE (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will respond to questions, which were raised by hon. Alonga, Member of Parliament for Aringa. He wanted to know what benefits have come out of investment in value addition to coffee, and my response is as follows: 

Under the strategic programme, Uganda Coffee Development Authority undertook value addition to coffee through processing and formation of joint ventures. Under processing, 16 wet processing equipment –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, on behalf of the people of Lubaga South, I am seeking a procedural answer. The hallmark of responsibilities of Members of Parliament is to check Government excesses through budgetary estimates, and at the time when the Minister was called, I noted that there were a number of Members of Parliament, wishing to contribute to this important subject. I would be very delighted if we extended the discussion for about four or five Members of Parliament before the ministers conclude - because I was one of the aspirants.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I sat here yesterday up to 7.15 p.m. and I captured those who were here. We agreed that I would give you the opportunity to finish today and that we would start at 2.00 p.m. because we have other items on the Order Paper, which are also important. But as you know, this is not the end because we are going to the committees, which will consider these points. A member, who has a very burning question, will go to the committee and present it.  

There was a suggestion that we end it last week but we have proceeded to today, Thursday, and according to our rules there are days to consider this. This debate is ending today, then I will put the question for us to become to Committee of Supply. I intend to do so when the committees are ready with the reports so that immediately we agree to the motion, we go to the Committee of Supply. But there are other matters that we are to consider. 

As I told you, the Minister of Defence had told me that he wants to make a statement on security, which is equally important. The Minister of Foreign Affairs also has a statement, which he could not make yesterday. But this is not the end of your scrutiny. You will continue to do the oversight role. The people of Lubaga South sent you to do that, and I think you are doing it. Thank you very much.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, much obliged. The impression I am getting out of your very clear explanation is that my motion is also likely to come this afternoon. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, let us proceed and see how to handle it.

DR NDUHUURA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was saying that using funds under the Strategic Export Programme, 16 wet processing machineries worth US $465,000 were imported from Brazil into the country. The quantity of washed coffee is envisaged to increase by over 20,000 tonnes per year under this initiative. You need to know that washed coffee fetches around US $300,000 per tonne. When you compare this with unwashed, ordinary coffee, it translates into an increase of at least US $6,000,000 per year, of export earnings from coffee.  

Under the joint venture programme, Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA) has established joint ventures in the following countries. In China over 180 tonnes of coffee have been shipped since the programme started, and this venture supplies roasted coffee and ground coffee powder to 15 hotels and restaurants, three large supermarkets and nine distributors in Beijing and Hong Kong.  

Under the Denmark venture, Mount Elgon coffee is roasted and packaged to the tastes of the Danish, and distributed through a large supermarket, which has 680 outlets in Scandinavian countries. This venture has acquired a roasting plant, which as you have heard will be installed in Tororo.  

Under similar arrangements, Mr Speaker, Bugisu Co-operative Union has partnered with Twin Trading/Cafe Direct in the United Kingdom and Select Savings in Switzerland. Rwenzori coffee brand was launched in South Africa and can be found in the Shoprite Supermarket chain in a number of African countries.

Then there is the Egypt venture; this is a new one through which the UCDA is launching Ugandan coffee in the Arab world. Prior studies had indicated that coffee consumed in the Arab world originated from Europe and the United States, so we are establishing ourselves in the Arab world market. UCDA has established a roasting facility and coffee shop in a very strategic location in Cairo, and they have developed a coffee brand for the Arab region and the response so far is very good. Mr Speaker, that is my response. (Interruption)

MR SEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, the honourable minister holding the Floor has said that UCDA has entered a joint venture with China and Scandinavian countries. Whereas such ventures are understandable say between Bugisu, Rwenzori and their partners, may I know under what arrangement UCDA is entering into partnership? Is there a Government hand? Do we involve public resources? I thought the Minister should clarify on that such that we know. 

MR ALONGA: On that joint venture between Uganda Coffee Development Authority and another gentleman, who is now late, that is Gindi in Egypt, how is that going to affect this joint venture? I do not know whether the Minister is aware that Eng. Gindi, who was undertaking this joint venture in Cairo, passed away some few months ago? I do not know how that will affect the joint venture. 

MR AWORI: Mr Minister, is Star Coffee also a joint venture between Uganda and Tanzania?  

DR NDUHUURA: I thank all the honourable members who were seeking further clarification. First of all, hon. Sekikubo wants to know whether Government has got a hand in this. Yes, Government has got a hand in these ventures and as I clearly explained, UCDA is using funds from the Strategic Export Programme, which is a programme of the Government. We are making these trials and we think they will be successful. When they are, certainly there is no reason why we cannot ask the private sector to take over. 

The joint venture with Cairo, this is a company; if one of the directors is dead, certainly there is no reason why the venture should stop. That is one man in a company. So, as long as the company survives, the venture will also survive.

Star Coffee, as far as I know, is not a joint venture between Uganda and Tanzania. This is a private, Ugandan businessman who takes advantage of the facilities of roasting and milling coffee, which are not available in this country but are available in Tanzania. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE, PRIMARY EDUCATION (Mrs Geraldine Bitamazire): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and my dear colleagues. When the policy statement comes to the Floor it will give an opportunity for the ministry to clarify on a number of issues, which have been raised. However, I would like to clarify further the comments made by hon. Kabakumba Masiko about the outlet for primary leaving children and the implementation of the community polytechnics.  

Mr Speaker and my dear colleagues, technical education or skills training is one of the components, which as a ministry and Government we should highlight more. Many of our children are now running to pure secondary schools forgetting that probably the future lies in the technical and practical skills. Therefore, I thought I should inform the House about the 16 community polytechnics, which are in operation now and the 33 privately-owned institutions, which are being assisted by our donors to make sure that Ugandan children from the UPE programme access technical training institutions.

Mr Speaker, right now 16 community polytechnics are in operation and this financial year we are starting on the construction of 14 more, which will give us a total of 30 community polytechnics. From there we shall roll down the programme to one polytechnic per district and then continue accordingly. But members from these districts might want to know the following: 

In Gulu, Bobi Polytechnic is in operation; in Bundibugyo we have Hakitenja; Kadogo Technical Institute in Mbarara; Wairaka in Jinja District; Bowa in Luweero; Kihiki in Kanungu; Rukore in Kabale; Oriyo in Soroti; Mubende in Mubende; Mbale in Mbale District; Lumino in Busia District; Luwonku in Sembabule District; Gombe in Wakiso District, Sanje in Rakai; Pacel in Nebbi and Obyem in Kitgum. So, our colleagues who come from those areas should visit some of those institutions to assure themselves, but most importantly to encourage the young men and women to join those institutions.  

Mr Speaker, also allow me to say that in those sixteen, community polytechnics –(Interruption)

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and honourable minister for giving way. Members have noticed that you are continuing to apportion whatever we have per district, thank you so much for that. But remember, when you talk of Kanungu and Mbarara, we are not anywhere. That is why we have insisted and are saying that we should give these colleges or grant-aided schools according to the populations.  

Mbarara has 52 sub-counties, which none of your districts have. We continue suffering because you are apportioning per district. I think, hon. Minister of Education, it is high time you thought of the bigger districts, bigger populations and gave them three institutions instead of one. I thank you, Mr Speaker.  

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I also have a problem in Kampala as far as that issue is concerned. Good enough hon. Byanyima –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But honourable members, I heard the Minister saying these are 16 but they are planning fourteen others. Why don’t we get the list and then we have the idea because the fact remains that as of now they are sixteen; that we cannot change. You have to listen and hear the fourteen, if your district is not there, then that is when you can – (Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: The problem I have, Mr Speaker, is that the one, which was earmarked for Kampala was taken to Wairaka. Fine, I do not have any complaint about that. The problem is that the reason it was actually relocated was that there was no land. We were in the process of negotiating for land out of the Butabika land, which has been a subject of discussion in this House. Could the ministry please reconsider the issue? 

You see when you talk in terms of population, let me give you an example: one of my parishes in Nakawa, that is Mutungo parish, it has got 45,000 people; it is bigger than the district of Kalangala. When we are talking about facilities that can accommodate the available population, you certainly cannot say you have got JICA in Nakawa, you have got this and that. We still need a lot of these facilities in our city. Thank you.  

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the honourable minister. We are one of those districts that got a polytechnic and we are very grateful. What I want to find out is what she has in plan because while they have started work, they do not have the equipment yet they require that. I wonder what you have in plan to make them able to seriously take off. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, these details are about ministries. It should really be addressed in the committees, not in this general debate. It is the Social Services Committee that you now have to take your problem to and they see how it can be handled.  

MR BIKWASIZEHI: Mr Speaker, mine is a clarification of concern. We normally think that we are a nation and we should think nationally. I am wondering whether if an institution is located say in Luweero or in Kayunga or in Mbarara, is it a confine of the people of that area? To me these are just locations, like we had Makerere here. Everybody came here; it was not for Buganda. We have Mbarara University, is it for Mbarara only? I go there, but I see the population is for people from the different parts of the country. So, my thinking is that the location of these institutions should not make us blind to the fact that these are national institutions, and a student from any corner of the world can go to that institution. I think it is high time we set an example by thinking nationally. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Speaker, at the commencement of this sitting, you informed us that the Minister of Defence was going to make an important statement to the House. Noting that our number seems to be fluctuating at a very interesting rate of geometrical progression, I am wondering whether this important statement could be made when even the members of the Frontbench are still around? Some of them may be very busy and want to go away, including the Prime Minister. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, if this is your wish, because I am not going to put the question on the motion today - I intend to put the question when the committee reports are ready. So, the final day will come when I know that the committee reports are ready. Once we pronounce ourselves on the motion, then we shall immediately start as a Committee on Supply. What I foresee here is that if I put the question now, so will come the Committee of Supply, yet we will not be in a position to supply because the committees are not ready. 

If you think that we need the statement of the Minister of Defence on security now, what we can do is to say that the ministers will come back when finally we are going to pronounce ourselves, to make their responses to the queries. If that is what you want, we can do that? Okay. 

So, the ministers will make their responses to queries raised in the debate on that day, which I will appoint, after I am satisfied that committee reports are ready to use to start the supply. Is that agreeable, honourable ministers? You see, there is a statement by the Minister of Defence, and before we started, people had started agitating for it. I told them that the Minister of Defence was coming. In fact he came at the right time I told him to, and I think they are anxious to hear the statement. There is also a statement from the Minister of Foreign Affairs. 

Today, I will be adjourning the House for about two weeks to enable the committees to finalize their report, and I will not be able to put the question to this motion until that day when they will be ready. Immediately the motion is carried, we shall start the supply. Therefore, what we can do is that, on that day before I put the question, the ministers will make their responses to the queries raised and immediately after that I put the question, then we start with the Committee of Supply.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, I quite agree with the way you have presented the matter because when the committees report to this House, the sector ministers will be expected to respond. So, if we sit here and listen to all these responses, we shall again, when those reports come from those committees, be listening almost to the same kind of responses from the same ministers. 

Therefore, in order to economize on time, let the ministers take note of the views members have expressed, and any other views that will be expressed at the time when the individual sector reports will be presented and give one, comprehensive response on each of the sectors. I think that is the best way forward.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, it is the consensus. So, the debate is adjourned to a date I will let you know after the committees are ready. After one or two committees are ready, we shall fix a date for these responses.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

4.29
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and hon. Members of Parliament. I have two statements to make. The first one is a statement on the decision by the International Criminal Court (ICC) to open investigations into the situation concerning Northern Uganda.  

Therefore, Mr Speaker, allow me to brief this august House and the general public on the progress so far made in the preparatory process that will eventually culminate in the international criminal prosecution of the leaders of Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) terrorists by the International Criminal Court.  

On 18 December 2003, the Uganda Government filed in the International Criminal Court at The Hague the “Referral of the situation concerning the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA)”. The referral contained considerable details of the atrocities committed by the LRA terrorists in Northern Uganda. Government requested the prosecutor of the ICC to investigate the said atrocities with a view to determining whether or not those involved in the commission of these crimes should be prosecuted in the ICC. 

The said referral was well received by the prosecutor. The prosecutor and his staff studied the referral together with documents in the public domain concerning LRA atrocities on the various aspects of the referral. 

The office of the prosecutor has, during the last several months, been undertaking independent, preliminary investigations with a view to determining whether there is sufficient basis to proceed with formal investigations that will eventually lead to the international criminal prosecution of the LRA terrorists in the ICC.  

Yesterday, the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court issued letters of notification to all states parties to the Rome Statute of the ICC and other concerned states, in which he announced his decision to formally initiate an investigation in relation to the situation concerning atrocities committed by LRA terrorists against the people of Northern Uganda. 

The Government of Uganda welcomes the formal announcement by the Prosecutor of the ICC of his decision to initiate this investigation. Government strongly believes that, at long last the LRA terrorists, who have committed terrible crimes against innocent and law-abiding citizens of this country, are going to face justice. 

The Government is ready to co-operate with the office of the prosecutor in gathering evidence that will eventually be used to make indictments of the LRA terrorists, and to institute international criminal prosecutions against them in the International Criminal Court.  

Lastly, the Government of Uganda wishes to profoundly thank the prosecutor for his very important decision, and takes the opportunity to renew the assurance of its commitment to providing all assistance that may be required by the prosecutor to advance the realization of justice and peace in the Northern part of Uganda. Should the International Criminal Court come across any information or evidence implicating any Ugandan Government official in the commission of any of the crimes complained of, Uganda shall immediately prosecute such officials. (Applause).

My second statement, Mr Speaker, is on the current security situation in the country.

THE SPEAKER: Copies I think are being distributed.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, in fulfillment of my ministry’s commitment to keeping Parliament briefed on the security situation in the country, allow me to make the following statement on the security situation in Uganda today.  

Generally, the security situation in the entire country is relatively peaceful apart from some LRA terrorist groups, which are still causing some trouble in some parts of Northern Uganda within Gulu, Kitgum and Pader districts. However, with the ongoing UPDF operations both in Northern Uganda and Southern Sudan, the security situation is greatly improving and LRA terrorists continue to be weakened in terms of manpower, arms and ammunition, as well as their lines of supply for food, medicine and equipment, which are now significantly affected.  

The LRA situation:

Since the time he left Katire valley between Acholi hills and Imatong mountains in mid March this year, Kony until yesterday morning was in his rear base camp of Nisitu behind Sudan People’s Armed Forces lines, across the red line. I have had occasion, Mr Speaker, to inform Parliament what this red line is. It is the line, which according to the protocol that Uganda Government signed with Sudan Government, the UPDF is not supposed to operate beyond. We are allowed to operate in Southern Sudan up to the red line, which is about four degrees to the north of the Equator. But because of the accelerated pressure by the UPDF, Kony had moved to behind the Sudanese Army defence lines across the red line.  

Yesterday, July 28th, UPDF units in Southern Sudan with the concurrence of the Sudan Government, attacked this LRA base at a place called Birinyang, approximately eight miles east of Juba town. You can see how close it is. This base, covering an area of about two square miles, was overrun and completely destroyed. There were three camps in that base. 

Preliminary reports based on inspection of the camp where bandit Joseph Kony was show the following results: 120 bandit fighters were killed - the body count continues; 28 of them were captured alive, including four of Kony’s wives; 24 children were rescued, 13 of these were Kony’s own children, the youngest being two weeks old and the oldest 16 years old. They are being taken to Juba town. 

Weapons captured include: 36 AK-47 rifles, three G2 guns with three G2 ammunition chains, five RPG launchers with six RPG bombs and five fuses, seven SPG bombs, one Bazooka with two bombs, one HF man-pack radio, one VHF walkie-talkie, one VHF base station, four solar panels, 10 anti-personnel mines (APMs), 32 grenades, one 82-millimeter recoiler bomb, one 60-millimeter launcher with three bombs, one bipod of 12.7 millimeter anti-aircraft gun, three chains of 12.7 millimeter anti-aircraft ammunition, 10 cows and an assortment of food and other things. 

When inspection of the other two camps that we have overrun has been completed, Mr Speaker, we will give you the full picture of this spectacular performance by the UPDF.

Some of Kony’s commanders within his range or his proximity in Southern Sudan include: Odhiambo, Raska, Lamora, Wod Paco, Lapanyikwara and Lotiba. These commanders around him are for purposes of launching attacks on civilian settlements, Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) and Equatorial Defence Forces (EDF) detaches for food and ammunitions or arms, which they are badly in need of. 

Kony has been rotating in the general areas of Jabelin, Lubangtek, Nisitu; these are former LRA camps, which we overrun the other time across and slightly below the red line, close to the Sudan Armed Forces’ camps. He went there for his personal security and his concern for survival by avoiding contact with the UPDF using a small force with which he was moving under concealment and taking advantage of knowing that the UPDF would not operate in the areas above the red line, the four degrees latitude north that I talked about, as per the protocol between Uganda and Sudan.  

As you can see, honourable members, obviously Kony was mistaken and the UPDF operated beyond the red line. I wish to express Uganda Government appreciation to the Sudan Government for this higher level of co-operation they have shown. It would appear that once again Kony himself may have survived. One of his captured wives told us that he had stepped out to speak on a satellite phone. If this is confirmed it will suggest that in fact Kony may have got a tip off. The Uganda Government will obviously take a lot of interest in the matter with a view to establishing exactly what may have happened. 

But I should add, Mr Speaker, that another wife, subsequent to my writing of this report, said that actually Kony was not talking on phone but he had stepped out to do other things. 

Kony anyway, is a totally demoralized man, having been psychologically affected by continued defections and capture of both LRA officers and men as a result of UPDF’s sustained pressure against them. This has caused a lot of mistrust and frustration within the LRA leadership both in Uganda and Southern Sudan.  

In Gulu areas, Vincent Otti and commanders under him, namely Koyelo and Sam Otto, remain in general areas of Kilak hills under concealment though they send out small scavenger groups, who disturb the population, in search of food. Dominic’s group also operates in the general areas of Ato hills. UPDF mobile forces continue to pursue Vincent Otti and bandit fighters under him. As you are all aware, significant success has been recorded of late as follows:

On July 14th Major Kenneth Banya, going by the bandit title or rank of Brigadier, a senior LRA member of high command and an adviser to Kony, and in fact a chief planner of the LRA structure and operations, was captured by UPDF in Pawel, West of Okidi hills.  

On July 18th, Otti’s group was engaged in Olamunyung areas, northwest of Kilak hills. Two sub-machine gun rifles, one RPG launcher, two RPG shells, were recovered and six of his fighters were captured alive.  

On 24th July, Otti’s group was hit in Gotgweno areas. Two LRA rebels were killed, three were captured and one abductee was rescued. Though Otti remains the overall LRA commander in Uganda, he is progressively losing his role and his ability to plan is diminishing, and his morale is very low.  

In Kitgum and Pader areas, active LRA commanders include: Ochan Bunia, Labong, Abudema, Angola and Kapere, whose several, fragmented groups roam Kitgum and Pader districts in search of food. They have made several attempts to attack internal displaced persons’ camps and lay ambushes on roads, the majority of which have been foiled.  

On 14th July at Awino Lio, North of Padibe, an LDU detach was attacked and in fact overrun, but the bandit group lost eight rebels who were killed by the pursuing UPDF force. One rebel was captured, four SMG rifles were gained and all the food that had been looted was abandoned.  

On 15th July at Orit camp, an attempted attack was repulsed – I am sorry about the mistakes, this thing was done in a hurry; I hope you will correct it. An attempted attack was repulsed and five rebels were killed, and one SMG was recovered.  

On 18th July, at Lachekochok camp, an attempted attack was repulsed and one anti-personal mine, and three magazines of SMG were recovered. 

On 19th July, at Amyel camp an attempted attack was repulsed, two rebels were killed, one SMG rifle with two SMG magazines were recovered. 

In Lira and Soroti areas, the region is generally peaceful thanks to the relentless efforts of the UPDF, and Arrow and Amuka Groups in those areas. The population is now relocating from Soroti Municipality to sub-county camps closer to their homes, and others have gone back to their villages.  

However, one incident happened in Apungi village in Abia parish, in Lira District, when 11 people from one family were killed by the LRA rebels away from an IDP camp where they had gone to look for some oil in the bush.  

In summary, operations both in Uganda and Southern Sudan continue day and night, and a lot of successes have been realized as exemplified by the LRA terrorists who are killed, those who have defected and others that have been captured, and the increasing rate at which the abductees are rescued. The example I want to give to this Parliament is the achievements of the last two months of June and July - really not the last two months because it is not two months yet. 

Seven hundred and thirty-five (735) LRA bandits have been killed; 250 abductees have been rescued; 202 LRA officers and men have defected and reported to UPDF; 60 LRA officers and men have been captured, 166 sub-machine rifles recovered and all those bombs, including bombs of big guns like B10 and SPG-9. I am sorry I did not attach, but I will subsequently bring the entire list of LRA officers that have been killed, those that have been captured and those who reported. 

As UPDF’s operations continue against these LRA terrorists both inside Uganda and Southern Sudan, their capacity to commit atrocities against civilians continues to dwindle day by day. In fact, I can tell this to Parliament that I have full confidence that even Kony himself, his days are numbered. Our forces continue to pursue him even today as we speak and we hope that sooner than later we will catch up with him in person.  

In Western Uganda, the situation is peaceful apart from some ADF remnants who are trying to re-organize in some parts of the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) in areas of Malika, Bundiguya, Kakumbo and Kayinama. 

PRA rebels are also in areas of Narugo, Logo, Kasenyi and Bukwa. They are being monitored closely and a contingency plan to deal with them, should they dare to attack Uganda, is in place. Joint efforts are being made with the DRC Government and MONUC to handle the situation in general.  

On 14th June this year a group of Congolese soldiers entered Uganda at the village of Gatwe in Muramba sub-county, Kisoro District, and robbed the wanainchi. The Kanombe UPDF detach intercepted the attacking Congolese, killing their commander, one Lt Nihibizi Jeanne Bosco, and four others. A fight ensued between UPDF and the RCD force, which came from DRC to recover the body of their commander. This fight caused between four and six thousand Congolese with their livestock to run into Uganda. They were encouraged the following day to return to Congo, and they did.  

On 14th July a group of RCD Goma forces entered Uganda at Kikobero trading centre and robbed 15 civilians of an estimated cash of Shs 1.2 million. They are believed to have come from their detach at Mpimbi, North Kigo, which is about two kilometers from the Uganda border located North of Kisoro and South of Bwindi National Park. The OC/CID, Kisoro, has already taken statements from the victims and complaints have also been raised to the RCD, Goma administration, and a reply is awaited. 

There were many similar incidents previously, which we believe were motivated by criminal intentions like robbery, which the RCD forces have visited on our people in that part of Uganda. We have had good contact with the leadership in North Kivu and an understanding was reached when a delegation led by their Governor, Mr Eugene Nselifoli, met the Uganda delegation led by Dr Philemon Mateke, the Chairman of Kisoro District. These meetings will continue on a monthly basis to avoid a repeat of these occurrences.  

I am sorry I did not have this in this statement but, Mr Speaker, allow me to inform this Parliament that only last week I returned from a trilateral meeting between the Government of DRC, the Government of Rwanda and the Government of Uganda under the facilitation of the Government of United States of America, in Washington DC. The purpose of this meeting was to examine the question of insecurity in the region and find a solution to this problem. I am happy to inform this Parliament that an agreement was reached at this meeting and we issued a communiqué in which, among other things, the following was said - and I will lay it on the Table; I will get a copy for Parliament to be distributed.  

We agreed that in order to enhance peace in the region, we should reaffirm, and indeed we reaffirmed, our commitment to existing agreements and we resolved as follows: 

• To continue to work on a joint verification mechanism as agreed on in Abuja and Addis Ababa. In Addis Ababa on the sidelines of the OAU Summit, under the Chairmanship of the Secretary General of the United Nations, Kofi Annan, our President, the President of Rwanda, the President of Nigeria in his capacity as Chairman of the African Union, the President of Burundi, the Head of Delegation of Tanzania and of DRC and the President of Mozambique, held a meeting at which this joint verification mechanism was agreed. We, therefore, resolved to continue to work on that mechanism.

• We resolved to disarm armed groups, including in particular genocidal forces, with the assistance of an international force. In the case of Uganda, we agreed that the PRA and the ADF in Congo would be disarmed. 

• We resolved to request the United Nations (UN) to change the mandate of MONUC or the UN Mission in Congo from the current mandate under chapter 6, which means simply keeping the peace, to chapter 7, which gives the power to MONUC to use force in order to achieve disarmament of these groups. And I am very happy to inform you, Mr Speaker, that the United Nations Security Council at its sitting last night indeed agreed to give a chapter 7 mandate to MONUC. (Applause)

• We also resolved at this meeting to normalize the security situation along the common borders, and each of the countries committed itself not to train, harbour on its territory or render any form of support to elements or armed opposition seeking to destabilize the three countries. 

• The three Great Lakes countries further noted their appreciation for the support of the United States Government and its continued commitment to facilitate the establishment of a trilateral mechanism to foster cooperation in the region. 

The three Great Lakes countries declared their commitments to promoting the strengthening of relations and the creation of a mechanism to address regional instability; and to that extent we resolved as follows:

• To enhance our efforts to prevent the use of our territories to arm and support negative forces in the region;

• To continue to encourage the return of refugees in the region to their countries of origin;

• To support the transitional government of the Democratic Republic of Congo; and

• To move forward with the process of political and diplomatic rapprochement. 

It is in that context, therefore, that I make the point on page 9 that Uganda’s relations with Rwanda have continued to improve greatly day by day.

Cattle Rustling: 

Mr Speaker, last time hon. Malinga of Kapelebyong, raised the question of cattle rustling. I reiterate the point, which I made that time that the disarmament programme had slackened due to the shifting of focus onto the LRA. However, necessary measures to speedily end cattle rustling as a matter of top priority are in place to ensure maximum protection of the areas within and neighbouring Karamoja, as well as Uganda’s international borders.  

However, some incidents of cattle rustling by Karimojong still affect the neighbours, for example, on 17th July Karimojong raiders took away about 20 head of cattle from Akobi in Katakwi District. An LDU detach under the name “Kapelebyong Battalion” reacted promptly and pursued the rustlers, recovering the 20 cattle. Claims that the actual number of cattle rustled was 73, as hon. Malinga stated last week in this Parliament, are being investigated by security forces.

In conclusion, the UPDF continues to significantly reduce the fighting capability of LRA terrorists, and it is still focused on its noble, constitutional obligation of protecting and defending the sovereignty of Uganda within its boundaries. I thank you. (Applause).

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister.

4.59
MRS SARAH NYOMBI (Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for his reports, but I have a general concern. According to our Budget, the budget for Defence is quite big. I am surprised that the Minister of Defence could bring a report written in such a font, leading to wastage of paper. I am afraid we do not have a saving heart. How could you put a signature on a full page? Could we save and we really fight Kony? We could have this report on two pages. Please, Mr Minister, be conscious of those savings and really wipe out Kony. 

Secondly, I am pleased that we have had many achievements, one of them being rescuing people, including the children and wives of Kony. But I am afraid that at times when we rescue these people we put them to task to answer to the community through interviews. I believe as a woman, being a wife of Kony, I think it is not by pleasure; they are forced. When you rescue them and get them out of Kony’s territories and then you expose them, you are traumatizing them more. I wish we could at least save the children and the wives mainly; I am concerned about the wives rescued from Kony, they should be highly protected. I really beg the minister to do that.

One last general comment is that the second report is about the security situation in the country. I wish it could be addressed to the regions where there is insecurity than being a general security situation in the country. I would have wished to see the Central region, the Northern region as a countrywide report. Let us really be specific on the areas where there is insecurity. Thank you.

5.02
MR ATUBO OMARA (Otuke County, Lira): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the Minister of Defence for these two reports. But unlike my honourable colleague who was worried about the piece of paper being wasted, I thought that the minister possibly could have done a little bit better work than this.  

Mr Speaker, the issue of defence and security is of uppermost importance to this country, which has been in a state of war since 1972. Therefore, we are really praying for permanent peace and security. I don’t know why the Minister decided to bring his statement at this late hour without notice on a Thursday evening, therefore, possibly not deserving the attention that it would have had with many members interested and possibly provoking that debate, which I expect. Defence and security take a very large part of our budget and, therefore, I expect the Minister not only to give us sufficient notice in future when this debate is going to be, but also to have an in-depth statement.  

Mr Prime Minister, we heard yesterday of the very important issue of food security, and shockingly we were not satisfied with it. I beg to say that even this one, which is even more important than food security but is the security to life and property, I do not think I am satisfied with it, leave alone the way it has been brought to the House.  

Anyway, let me all the same thank our soldiers who are on the frontline, the UPDF. I come from Otuke and I know what they are doing, I know the problems they are facing and the sacrifices they are making. I also want to thank the LDU and the local militias, especially the Amuka, who have co-operated very closely with the UPDF and have brought this drastic change in realizing what I may call reasonable peace and security. 

But, Mr Minister, if you want to get support from the country on this matter of peace and security, you do not have to play propaganda; there is no need to play propaganda. You really have to be factual and touch the conscience of the people so that you get support, so that you get sympathy whether politically or financially. Therefore, when you come to the House, we expect a thorough statement backed by clear statistics. 

I know that you, as a Minister of Defence, as well as the Minister of Internal Affairs and that of Security, get what we call daily situation reports (SITREPS). Therefore, it is possible for you - I am going to tell you what has happened in my area, which is not here. Therefore my colleagues who are going to debate, this important statement really is not updated on the real situation, which is prevailing in for example Lira and Apac. For you to come with one statement and say the situation is calm and so on and so forth, colleagues here are going to take it like that, and they may not give you that support, which you may need in budgetary terms and in other political support.

Mr Minister, this thing is human. I do expect that in the next report, which is coming, please take your time and give us a full report rather than jumping from what is in your statement, opening a file, which is not part of the statement in the House, and that sort of thing. You are a very senior, respected man; you have been in that ministry for long. Even Minister Mugerwa has been in the Ministry of Agriculture for long, but the statement he gave us yesterday was very disappointing.  

What do I want to say? I want to say that the situation in Lira and Apac is worrying, especially the whole area bordering Kitgum, Gulu and Pader. Let us not relax and let Members of Parliament know that right from Ben Wacha’s constituency of Ngai, Otwal, coming to Erute North, the constituency of Charles Angiro, of Aromo and Ogur, and going to my constituency of Otuke and that of Moroto of Alex Okot, that is the only statistics you brought. There are sporadic attacks, and for us in Lira and Apac we say that as long as there is no peace in Acholi land, there will not be peace in Lango. So, please take it that when you are reflecting the situation of your report, get the border reports especially of those sub-counties, which are bordering Kitgum, Gulu and Pader.  

In the last two weeks, which you have not reported on here, there was a serious attack in Ngai; there was a serious attack and abductions in Otwal; and unfortunately it is not here. There has been an attack in Aromo, Ogur, and Okwang in Otuke County in a place called Baralege, in fact this is where the President is camped. It was a vehicle carrying traders going to the market; four people were killed. Just last Tuesday, and the press reported it very well, there was a very serious battle in Orum sub-county, where I come from. About 70 rebels penetrated that area and there was a very serious battle. Twenty rebels were killed and both the UPDF and our Amuka boys were victorious, in fact the rebels were chased. But those remnants spread all over Otuke and now they are even a greater danger.  Travelling has become impossible and, therefore, this is the real situation, which I would like my brothers and sisters in this House to hear of so that you appreciate it.

Let me now make just two points and I sit down. This is the issue of your statement on the International Criminal Court Prosecutor. One, I would ask you, Mr Minister, to lay before this House those two documents, which should be part of your statement. We want to have a look at them. The referral of the situation concerning the Lord’s Resistance Army, this is what you referred to in page 1 of your statement. We think it is an important piece of paper, which Members of Parliament should see, and we would be grateful that at the earliest opportunity you should come here with that referral and lay it on the Table. 

The second one is, the letters of notification. You referred to this in your statement on page 3; these are the letters of notification to all state parties, who are signatories to the Rome Convention. We also would like to have a look at this. Please lay it on the Table.

The other point is about prosecuting implicated Ugandans. Mr Minister, I am still not clear in my mind whether we should leave it to Uganda to prosecute those who are implicated, or they should be part of the International Criminal Court. As I said, I am not yet clear in my mind, I do not know whether the Uganda Government has already taken a decision on this matter. If it is true that these are Ugandans, who have been implicated and they are really part of this criminal act, or terrorist act, who have caused the suffering of our people, are you going to prosecute them here or they will even get better trial in the International Court? As I said, I am not very clear in my mind, I will think about it and possibly when you come next I will give you my piece of mind on it.  

Finally, you are saying there are PRA rebels in Lango. In your statement you said there are PRA in Western Uganda. I am aware that there have been arrests of some people in Lango implicated in this PRA, and five of them have been charged with treason here in Kampala. Mr Minister, these people who were arrested and possibly more have been arrested, some of them are simple peasants, some of them are retired soldiers, some of them are LDUs.  I do not believe that these people were acting on their own initiative, I think there were bigger people behind this thing. The mistake, which the Government normally makes, is to arrest those who are in the lowest ladder of rebel activities and leave out those who are implicated. Sometimes when they arrest those who are implicated, they arrest the wrong people for political reasons.

As people in the North and Lango settle, I am telling you that the last thing they want to hear about is another group destabilizing us. Therefore, we are going to be too happy if your investigation can be complete and tell us who are these people who are recruiting rebels in Lango. To tell you the truth, some people are now turning it round to say you are arresting UPC leaders. I am sure you have heard what people have said; therefore, neutralizing what may be true, or if it is not true, you run the risk of the security matter being politicised and the truth being totally marred. It may be happening in the West, but I can only speak for the area I know and some of us, political leaders, are much concerned. We are finishing the rebel activities of Kony, now we are beginning to think of another rebel activity?

Last time we had a problem in a camp, which led to the killing of Opon Acak and my unfortunate arrest, which later you people say was a mistake. Usually somebody comes up and says it is a mistake but by that time possibly somebody has been killed, somebody has been injured and so forth. What we are asking now is that if the Government comes across such a situation, can your investigation be thorough and get all those who are involved? This suspicion of saying, “We think so and so is involved, we think so and so is wrong, we think this party is involved,” should be thoroughly demystified - if I can use a very common word, which the Movement introduced to us in our political language - demystification. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.16
MR NYEKO OCULA (Kilak County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me a chance. Mine is just a brief to the honourable minister. I want to find out exactly, how does this International Criminal Court operate? I am wondering how Kony is going to be compelled to appear before this court. What is going to take place exactly?

Two, assuming Kony does not reach the court in person and the judgment is passed that he should be hanged, how shall we reach him and get hold of him and hang him? I am a bit disturbed. I do not know how it operates exactly.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, there is in this House a Bill, which was read a First Time, on this matter and it is quite thick. Maybe if that Bill is expedited it would make us appreciate the work of this prosecutor within the context of our own legislation. We can, because yesterday a Bill was referred to one of the Standing Committees and I believe that even this Bill can be referred to one of the Standing Committees, the results of which can be brought here for debate.

MR OCULA: Mr Speaker, I definitely appreciate so much the effort of the UPDF on the ground because we keep interacting with them whenever we go to our constituencies, and the commanders on the ground are very committed, except the task they have is so heavy for them that they cannot accomplish it in as short a time as we want. 

To deal with this Kony problem I see there is one measure, which can be taken immediately. It is to stop abductions because provided some rebels surrender and again the following day more are abducted then definitely we are moving nowhere.  Even if we kill others in the bush and more are abducted to replace and train them, then automatically we are doing no work. Therefore, Mr Speaker, the measure, which was taken about a week ago, to appoint some specific commanders to ensure protection of the camps - some commanders were named, I think that was in a positive direction. Let us stop the abductions. If we stop abductions, many of these rebels are surrendering; they will come out and maybe others will lose their lives.

Mr Speaker, when the honourable minister was reading out the successes of the UPDF and when he reached somewhere and mentioned that over 700 rebels had been killed, I did not clap for him. Reason? The majority of those who are always killed in combat are fresh abductees, not the ardent fighters. They use fresh abductees as human shields and they get killed because they do not know how to take cover. For that reason, I still stand to say that se should try to persuade these rebels, as many as possible, to come out. Otherwise, we shall continue killing the fresh abductees as the case is going on.

Finally, Mr Speaker, there has been a trend recently to use the rebel returnees for politics. This is very dangerous and may actually negate our achievements all along. The recent case in point of Mzee Banya, which we know very well, we know how he was very close to Kony in Sudan. Finally, he was captured by the UPDF and after two or three days Mzee Banya is singing about “ekisanja”. Sincerely speaking, why do we trivialize matters of life and death? Somebody has just come from the bush - of course, evidently for somebody who understands it like I do - he must have been coached maybe by the NPC. Because I do not expect somebody who was in combat with Government a few days ago, as soon as he comes out he begins saying “ekisanja”. It is really unbelievable!

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I ruled last time, I do not understand that term myself. But since it is a song, you are just repeating a song.

MR BASALIZA ARAALI: Mr Speaker, this man called Mr Banya who came out of the bush and he had not been killed at all, has he no right to sing the “ekisanja” to appreciate that he is safe?

MR OCULA: Mr Speaker, I am raising this point because for us who come from that part of the country where there are problems, we have sat down and agreed that on the matter of security for our people, let us leave alone these issues of politics. Let us forget about our political differences; let us work for peace in that part of the country. Now, all of a sudden Banya comes from the bush and begins singing “ekisanja”. 

The “ekisanja” is a third term, Mr Speaker, for the President. You know for sure in that part of Uganda, in Gulu and Kitgum in particular, when you sing “ekisanja” in any forum it is a big insult to us, and you continue to do that; it is very unfortunate.

Finally, I would like to ask the Minister of Defense, for a long time the President has been complaining about religious leaders; even this morning we were together, religious leaders were putting some points across for us to consider.  One time we went to meet the President in Okwang and he raised a complaint about Bishop Odama.  On several occasions the President has castigated the religious leaders in their effort to look for solutions to this problem.  Now, I want to find out from the minister, what exactly is the problem with the religious leaders?  Even just a few weeks ago, there were some issues in the press that some rebels where going to appear on television and name some powerful Ugandans who are connected to rebel activities or supporting rebel activities. I waited to see these people who are making people die in Gulu; I failed to see them. Who are these people, who are working to undermine our efforts to bring peace to Uganda?  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.24
MR SAMUEL ABURA (Matheniko county, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker and the hon. Members.  Mr Speaker, it is very encouraging and gratifying to see that our gallant soldiers, the brave sons of Uganda, UPDF, are pursuing Kony with success.  When I see from the report the number of ammunitions, weapons, manpower that has been removed from Kony, it is an indication that the war is on progress.

Mr Speaker, I have always heard of the support of the Government for the Arrow Group and Amuka, but I have never heard anything mentioned about Karamoja.  Going back to 1994, when the insurgency was serious, there were rebels coming from Kenya to Uganda.  The Karimojong rose up and finished that group, which was led by the notorious man called Jesus.  But no appreciation has ever been said.  Then in 1999, the constituency of hon. Omwony Ojwok was attacked by the LRA before the eve of the New Year; 300 of the rebels were killed.  Up to now nobody says the Karimonjong fought. Whom does Kony fear?  Kony fears the Karimonjong.  Nobody says, “Yes, you are doing a commendable job,” apart from mentioning the bad things like rustling.  Why not appreciate what we have done?  Mr Speaker, on a serious note –(Interruption)

MR OMARA ATUBO:  Thank you for giving way.  There are a lot of people who are doing a commendable job, and because of limited time I could not even say it in my remarks. Honourable member, it is not only the Karimonjong.  If you see the minister’s statement, which I consider inadequate, he has not thanked the amnesty commission, which has done a wonderful job and had brought a lot of people out.  He has not thanked religious leaders, who are doing a wonderful job, and a lot of rebels have come out.  In fact Radio WA, which was burnt by rebels, and the Government promised to donate some money and has not donated anything, has a special programme for bringing rebels out. I can swear to this House that at least 50 per cent of the rebels who are surrendering peacefully are a result of radio stations in the north making appeals.  

The minister has not thanked Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs).  So many NGOs have gone to the north for peaceful resolution of this conflict; the minister has said nothing.  I know you are a Minister of Defense, but not a Minister of Religious Affairs or NGOs, so you are only thanking UPDF.  This is a Government statement; please thank some of these people.  Apart from the Karimojong, thank the religious leaders, the NGOs and amnesty commission.  Thank you very much.

MR ABURA PIRIR: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the colleague for the information.  But the religious leaders and other NGOs are always in the media, at least that shows that there is recognition from the Government.  For us, whether we kill 300 rebels, nobody will say it even in the newspapers.  

On the disarmament, Sir, as it is in the last part stipulated page 8, Mr Speaker, the disarmament in Karamoja is a voluntary one.  Unfortunately, it tends to be operational.  Why take our cows?  More cows were taken than the guns, people were beaten; in my constituency of Matheniko 700 cows were taken by Capt. Rutainama for no reason.  In a parish where we had a disarmament committee, the leader of that committee mobilized 12 guns in on one day to be returned and we suffered.  So, next time we come, please let us avoid the idea of beating people.  Let us talk as we did; sensitize people.  There is more looting during the disarmament.  I am not telling a lie, it is the truth; I have enough evidence even in camera.  So, let us turn it to disarmament, not an operation.  So, our soldiers who will come there should also be sensitized so that they go there when they have proper instructions. 

On the disarmament issue, the Government programme of track routes, putting water in place, especially to stop these Karimojong from going to the neighbors, why not do it as it was done in the colonial days?  60 dams, which the colonials constructed in Karamoja, stopped the Karimojong from going to the neighbors.  Now, these are desilted, you could be only desilt these dams using only UShs25 million per dam instead of taking UShs500 million, which is not there, and at the end of two weeks the constructor comes back.  There are 60 dams in Karamoja, which ought to be desilted.  The issue of crossing will not be there, the Karimojong will be stabilized like the people of Mbarara.  They were also moving like the Karimojong but now they are settled.  They have been given water; do the same for the Karimojong.  

On the other hand, it is not only the neighbors who are suffering, even inside Karamoja it is worse; it is hell.  Every other day people are going from county to county.  So, we would like the disarmament programme to come so quickly to save us, both the neighbors and the Karimojong.  But come with a humble heart; do not come like you are going to the enemies. I would like to inform you that so far we have a complaint of our property being taken.  I do not mind about the guns, the source of the guns is now closing because if peace is now in Sudan, there are no more guns that will come.  But the source of ammunitions will never come to an end.  So, that is the question we have to find out, where does it come from?  Guns will stop, but ammunitions will never come to an end.  But let us disarm the people and deploy them according to the programme that was designed to handle this.  Thank you.

MR GODFERY KIWANDA (Mityana County North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I will start with this statement that reads: “Generally the security situation in the entire country is relatively peaceful.”  This is a very encouraging statement, and I wish we could improve on this.  Mr Speaker, I hope the next time the minister is presenting a statement, he will say that “Generally the whole country is peaceful.”  We all pray to achieve peace in the country.

Mr Speaker, when the minister was reading the statement, he talked about the two ranks of Mr Banya.  One, as Major Kenneth Banya and Brigadier Banya.  Actually the second one, the minister said that this is a bandit title, but in the Army the rank means a lot.  You know, some of us at a certain time we associated with the Army, and we still do associate with it.  But the issue of the rank means a lot.  Some of these people who are saying that when you come out, your rank is going to be wiped away, it might cause some people not to come out of the bush.  We know that this man who has come out is called Brigadier and we will continue calling him a Brigadier.  After some time, may be when we have achieved the other statement I talked about, we take them for training, whether somebody qualifies to be a real Major or a Brigadier.  But when somebody has just come out of the bush and you say, “You have been a Brigadier, but that is a bandit rank.  You are just a Major.”  I mean, in the Army a rank means a lot.  So, my point is, when they come out, let them retain their ranks for a certain time and after some time we shall take them for a course to see whether they qualify for that rank or not.  

I would like also to commend the work of the auxiliary forces.  Of course, when I talk of the auxiliary forces, I include the Arrow, Amuka, the Home Guards and the Karimojong. When I was training, I trained with some Karimojongs; it seems they are many on the ground to guard against the rebel activities.  But the issue of payment of these auxiliary forces is very important.  They helped so much to combat this insurgency, but they might turn against us.  When I was in this region, I saw most of them – you could be in a barracks for something like a week, you do not see them, but at the time of payment you see them coming with the guns to be paid.  These boys go home with the guns and if they are not paid, something bad can be done with this gun.  These are young people, they have a lot of demands, they sacrifice their lives and they are given the guns to keep!  So, this UShs60,000, which is paid to them, should be paid to them promptly. The issue of the payments should be looked into so that these people do not take out this money.

The discipline of the Army is really commendable.  Actually my people, they are now calling them the nuns.  The last time when I was contributing here, I said it is better to meet a soldier other than meeting some of the professionals whom I may hesitate to mention.  But as we are concluding the war, I know with excitement the discipline might deteriorate.  So, it is my humble request to the Commanders who are in the field to continue observing the high calibre of discipline the UPDF have shown. So that at the end of the war, even with anxiety and the excitement that they have captured Kony, they will not take us back into the undisciplined army. Because when you read about the history of this war, there was some kind of indiscipline at the end of another war, which cropped up into another war because of the indiscipline by the armed forces.  So, the discipline should be really encouraged.

Finally, Mr Speaker, I would like to appreciate the Sudan Government for the goodwill.  You know, Sudan Government has done its real best; we need to appreciate this as Ugandans.  Yes, some people are saying they have just- I think that is why we are getting all these achievements.  We should encourage them that we are ready to handle Kony, if they can capture him, they should give him to us; and if Kony is going beyond the red line, as the minister has informed us, we should be given more space to look for him.  UPDF should be given more space and we are informing the Sudan Government that our army is a very disciplined army; it shall only do the work that it has been sent to do.  

We encourage our sons and daughters of the UPDF and the auxiliary forces to continue pursuing this enemy.  We are here to support them in whatever way possible, given the budgetary allocations, to make sure that we end this problem.  It has been so long, eighteen years; this war has killed our economy and our name outside.  We are positive this war will come to an end.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Well, I remember, hon. Awori, you are the one who raised this issue.  I will give you an opportunity.  We have been dealing with this debate for over an hour.  I do not intend to hold this debate for more than 30 minutes.

5.40
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe North, Busia District):  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I would also like to thank the hon. minister for making this statement and situation report from the warfront.  Mr Speaker, I would also like to thank you because I had asked earlier for an opportunity to ask urgent questions pertaining to the security situation at home and in Sudan, and he has answered some of the questions.  

However, Mr Speaker, I am concerned about the International Criminal Court (ICC) report or statement on ICC for the following reasons. I would like to know the financial implications of involving ICC in trying a local bandit?  Mr Speaker, once again the Ministry of Defence is involving Uganda in unnecessary legal costs.  Not long ago, we had to settle a bill of over US$600,000 for engaging lawyers to defend us at the Hague.  I looked at that file and I noted with great concern that the same hon. minister was the one in constant touch with these lawyers, and at a certain period he forgot about them. I saw the correspondence where they kept reminding him whether he was still interested in the case at the Hague.  At the end, they threatened us, and I was sitting on a committee of Finance where this bill was presented to us, and we had to move money from one account to another to cover this unnecessary cost, which was partly due to negligence on our part.  

Mr Speaker, it is in the same vein I am wondering whether we are not about to incur unnecessary legal costs for pursuing a matter, which can be handled locally.  I would like to know from the government whether we have a treaty of extradition with Sudan, and if indeed we have a treaty, should Sudan capture Kony, they can hand him over to us and we try him as a bandit.  We do not have to go all the way to International Criminal Court (ICC) to pursue a local bandit.  It is very clear in our laws and statutes here that should anybody be found with an assault rifle, you are liable for court martial whether you are a civilian or whatever category. Why are we wasting time and money engaging outside bodies to do our local work?  Mr Speaker, I see on page 1 -(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: I would like to thank hon. Awori for giving way and I am standing to give a point of information.  The issue we are discussing today is very important.  If we have gone to the level of taking the matter to the International Court in the Hague, and spending - of course we will inevitably spend money - why do we not also begin understanding that there is need for us to accept that the northern Uganda is a disaster area because we have gone to the extent of reporting the matter so that action is taken?  Why should we have reached the ladders in the Hague without accepting that we have a disaster area in the north?  The Government is being challenged now; they should understand what I am talking about. 

MR AWORI: Thank you, hon. colleague.  It is indeed true what you are saying that we like to spend money where it is not necessary.  Where we need the money, we are most reluctant.  We wanted to spend money on our own people who are in need, victims of this unnecessary war; the government was most reluctant.  But on December 18th last year, the government was running to some European City to ask them to come and try Kony, whom we have not even captured, to start investigating whether Kony should be prosecuted for atrocities committed.  Who does not know in this country the atrocities committed by these bandits?  Do we need a foreigner to tell us Kony has been committing atrocities in this country?  Do we have to pay for that kind of unnecessary service?  Mr Speaker, really, is it inferiority complex -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Member, why do we have courts trying in Rwanda, Liberia and Sierra Leone?  What is the difference?

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, in case of Liberia and Sierra Leone, where I am very familiar with the situation, Mr Speaker, the government was shaky. Actually in the case of the two countries, they were literally no governments in place.  These bandits were literally running these countries.  It was necessary for international organizations or communities to come in and establish law and order, and figure out the level of atrocities that these bandits were committing.  

In our case here, I assume that we have a stable government, I assume we have laws against banditry and I assume we have got the capacity to investigate any kind of atrocity.  Mr Speaker, if this is a matter of international publicity to impress Americans so that Americans can put Kony on the list of international terrorists, so that you can qualify for some grants from the Americans to fight international terrorism as exemplified by Kony, let us be direct.  But for us to waste additional resources going to some international organization to investigate a matter, which is very clear to all of us, Mr Speaker, I say no.  I would like to tell the government, please commit our resources where we need them most.  Where we do not need, we can handle the situation ourselves.

Mr Speaker, assuming that I accept the position of the government, that you can go abroad to look for an international prosecutor, do we have a statute of limitations on some of these issues?  If so, what is the cut-off period?  I note here that even in the last sentence, which was very brief, that in the event that one of our own soldiers committed an atrocity, he shall be tried.  Are we saying a UPDF soldier shall be subject to ICC when we have got the court martial here?  Why do we have to do that?  It is not necessary.  We have hired Ssempebwa to prosecute some of our alleged errant officers before a court martial.  We ignored the Attorney General’s Chambers, we went to a private law firm, now this time we are going even abroad to get the Mzungu to look into atrocities committed by our own people.  Mr Speaker, I find this totally superfluous.  

Mr Speaker, again on the specific terms on the statute of limitation, it is known by people of Gulu what happened in Pece stadium in 1991, whereby even the World Bank Officials were told, “Do not cross Karuma.” All missionaries who had communication equipment were pulled out of the north.  What was going on behind the lines?  Are we going to bring those officers, who were committing certain atrocities, before the ICC or the statute of limitation exempts them?  

MR OULANYAH: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and hon. Aggrey Awori for giving way.  The International Criminal Court operates on the principle of complimentarity and concurrent jurisdiction.  Complimentarity means the government of Uganda would compliment the efforts of the ICC in prosecuting whoever has been found indictable under that Statute.  Concurrent jurisdiction also means that the government of Uganda has jurisdiction to try the criminals just as the ICC has the same jurisdiction.  So, the jurisdiction to try these people is concurrent.  The ICC can actually not even carry out the trials in the Hague, but they can carry out trials in Uganda. The ICC is a completely supported international court with its own funds and with its own investigation machineries of finding out all these things.  

Now, on limitation, the Rome Statute was created to handle cases from the date that the Rome Statute came into force in July 2002.  Cases that happened before that do not fall within the mandate of the International Criminal Court and therefore they cannot be tried.  But there is no Statute of limitation on criminal activity under our law.  Even if a crime was committed in 1900, that crime is still prosecutable under our laws, and there is no statute of limitation on that.  That is the information I wanted to give you, Sir.

MR AWORI: Thank you so much.  I wish my hon. Colleague was on the Front Bench in either the current Government or future Government.  Mr Speaker, I could not have received more elaborate information on a matter, which was -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You mean you cannot get good information from Back Benchers?

MR AWORI: I am saying, I really appreciate what he has told me, but it is a pity he is still a Back Bencher.  He should be on the Front Bench to give us more information of this kind.  I am not implying that people on the backbench do not have brains, I am simply saying that backbenchers the talent they have is rarely exploited.  There is plenty of it, but only on the frontbench.  However, Mr Speaker, coming back to the point, again on this matter of exemptions, statutory limitation, I have understood, we stop at that period when we accepted the treaty.  Now, what about our local amnesty?  

Some of our people, who committed atrocities and have since surrendered, International Criminal Court (ICC) prosecutor comes and confirms and traces that they committed atrocities, and yet our local amnesty law says, “No, not withstanding what you did, we forgive you.”  Now, are we going to bring them out of wherever they are, enjoying their peace, and put them before the ICC for prosecution?  Which law takes precedence?  I assume it would be our law.  Now, Mr Speaker, these are issues, which are not clear to most of us.  We take it for granted when we make statements here that it is understood; they are not clear.  You cause a lot of contradictions.  This statement of yours is going to be broadcast tonight and even tomorrow in the north.  Now, some people say, “Eh, I thought I had been forgiven.  Now again am I going to be tried by ICC or what?”  So, things like these need to be brought out clearly.  Only learned minds –(Interruption)

MR SEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I have tried to follow the hon. Member holding the Floor and hon. Oulanyah Jacob’s explanation about the complementarity of the ICC.  However, on page 3, I find it categorically stated and in clear terms that, “Should the ICC come across any information or evidence implicating any Ugandan Government official in the commission of any of the crimes complained of, Uganda shall immediately prosecute such officials.”  I wanted to know, is it, say, for the part of those officials under Uganda Government and service, those ones are a preserve of the laws and other tribunals set up under the government?  Does the ICC not have a hand to touch them?  I do not know, possibly what comes to me is that the ICC’s jurisdiction shall largely catch up with the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) and other atrocious elements, but with Government - because we know there are those with acts of omission, which they did not mean to commit, maybe due to negligence, others have been pulled back from their operational areas, others have been put to re-training.  

I need a clarification from the Minister in specific terms, what categories are we subjecting our Ugandan nationals to the ICC, or as it is put here clearly, this is a position of Government such that I may be rest assured that our people, the gallant ones, who perhaps out of oversight or otherwise or out of omission or in any nature, were involved in the commission or omission are not part of this ICC arrangement.  That is the clarification I wanted to seek.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, Finally, on a matter of ICC, I would like to get a categorical statement about the financial implications of ICC getting involved in this prosecution.  

Mr Speaker, now I come to what I consider as a situation report by the minister that it is not really a statement to the august House, but a situation report from the warfront to the general headquarters of the Commander-in-Chief.  Mr Speaker, again this situation report is wanting in very many aspects, again in some cases is superfluous.  If you analyse it from the intelligence standpoint, you get a lot of information, which you should not be releasing to the general public.  

One, there is contradiction in your operations.  You are saying, among other things, that the last time you hit Kony was only eight miles away from Juba, from this little place called Birinyang.  How do you hit somebody around Mukono and you cannot trace him using intelligence?   Really, how?  You fail to get a man who has escaped from you.  Juba is no small town - some of us have been there - it is a sprawling - really what does it say about your soldiers, who cannot track a person down whose wives and children say, “He has just gone to make a phone call.”  Really, what does it say about your intelligence network and about your soldiers?  That kind of information, probably it is not necessary for us because it really makes me believe that some of our money we are giving you is not being put to the best use.  

Mr Speaker, my colleague raised this question of source of ammunition.  Again, when you look at the breakdown we have been given on page 2, this kind of ammunition, anybody familiar with the military hardware, it is generally marked.  It is marked, the boxes, especially for the SPG bombs, those boxes are always – the origin, and I know with Sudan, they always have the Arabic markings.  If they are from the Middle East, they always have Arabic markings.  If they are Russian, they always have those markings.  Very few people, even these smugglers, do they use cardboards without special markings?  Really, from intelligence you should be able to confirm how these people got these ammunitions.  

You have not even told us, these senior officers, including Banya, who you are now parading for third term, according to my friend, really can he not tell us how they move this equipment?  This is not very light equipment; anybody familiar with army hardware, it is not light stuff you just carry in your pockets or your hip.  There must be a method of transportation, which should be established through intelligence sources.  Have we done that?  So, when you bring me a statement like this, really I look at it and I begin to wonder whether the minister - I know it is not your work, it was brought to you.  You should ask those people, “You have brought me this information, I want to extrapolate it, put it in ordinary language so that my colleagues in the House do not read between the lines.”  

Mr Speaker, once again on the number of people, who have been killed, who have been captured.  Mr Speaker, we have heard this story day in, day out, “We have killed so many, only few are remaining.”  Like this time we were being told, Odhiambo - unfortunately we used to know him, I do not know how he got mixed up in this affair. (Interjection) Yes, I know Odhiambo, it is a pity he got mixed up.  He is like Banya, he is a well-trained officer; I do not know how he got mixed up in this situation.  However, Mr Speaker, why do you tell us –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I would like to thank hon. Aggrey Awori for giving way. I am intervening with information on the statement related to “We have killed so many”.  Recently, it is on record, that the Minister of Defence accepted in certain terms that over 98 per cent of the rebels in Kony’s camps are predominantly abudctees.  The information I wanted to give is that, after that submission by the Minister of State, it goes without saying that a number of people reportedly killed are also suddenly killed by UPDF and there is no explanation about that.

THE SPEAKER: That is not different from what the hon. member has said. You are just repeating what the hon. member raised during his submission.  How different is it?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Yes, it is different.  I am saying in a nutshell, that the people reported killed are killed by UPDF with knowledge that they are not necessarily rebels.  That is the information I wanted to give.

MR AWORI: Thank you, my hon. colleague.  On this issue of rebels being killed and, so many left, Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the Government that we are not interested in the casualties; we are interested in peace.  How come the more you kill, the more the number of IDPs keeps on increasing?  What we would like to hear is that, last month the number of IDPs was 1.6, now if number is 0.9, then we say indeed peace is coming back to the north.  But when you keep killing and the number of IDPs keeps increasing, what are you doing, what peace are you bringing to us?  You are just like anybody else killing people.  You are not bringing peace; you are just killing.  What we want to hear is that, “At the end of last year we had –(Interruption)

MR ERESU: When the rebels came to Teso, 43 officers of the LRA were killed and about 700 rebels, ordinary soldiers, were killed; and that has brought peace to Teso.  For that matter, it is inaccessible, and I can tell you that we used to have a camp in Kalaki in hon. Martin Orech’s constituency, I had a camp in Kaberamaido; these camps are not there now. We only have two camps, one in Anyara and the other in Otuboi, but people in those camps are also now moving to their homes.  The information I am giving, Mr Speaker, is that it not only through the process of killing these rebels that peace can return.

MR AWORI: I would like to thank my hon. colleague for the information pertaining to IDPs and peace in Teso district.  We would like to thank all those people who were involved in bringing peace to Teso district, but at the same time I would like to remind those involved in restoration of peace in Acholi and Lango districts, that killing per se, in itself, without bring peace, without helping people who are in IDP camps going back to their respective homes, is not enough.  We want these people back home.  

Mr Speaker, we talked about the sources of ammunition.  I would like to know from my honourable colleague in charge of Defence, what relationship do we have with equatorial defence forces (EDF) militia of Sudan.  For a long time these people were the source of ammunition and military hardware for Kony.  We would like to know whether we have any relationship at all with this organization.  

Two, Mr Speaker, could the honourable minister tell us, what is this rebel Commander of EDF doing in Kampala?  He is using a name called Steven Kasangaki, which is not a Sudanese name.  He is actually using a nom de guerre; he is not a Munyoro, he is not a Ugandan.  But two days ago the BBC correspondent speaking broken Swahili interviewed him in Kampala, and he said a lot about the situation in Southern Sudan vis-à-vis LRA. Is he here by our invitation? –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Would you like others to make a contribution?  Can you wind up, please?

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I would like to wind up on that note that, please, if indeed this man is here by our invitation we do not want any more problems with our neighbours.  We are not a place to harbour rebel leaders.  For heaven’s sake if he is here, can you let him go or send him away?  

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, the minister’s statements are very important for this House and the country, and the manner in which they were brought in I think will not enable many Members of Parliament to give their contribution.  I was requesting, Mr Speaker, that you allow his two statements to be thoroughly debated next week so that we give our input in this discussion.

THE SPEAKER: There will be no sitting next week because I want the committees to fully concentrate on the budget.  I intend today to adjourn for two weeks to enable the committees complete their reports so that we are within time expected to finish the budget, so that we can embark on other matters.

MR SABIITI: So, could you guide us how best we can further discuss this report?  

THE SPEAKER: If you think you need time to study it, well, the best I can do is that you study it for the two weeks besides the budget, and then when we come back you debate it.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI:  Mr Speaker, as I said in my opening sentence, we have a commitment - in fact to answer hon. Aggrey Awori – as a Ministry of Defence, at the prompting of Parliament itself, to regularly update Parliament on what is going on, on the security situation.  So, when I appeared before the Defence and Internal Affairs Parliamentary Committee two days ago, I did brief that committee, but I actually informed them that I would be making a written statement. It covers essentially what I told them in the update. So, we will be coming with more statements - I actually expect to make a statement in two-weeks time to brief Parliament with greater detail on what has happened and what is likely to happen in the next two days because a lot of things are going to happen.  Therefore, people will have the opportunity if they so wish, like they are doing today, to debate and give their views. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Is that agreeable, hon. Sabiiti?

MR SABIITI: Yes, that one is agreeable.  But I would request the honourable minister, when he is coming, he should give more information because I can see there are many questions that any person who has had access to military science - you know, there are things, which are really hanging.  They are hanging and we would like him to be detailed in his reports so that they help us to understand the situation.

THE SPEAKER: Is that agreeable, honourable members?  

MR MWANDHA: I think for now, rather than debate to the extent my colleague, hon. Awori, has done, I think members who have very brief questions should put these questions rather than debate.  There is a difference between a debate and asking certain things that are not clear.  For instance, Mr Speaker, this Major Banya –(Laughter and Interjections)- I am sorry, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Are you now smuggling it in, or you are giving an example -(Laughter)

MR MWANDHA: This Banya, Sir, I do not know what his status is.  Is he a prisoner of war, or is he somebody that is going to be prosecuted because when you watch television, he is being treated like a VIP.  He goes all over the place and waves to people and so forth.  Now, if he was a prisoner of war, I do not think that he would be receiving the kind of treatment that he is receiving right now.  So, this is the question, which I wanted clarified, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: As you heard, honourable member, one member, I think hon. Kiwanda, said that do not remove their ranks to attract the others.  Do you not think that allowing him to go on waving will also attract others to come? 

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I have heard from the minister that he went to the Defence Committee two or three days back, and he informed the Defence Committee that he was coming to make this statement here.  Mr Speaker, some time back we agreed as a House that - there was a resolution actually that the Defence Committee would be making a report to this House regularly- I seem to have forgotten the duration – about every three months, we are supposed to have a report about the security situation.  

Now, the minister went and informed them, and he is coming again to inform us that he is bringing another report, and we are talking about the depth of the statement that is being presented here.  Would it not be prudent if we put what the Minister wishes to bring to us and the observations of the committee, because the committee is capable of inviting other people to come in, then we have a richer and a better statement next time?  Mr Speaker, I would like to be guided.

THE SPEAKER: Well, the only problem, as I said, I have a problem of the budget because it has a time frame; and the history I have seen about this Defence committee, with due respect to the budget process, there were times in the Sixth Parliament when they could not present the report, I think because of the nature of the work they have.  Now your suggestion is that maybe the Defence Committee should go and study this in detail and make its comments on it and then report back.  But I do not know how this will be when they are considering the budget for Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Internal Affairs and related organs of Government.  Otherwise that would work, but I do not know - the Chairperson of the Committee is not here and I do not see –(Interjection)- or you are here? 

MRS KABAKUMBA LABWONI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I am a member of that Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, and actually when the minister informed us that he was going to give this statement, we put it to him that there was a standing resolution of this House for him to be reporting to us, and then we analyse and report to the whole House.  But apparently, he has his ways of doing things.  But otherwise, as a committee, we are ready to receive his reports, scrutinize them, invite other concerned stakeholders and report to this House.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: So, hon. members, in view of that, do we say that the Defence, Internal Affairs Committee -(Interruption)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I am just seeking clarification on this.  I am aware that the Defence Committee was asked by Parliament to make regular reports to Parliament; and in that context; therefore, they can of course demand information about the security situation. As we have done in the past, we willingly do so.  Now, I am not aware that you passed a resolution that I should not speak to Parliament directly on security except through the Defence Committee.  So, I will be happy to have that clarification –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER:  No, that is not that.

MR ATUBO OMARA: Let me inform the House, and I think the Minister of Defence is really correct.  The motion, which I moved - remember it was heavily debated, it had 10 points - and in order to monitor the implementation of those points, it was agreed that every two months or so, the Defence Committee should report to the House on the implementation of those resolutions.  But earlier on before my motion was approved, there was an earlier motion, Mr Speaker, which asked the Minister of Defence or the Government to come on a fortnightly basis to report directly to the House giving an overview of the security situation.  

So, I think what hon. Alaso is saying is that, this seems to overlap with the way we are now seeing it.  The minister gives a fortnight report and then the committee itself looks at those resolutions, ten of them, and also reports to the House.  Otherwise, the minister is supposed to give his own report to the House - that is our resolution.

THE SPEAKER: Well, as I see this statement was to inform us what has happened and the achievements obtained.  But apparently some members think that there are certain other details that they want to get.  Can we, in view of what you have said, say that the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs studies this particular statement and obtains the necessary details, or we note that we have received the statement and then we wait for further development?  Now, in view of that then, should we at least ask the minister to comment on the issues so far raised?

6.09
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank all the members who spoke and those who did not, for appreciating the good work of UPDF in trying to bring closer your hope and dream that Uganda - I think it was hon. Kiwanda who said so - Uganda is fully and totally peaceful.  I thank you very much.  

Secondly, I want to say I really appreciate the criticisms about the quality of the document that I read.  I said that this was done quickly and it could have been better.  I agree with that, and I hope we will do a better job next time.  

Now, quickly can I answer some points, which I thought were critical?  First of all, from hon. Sarah Nyombi, apart from defence being wasteful because of the font, I think it is one of the criticisms I have said we have taken note of.  Next time I will look at the font.

The next question was, “Why not cover the whole country?”  The fact that we are talking about only limited areas means that - to call it a security situation in the country maybe is misleading.  I mean, what we have given you is the situation in the country as well.  But in case one understood it to mean every inch of Uganda, we will next time improve that title.

Then the question of exposing those who have been - especially wives of these commanders and Kony, and therefore risking exposing them to greater trauma, I think we are very conscious of this.  As you know, most of the people that we capture or those who surrender, we actually subject them to the greatest humane treatment available in this country; and I think Uganda has been commended and appreciated for the manner in which we treat people that we capture or those who surrender.  We have many international non-governmental organizations in the north, including World Vision and so forth. These are international expertise to whom we pass these people for the purpose of counselling and management, and that is what we have been doing as a matter of routine.

Hon. Omara Atubo raised very many points.  Of course, he made the same point as hon. Sabiiti.  He thought that I brought this statement on a Thursday at this hour precisely to avoid debate.  Hon. Omara Atubo knows very well, I think he knows me much better than any one in this Parliament that I am the last person to run away from debate.  So, the reason why this happened like this is mainly because - on the International Criminal Court (ICC) statement as I said, the prosecutor formally announced the start of investigation of this matter yesterday.  Yesterday he wrote letters to all the State parties, and it is only today that they have issued a press release themselves to announce this.  So, we had agreed that we would do it on the same day, today, Thursday.

Secondly, as I told you, the events in Southern Sudan, the attack on the Kony base actually happened at 11.30 a.m. yesterday, and I only got the details last night.  So, unless you are suggesting that I wait for another two weeks, I did not see a better time than this to inform this House.  So, when I did ask for permission of the Speaker to give me room, he gave me the time of four O’clock, which I tried to make, and I was here, I think, by 4 O’clock.  So, I am not one to run away from debate, I actually encourage debate. As I said, in two weeks time I will make another statement; if you want it on Tuesday I will do so.

Secondly, I would like to say that there is no propaganda in what I have said.  All the things I have said, as the Speaker said, are simply by way of informing the august House.  I did not even give an opinion. I simply issued out facts, “On this day Kony was attacked, so many were killed, so many captured,” no opinion.  So, it is up to you to interpret it, please feel free.

I agree that it was not as comprehensive as hon. Omara Atubo was saying it should have been.  There have been incidents like those he mentioned. Last week when we were in Gulu, the previous night there had been an incident on the border of Gulu and Apac districts in Oyam North, and so I did not mention this. I just talked in generality and I said I would give examples.  This was not entirely exhaustive, and if Parliament wants me to give that situation report on a daily basis, I can also compile them and give them to you.

On the International Criminal Court, the question of laying on the Table the referral and the letters of notification, I think actually with the announcement by the prosecutor formally, openly, that he was beginning investigation; it is possible that these are now open documents.  But I am going to consult with them, Mr Speaker, because this is not only us.  I will consult with them and if they have no objection, I will lay on the Table these documents.

Now, the question about those who are implicated, whom I talked about and whom my brother, hon. Sekikubo, also talked about, “Who has jurisdiction to try,” and I will answer this by answering hon. Aggrey Awori, who raised very pertinent questions to which we have answers as usual.  

I thank my hon. Colleague, hon. Oulanyah, for giving the answers he gave and I simply want to endorse them that he is right.

First of all, let me repeat what he said on the question of complimentarily.  Mr Speaker, the question of criminal jurisdiction has always been a state of national jurisdiction.  It is the Rome Statute for the first time that has introduced International Criminal Jurisdiction.  There had been some cases where certain situations were responded to internationally.  You remember Hitler after the war, the Nuremburg trials, even Rwanda and Serbian; all these tribunals were impromptu and addressing specific occurrences.  But the Rome Statute for the first time established International Criminal Jurisdiction.  However, the concept of complimentarily is very well and very firmly entrenched in this International Criminal Jurisdiction.  What it means is that nations retain their criminal jurisdiction.  

The International Criminal Jurisdiction is restricted to four or five crimes: one, genocide; two, war crimes; three, crimes against humanity; there is a fourth –(Interruption)- hon. Oulanyah says those are the only ones.  Now, the International Criminal Court has jurisdiction also only to the extent that the sovereign or the territory controlled by the government where these crimes were committed either have no capacity to try them or have no capacity to investigate, get them and try them, or are reluctant to do so.  

Like in Serbia, you remember recently, there is still pending the case of this guy who commanded the Serbian forces in the civil war and the case was referred to the International Criminal Court because there was a perception that his own government was not willing to arrest him and try him in his own country. The President of Serbia himself was a Yugoslavian.  So, where the country has capacity to investigate and prosecute these people, and where the administration of justice is credible, then jurisdiction still remains with the country.  So, the idea of complimentarity therefore is that, like in the case of Uganda, the country feels unable to carry out prosecution of someone they allege is committing those crimes, they can refer the matter to the International Criminal Court; and incidentally the referral can be either by country like we did, or by resolution of the United Nations Security Council or on his own volition; on his own, the prosecutor can investigate and carry out the prosecution. 

So, therefore this answers three questions that were raised.  One, that even if you have an amnesty law, this does not bar the international prosecution of any one who may have committed this crime and falls in the category you have described.  Two, that there is - because you are talking of - well hon. Oulanyah answered it, the question of limitation. The International Criminal Court, its jurisdiction begins with July 2002, not behind.  So, please, hon. Awori, settle down; there is no problem.  Three, that the Officials or individuals who have committed crime inside Uganda either can be tried by Uganda, because we have the competence as hon. Awori was saying, to do so or if we chose to refer them to the International Criminal Court, they can also try them.  That is the implication of everything I have been saying.

MR SEKIKUBO: I am sorry, hon. minister, but the concern I had is that in our referral of 18th December, did we take special care to protect our gallant sons and daughters as the case, say, with the United States, that it is shielding its own nationals in case our sons and daughters find themselves in the same problem?  In our letters of referral of 18th, did we take special care for them because they might have been in the service of their country without necessarily being consciously committing those crimes?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, as my colleague knows very well, the hallmark of this administration is to strictly apply the law.  So, anyone, gallant or not, who commits a crime against the laws of this country or international crime, should expect no protection from this government, none whatsoever.  However - hon. Awori says, including me, but hon. Awori knows that I am not in his category.  So, I am not a candidate.  

I was saying that when we referred this matter we were actually specific and, Mr Speaker, the President has made a statement, the amnesty bill is before this House, we are having in mind a handful of people. In fact, maybe, the Minister of Justice will inform you, or the Minister of Internal Affairs, some amendment will be coming even in this bill in order to take care of certain situations, which position has developed following interaction between Government and many interlocutors in this matter, especially the national governments and NGOs.  But I will let the Minister of Internal Affairs -(Interruption)

MR ANANG-ODUR: I am sorry, Mr Speaker.  This minister, as you know, does not want to be interrupted quite often.  Sir, I have been heartened by the minister’s suggestion that this Government will not tolerate any officer in Government who has committed a crime.  I was just reflecting on the issues, which have come from reports of commissions Government has set up before.  Officers, who committed crimes in the Congo, which were reported only in the Porter report; those who were involved in the junk helicopter gunships; those who imported undersize uniforms for our army and rotten rations for the Army, can he also competently and clearly tell us when these are going to be brought to book?  Thank you, Sir.

MR MBABAZI: Well, I reiterate what I said earlier, that this Government, as has been the case in the last 18 years, will not tolerate any of these crimes.  I do not want to talk about specific cases now because we do not have time for it.  I certainly have an idea about the Porter report. I have an idea about the helicopter report, which you call junk, which I do not call junk.  But if you want, you can raise it as a question; I will come back and answer you.

The question of hon. Omara Atubo of carrying out thorough investigation is very well taken –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. minister, there is an issue of the amnesty, which came from hon. Aggrey Awori.  There are people who might have been involved in these atrocities and so forth, and then they came to take benefit of the amnesty law.  What kind of assurance do you make to those because there could be panic that, “Oh, this is coming, even me -” so, I think the situation needs to be cleared.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Yes, Mr Speaker, I had intended to answer hon. Aggrey Awori when I come to it, but I can answer it now.  It is a clear understanding between the International Criminal Court (ICC) and us that they will not take action that will jeopardize the peace effort, because the whole effort is to try and help in the process of pacifying the north.  Therefore, the number of people - you are making me disclose what maybe hon. Aggrey Awori will hang me for – the number of people to be handled by the ICC does not exceed five.  So, all those who enjoyed amnesty, and as I said earlier, those who come under the amnesty law are free; they should have no reason to fear that this prosecution is going on.

Hon. Ocula asked a number of questions, but I think we have answered quite a few of them in the course of our presentations, mine and hon. Oulanyah’s.  How does ICC operate?  I have answered that; I have given you what the jurisdiction is.  They have the office of the prosecutor; they carry out investigations and actually the international community supports them.  So, for this Serbian, for example, there is an international force, which is hunting for that person.  So, should Kony be indicted, and should he be indicted before we capture him, who will look for him in order to compel him to appear before this committee?  It is not Uganda; if they ask us we shall lend a hand, but actually it will be international forces.

How will its decision be executed?  Well, I think they can commit you to prison.  As you know, even now in the Hague there are many people who are in jail in the Hague, even pending trial, like the former President of Yugoslavia is in jail in the Hague, pending trial.  

The next question, which was raised by many members, is a question of abductees being killed.  It was raised by hon. Ocula, repeated by hon. Ken Lukyamuzi twice.  This question, I have answered here before.  When we carried out operations, for instance, against the five camps in March/April 2002, the first time we went into Southern Sudan, it took a very long time, and in fact we really did not have very many people because we were conscious of the fact that there were abductees.  In fact we took a long time trying to gather intelligence about who was an abductee in this camp, who was armed or who was not armed.  Ultimately, when we attacked we did not use all the firepower at our disposal precisely because of that.  We did not use long range, we did not use air bombardment, we did not use anything that would kill indiscriminately; we relied on using foot soldiers, the infantry, in order to minimize harm and injury to abductees and this has been consistent.  

THE SPEAKER: Please wind up.

MR MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  So, I want this Parliament to know that we are very conscious of that.  But I also want to say that when these children are abducted - many of the combatants are abductees, not 98 per cent, but very many. When they are abducted, you know what happens, they go and force them to train. They take them out, especially to areas where they are very well known, such as their own villages, to commit crime. They make you kill even your relatives and take you back in order to make you a fugitive from the law and from your own people. Your fear is that if you go back, because you committed that crime in the gaze of everyone, then there might be something the society may visit on you. So, this is a way of making them fear coming out and that is why they fight. Some of them, by the way, get converted. 

I should tell you that one of the Aboke Girls was rescued by UPDF, she was put in World Vision centre; she was counselled. This counseling there is not for a long time, and when she was released and sent home, she went back to Kony. We have captured her a second time. So, some of them get convinced and they join willingly. But the critical thing is, when you are in battle and you are firing at the enemy position and the enemy position is firing back at you, surely nobody should suggest that our people should simply dodge the bullets and then go and say, “Well, this one who is firing is not firing as – (Ms Akwero rose_)- The Speaker clearly indicated – I would have loved to hive your information –(Interruption)

MS AKWERO ODWONG: Just to supplement on how the abductees escape. Mr Speaker, for the case of the abducted children, I wish to give commendation and appreciation to the UPDF and the other auxiliary forces because many of these children have escaped after the UPDF engaging the rebel forces. Many of them get opportunity to escape. You may recall that about three weeks ago, even the Protestant Bishop of Kitgum Diocese escaped when the UPDF engaged the rebels; his captor was shot dead. 

So, we should thank the UPDF that most of them, although some are killed, come out because of the engagement of the UPDF against the LRA. Please continue with the firepower, the battle is almost over.   

MR MBABAZI: Thank you very much, my sister, hon. Akwero Odwong. 

The other questions, which hon. Ocula asked about the President complaining about religious leaders, and about Mr Banya being taken to public rallies, well, I do not think time allows me to go into this. In the case of the President, maybe you will give him the opportunity to explain it when he comes.  

As for Mr Banya; he has been going around and he has been quite helpful. He has been on radio, and he has actually given us a lot of information as to what has been happening. He is one of those who joined that struggle right from the beginning in 1987. So, he is a repository of information about LRA; he is like an encyclopedia.  

Now, hon. Abura, I must state now and in the presence of all these hon. Members that we fully appreciate the great work done by Karamoja to fight and defeat rebellion. They did so in the last so many years. I actually have said so; I addressed the Karimojong some time ago at Makerere. I presented a paper and we do appreciate it; and even today you know we have appreciated the support Karamoja has given to, not only Government, but also to the rule of law. That is why we are working very cautiously to ensure that those in Karamoja, who are in illegal possession of arms and are putting them to wrong use and harassing their neighbourhood, so that Karamoja does not get a tainted face. 

Hon. Omara Atubo, we thank all the NGOs and religious groups, and the Amnesty Commission. I must register our thanks to them all.  

Hon. Kiwanda raised the question of payment in addition to other points, which I have answered.  To auxiliary forces, I want to tell you that we are doing everything possible to make sure that this payment is done on time. But as you know, Mr Speaker, this Parliament passed a supplementary very close to the end of the financial year, and you know it is a process. We managed to move from Ministry of Finance to Ministry of Internal Affairs, and then it came. We were four months in arrears, we have paid two months so far and we shall pay the other two months in the next one week. We will have paid everything and will be up to-date.  

I have answered almost every question raised by hon. Aggrey Awori, and I think that I will take his criticism positively and I want to assure him that all the information I have given is information meant for hon. Members of Parliament and the public. I am fully conscious of the fact that it is not likely to prejudice national security.

On Equatorial Defence Forces (EDF), I would say that we do not really have a relationship with them as such except that EDF was a militia of the government, which was fighting against SPLA. In fact it is true, as hon. Aggrey Awori said - sometimes he picks peripheral information - that EDF did indeed support Kony. But following talks in Sudan of the Sudanese in Kenya, and following, especially the agreement by the Sudan Government and SPLA, that even those who were in Government force including their militia and their regulars would be left behind in the South when the Government force moves away from there, and SPLA takes over fully the South under this agreement, EDF, like others, decided to take a step ahead without waiting for implementation of that agreement.  So, they have crossed the Floor – I am giving the example of Parliament here - and they are solidly with SPLA now. 

As a consequence, Mr Speaker, only last week Kony, actually as I said in this statement, they went and attacked them in search of food but also in anger because these were erstwhile allies. So, I hope we will develop a relationship with EDF so that their effort contributes positively to Uganda Government effort to pacify the North. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Minister.  Honourable Members, I thank you for your time and diligence in handling the parliamentary work. 

Today I received a memorandum from religious leaders and one of their concerns was about the transparent manner of transition to multi-party system. I assured them that as far as we are concerned, we are going to do everything possible to ensure that the transition is transparent. One of the ways of contributing to this transparency is the way we are going to handle the constitutional and legal provision that will come to effect that transition. In order to do so, we shall need a lot of time not to rush them, and in order to have a lot of time to do that we need to finalize the budget for this year. Because of this I appeal to you that from tomorrow you should sit full time, morning and afternoon, to complete the work in your respective committees so that we finish the budget process before the end of August. According to the Budget Act, we must complete the process by 31st August, but should we finish this work before 31st August, then we shall embark on those other laws pending before us so that we are ready to receive the White Paper and then the Bill so that we handle that programme fairly in good time and then complete in good time. Because of this, I am adjourning our sittings here for two weeks so that we come back on 17th August with reports so that we can act as a Committee of Supply and finish the budget process.  

I appeal to all of you to attend to your committees. Recently I was receiving reports that some committees lacked quorum and the meetings have been aborting. I do not want to repeat this many times because if I do, you know the implications.  So, I am sincerely appealing to you to concentrate on parliamentary work in the committees so that when we come back we have all the reports then we just push them through so that we save on time.  

With this, we have come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until 17th August, when we shall resume the plenary to act as a Committee of Supply.

(The House rose at 6.57 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 17 August 2004.)



