Wednesday 28th July, 1999.

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in the International Conference Centre, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

(The House was called to order)

READING OF THE PROCLAMATION DECLARING THE INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE CENTRE AND ITS SURROUNDINGS AS PRECINCTS OF PARLIAMENT.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proclamation by Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi, Deputy Speaker of Parliament of the Republic of Uganda.  

Whereas at the close of the 23rd Sitting of the First Meeting of the Fourth Session of Six Parliament on Thursday the 22nd of July 1999, I adjourned the Parliament to resume proceedings on Tuesday the 27th day of July 1999 at Parliamentary Chambers, Parliament House, Kampala; and 
whereas the said Parliament has been rendered unusable owing to structural problems that have led to the collapse of the ceiling and extensive leakage of water into the chambers; and 
whereas it has become expedient that Parliament sits at this part of the premises of Nile Hotel International, known as International Conference Centre to resume proceedings; 
Now therefore, I, Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi, Deputy Speaker of Parliament of Uganda in exercise of powers conferred upon me by the Constitution, the National Assembly Powers and Privileges Act and Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda hereby proclaim and declare the said International Conference Centre, including its fore-court, yard, garden, to be precincts of Parliament for the purpose - and other subsequent meetings of the First Meeting of the Fourth Session of Parliament beginning today the 28th day of July 1999 at 2.35 p.m. given under my hand at Parliament House, Kampala, this 28th day of July , 1999.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, as you realise, we are in a new home which is a bit different from our usual place in the Parliament House, and we may have to adjust some of the rules that we have been following in that House. Namely, if a Member wants to catch the eye of the Speaker to be able to speak or to contribute, he has to stand but because of the new arrangement, this will have to change so that any hon. Member who wants to catch the eye of the Speaker, he has just to put up his hand, and once he has been named, then he begins his address while sitting and not standing.  That is the adjustment we have to make until we shift to our old home.

BILLS
FIRST READING 

THE ELECTRICITY BILL, 1999

THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs. Syda Bbumba) Mr. Speaker, I wish to move that Bill No.7 of 1999 entitled 'The Electricity Bill, 1999' be read for the First Time. I beg to move.

DEBATE IN REPLY TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT'S ADDRESS TO PARLIAMENT ON THE STATE OF THE NATION .
 
MAJ. KAZOORA:  Point of Procedure.  Mr. Speaker, I am really surprised on the trend of the events.  When the Order Paper is made, I am sure proper consultations are done. We have now heard an item which was supposed to be addressed by the hon. Minister of Works,  and he is not in the House. The hon. Minister of State for Defence is just walking in. The Item was called out and the Rt. hon. Prime Minister just sat without telling us what is happening. We are here having run away from Parliament House; we had expected the Minister to explain this.  Mr. Speaker, are we really conducting serious business or we are just circussing?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, I quite appreciate the point which you have raised, but it could be that, maybe, there was consultation that the Minister could give a Ministerial Statement. Maybe, they might have gone to the old place - the Parliament House - but, well, now I have seen one Minister, he has come in, and in fact, I think he was here when I entered.  Well, I quite appreciate the point you have made but now what I suggest is this, since now we are only winding up the debate on item No.6 and we only going to listen to the hon. Nsubuga Mayanja, the mover of the motion, I suggest that we dispose of this item then we shall revert to item No.5 and the others.   

MR. NSUBUGA MAYANJA (Ntenjeru North, Mukono): Mr. Speaker, I thank you very much.  I also thank the hon. Members for the overwhelmingly support they gave me on my motion.  I am convinced that His Excellency the President was deservedly and convincingly thanked by the hon. Members.  I also thank you, Mr. Speaker, the Clerk and hon. Dick Nyai for clarifying that I and hon. Fiona Egunyu did what is done in other democracies, most particularly of Britain, that is that Back Benchers appreciate Government policy and express their thanks for the policy.

Turning to the issues which were addressed by the President and ably debated by hon. Members, the economy and the related matters, as well as security took much of the time and I think the hon. Members -(Interruption)

MR. AGGREY AWORI: Point of clarification.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to draw the attention with the hon. Member on the Floor, that he is referring to a procedure in Westminster which is not applicable here.  When he says that he has the authority to represent the Front Bench or the Executive Branch of the State in such a matter, I doubt whether such authority is applicable here. If that was so, Mr. Speaker, then some of us should also be allowed to say or to express our views on behalf of the opposition.

MR. NSUBUGA MAYANJA: Mr. Speaker, I read on this matter and  I asked the highest authority in this House and I therefore feel that I am on the right track.  

I was going to the issue of the economy as expressed by His Excellency the President. He was very correct to say that there is growth, he was very correct to say that inflation has been controlled, he was also very correct and very sincere, intellectually honest to say that despite our growth and despite controlling  the inflation,  we are still very far and I think even Members who felt not very satisfied with the aspect of growth, concurred with the President in saying that, we are still far and we can work harder to reach a better position. But most important, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members -(Interruption)

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Point of Procedure. Thank you Mr. Speaker. I am seeking your guidance with regard to procedure. I appreciate that the hon. Member holding the Floor is over zealous in expressing himself and as such, his voice is actually overwhelming the room. If he could a little bit reduce so that we can hear him, I will appreciate.  I thank you Mr. Speaker.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, the Member can adjust, but to be over-zealous, I personally do not understand; but hon. Member you have heard. Please, adjust.

MR. NSUBUGA MAYANJA: Yes, I have taken note of hon. Okumu Ringa's request. I was saying that when appraising our current economic situation, we must reflect on where we were and how far we have gone. We are talking of a situation where driving from Kampala to Jinja took over three hours and now we can drive there in less time.  We are also talking of a situation where I was looking for a chit for allocation of things like sugar, salt and soap.  So, if you can now go to the shops and buy things, at least, we have moved and feel more effort will make us go where we want to be. That is, everybody will enjoy a high standard of living  which we are all looking forward to have. 

I also wanted to reply on the economy; most Members were really concerned about the banks and the closure. I also feel concerned but I want to bring out two points.  One; that it appears some Members tended to think  that the closure or insolvency of banks is consonant with an economy which is doing badly.  I want to tell hon. Members that the world since 1980 has seen 67 crisis in finance systems, 52 of these were in developing or transitional economies but 15 were in very developed countries which we all admire.  In particular, in the United States of America, we had 5,270 bank closures between 1980 and 1996.  Japan has had a similar experience, actually a worse experience than ours, and I therefore,encourage Members to just think about the way we change the crisis to normal rather than being defeated by a temporary situation.  

I now want to comment about security. Almost all Members who stood up thanked His Excellency the President for the olive branch and called for the amnesty law to be passed as a matter of utmost urgency.  His Excellency the President was also concerned about this and among the bills, at the end of his Speech, exhorts us to pass the Amnesty Bill as a matter of urgency. The President must be thanked for this because every Ugandan, and actually even non-Ugandans who are pro-Uganda are not happy if the insecurity continues and should assist His Excellency the President to achieve this amnesty by passing the law as fast as the most possible.

Another issue which Members discussed at length and appreciated very much and thanked the President for, was the issue of UPE but almost all Members were concerned about the quality which is being provided under UPE and I am sure Government is very concerned such that when one looks at the budget for the year 1999-2000, 35 billion have been allocated for completing 6,100 classrooms, 15 billions have been allocated for text books and 10 billions for the instructions materials. Therefore, I am convinced that His Excellency in his manifesto, having emphasised UPE as a major social issue, has put in everything to make sure that UPE is a success and it is not just a mere show.

The President dwelt at length on the issue of poverty eradication  and he insisted that in order for us eradicate poverty, we must increase household income.  This is universally proven that for an economy to grow, household incomes must be increased because the saving ratios of our country are major input in our economy, the lower they are the more vulnerable it can be and the more we shall depend on donors and consequently we shall suffer a big debt burden. I therefore, thank the President for having tried to go around the country explaining the importance of household incomes, and I also request Members to take serious note of this and help His Excellency the President in his effort to eradicate through increase of household incomes.

Regarding roads, I was very pleased particularly with hon. Dombo. His bridge, the Budumba Bridge, and many roads were repaired.  I have also noted that to this effect in our budget for this year, 9,600 kilo meters of main roads will be maintained at the cost of 25 billion, it has been allocated and more money has been allocated also for feeder roads. 

The Prime Minister has responded before me and has ably dealt with matters which were raised in the state of the national address and we have moved this motion and debated it at the moment when our Budget is going to be debated on very soon.  So, the Policy Statements regarding all the matters you have raised and the questions which you have asked and those which you have not asked, I am sure will be answered during the course of the debate on the Budget Speech. I therefore beg to wind up -(Interruption)

MR. MWANDHA: Point of order. Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, is it in order for the hon. Minister of State in Charge of Economic Monitoring to undress in this House, is it in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is out of order. He has complied. Hon. Members, I now put the question that "Thanks of Parliament be recorded for the clear and precise exposition of Government policy contained in the Address on the state of the Nation by His Excellency the President to Parliament on Wednesday, 22nd June, 1999."

(Question put and agreed to)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE (Mr. Steven Kavuma): I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, I must say I regret the inconvenience caused at the beginning of the Session when I had temporarily left the Chambers, only to come back and find that I had been called on by the hon. Speaker to make this Statement.  But I did not intend to cause any disharmony in the workings of the House.  I was trying to see whether I could organise quickly some copies of the Statement for hon. Members so that when I make it, they would be able to follow it.  As it turned out, Sir, it was not possible within those three minutes to achieve that, and I had to run back to the Chambers.

I wish to make the following statement about the alleged arrest of hon. Daniel Omara Atubo, and his short stay in our barracks in Gulu which has been widely misconstrued as an arrest.  I am aware of this matter and the fact that it has caused to some hon. Members of this hon. House some concern.  I will, Mr. Speaker, also give the background which led to the incident, that is the death of Brig. Smith Acak. 

First and foremost, Sir, I regret the delay in making this Statement.  This is due to the fact that when the incident happened, I was away out of the Country on official duty.  Hon. Members, Government and indeed the UPDF have no ill-feelings against any Member of Parliament.  Our policy is to avoid any intimidation to anybody, and as hon. Members know, Mr. Speaker, the UPDF forms part of the electorate who voted us into this august House, and the trust and confidence they have in this House is without question.  

In January, 1999, that is this year, Government Security Agencies received unconfirmed reports on the creation of a new rebel group to operate in some areas of Lira and Apac Districts.  These reports were later confirmed in April, this year.  It was then that intelligence monitoring and surveillance in the Lira-Apac region was stepped up.  It was further established that the new group was calling itself, "Citizen Army for Multi-party" - CAM in short.  

By May, 1999, intelligence gathering had established that the new group was conducting selective recruitment targeting Army deserters and retired X service men and was being financed by leaders based in London, Lusaka, Nairobi, Kampala and Lira town.  

Let me at this stage mention some of the incidents which occurred before the encounter of the 18th day of July, 1999.  

1. On the 31st day of May, 1999, 12 armed camp militants attacked Boroboro Police Post in Lira where one policeman was killed and his rifle taken.  In that attack, leaflets stamped with a camp stamp were dropped.

2. On the 24th day of June, 1999, Brig. Smith Opon Acak with a platoon of camp rebels moved from Abako to Aloi areas.  Brig. Smith Opon Acak was mobilising camp leaders, drafting operational plans and meeting some political leaders in the region.  

3. On the 28th day of June, 1999, nine camp militants raided Lira town. This attack claimed one innocent life at the rebels hands and the rebels looted two million shillings. They later withdrew towards Amac in Lira.

4. On the 9th day of July, 1999, Brig. Smith Opon Acak established a rebel camp about eight kilometres  on Lira-Apac road at a place called, Baropok.  This camp basically acted as the Mobile Command Post from where all meetings and recognisance missions were directed.  

Hon. Members, after one weeks of intensive surveillance on the camp mobile command post, the UPDF intelligence personnel confirmed that the rebels had completed drafting their operational plan and were scheduled to attack four police posts for arms and ammunition. They were also to kill some prominent people in Lira and Apac. In order to prevent what would have been a catastrophe in the region and Uganda as a whole, the UPDF decided on a quick operational mission.  

On the morning of Sunday 18th July, 1999, the UPDF launched a dawn attack on the enemy camp at Baropok, and when fire exchange had stopped, the operational commander ordered for a check of the area in order to make an assessment of the outcome of the encounter. The check established the following: on the side of the UPDF, one soldier had been shot dead; on enemy side, two rebels were shot dead and they were later identified as Brig Smith Opon Acak and Lt Benson Ajan.

I wish to emphasise that the late Brig. Smith Opon Acak was killed while in combat at the CAM Baropok camp .  I want to emphasise this because voices have been raised and heard elsewhere alleging that the late Acak had been murdered from some other place and the body carried to the camp - the late Acak was killed in action in battle at the camp at Baropok.  

Four rebels were captured alive and these were useful in giving additional information to State Agencies.  Some equipment was also captured, and this included three AK 47 sub-machine guns, two pistols, four stick grenades, one camp stamp, 50 loose pistol ammunition, 11 empty magazines, one walkie-talkie and a lot of vital documents of security interest.

The soldiers who conducted the operation sighted hon. Daniel Omara Atubo driving a minibus No.UAZ 232 which the captives had stated as having ferried some of them to the place where the fighting took place.  The soldiers were inevitably agitated by this development, and the Officer-in-Charge radioed the Army Commander who was in Gulu at the headquarters of the 4th Division and briefed him. 

The Army Commander quickly advised the I.O to take hon. Omara Atubo to the 4th Division Headquarters at Gulu for hon. Atubo's safety, since his apparent linkage to the fateful incident had caused a lot of anxiety in Lira and could definitely be dangerous to his security and safety.  The Army Commander genuinely sought to protect hon. Daniel Omara Atubo. 

Hon. Daniel Omara Atubo was warmly received at the 4th Division Headquarters by the Army Commander at 9.00 p.m. on that very Sunday.  There ensued a very cordial discussion about the Baropok incident between the hon. Daniel Omara Atubo and the Army Commander and they also discussed other general issues, and I am informed reliably too, that hon. Daniel Omara Atubo was grateful to the Army Commander for the initiative he had taken to invite our hon. Colleague, Member of Parliament, to our Gulu Barracks  for his safety.

Hon. Members, hon. Daniel Omara Atubo did, at one point, raise the issue of his drugs with the Army Commander and the Army Commander advised that the drugs could be obtained from Laco Hospital since it was nearby.

Hon. Daniel Omara Atubo replied that since he was not in a critical condition, it was not necessary to go for the drugs from hospital and that his wife could bring the drugs the following morning.  Hon. Speaker and hon. Members, the discussion I have referred to about the Army Commander and hon. Atubo went on until some time past mid-night when both the Army Commander and his guest retired to bed.  

On the 19th July, 1999, the Army Commander and his guest once again met and had breakfast together.  Having assessed the situation in Lira, the Army Commander advised hon. Daniel Omara Atubo that he could safely go back home and continue with his activities. Hon. Daniel Omara Atubo at his own option, travelled to Lira with Col. Oketa and Maj. Mwesigwa who were scheduled to meet the district council later in the day.

Let me comment on the words which were attributed to the 4th Division Intelligence Officer, Maj. Mwesigwa. Following Press reports which alleged that the Major had said "We  shall wait for them where there is no immunity, ...".  Investigations were carried out in the matter and then it was found that Maj. Mwesigwa had been misquoted.   What the Major actually said, when asked by Press men on what to say on Opon Acak's killing at the battle at Baropok was that there was no immunity at the battle field. 

I wish to reiterate Government policy of non-interference in the lawful activities of the hon. Members of Parliament while they perform their duties.  Government takes hon. Members of Parliament as partners in serving our Country. We therefore call upon hon. Members to understand the circumstances under which a colleague spent a night in our Gulu Barracks.  

As indeed I had been informed reliably too, that hon. Daniel Omara Atubo, himself, had understood those circumstances very fully and had appreciated them, I was therefore surprised to read from the Press the other day that hon. Daniel Omara Atubo has threatened to sue Government over alleged arrest.  I hope the hon. Member was misunderstood or misquoted by the Press.  

Lastly, Sir, I want to state that the measures taken by the Army Commander and the UPDF with regard to hon. Daniel Omara Atubo after the battle at Baropok were taken in absolute good faith, and in the interest and for the security of my Friend and our dear colleague, hon. Daniel Omara Atubo.  I thank you for listening to me, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I do not think I need to draw your attention to Rule 37 which governs such a Statement, and that such a Statement will not attract debate but only questions for clarification can be raised by hon. Members.  As I told you, those who came late, you do not have to stand, you just put up your hand and then you can catch the eye of the Speaker.  

DR. OKULO EPAK: I thank you, Mr. Speaker and I want to thank the hon. Minister for making this rather good Statement.  Mr. Speaker, I am seeking clarification in two areas.  I believe the Government is now sure from its reliable sources of information that there is a dissident group called Citizens Army for Multiparty Politics; and another one was reported in Serere called Anti Referendum Army. I would like the hon. Minister to inform us and assure us those of us who are multipartyists and those who are opposed to the referendum how they will be distinguished from these glorious names of dissident organisations.  Because, to some of us who have a little bit of knowledge of sybanetics, it sounds a bit curious like FOBA was.  It could end up being a terrible instrument of intimidation and infringement on our freedom of association and belief in political association.  

The final clarification I want to make, Mr. Speaker, we have been told by those who are responsible for security some names of persons who are supposed to be associated with these arrangements namely, Col. Ogole and the other one, is it Capt. Ageta.  I would like the hon. Minister to confirm to us that they have received this information reliably and they can prove it.  Because, Capt. Ageta died in 1988.  How he has been revived by the intelligence system so that he was available and he took off at Baropok, it might be another resurrection story.  

As for Col. Ogole I can say with definite certainty and that there are many people in this House and elsewhere who can confirm that Col. Ogole has not for a long time stepped his foot in this country.  I am the Chief of the  "Inomo" clan responsible for him, and I can bet that he is not involved in any dissident activity ; and these kind of stories create a bit of doubt on what is going on. I would like the hon. Minister to clarify these points.  I thank you very much.

MR. ONGOM:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to have a clarification from the Minister about the recruitment that he told us took place or was taking place in Lira leading to the death of Opon Achak.  After the incident, many prominent Langi met in Lira and according to the report, have denied such activities going on in Lira and Apac.  

At the same time, they have also asked for further investigation into the death of Opon Achak.  This seems to be a contradiction of the Minister's assurance that these things took place.  Because if any recruitment took place, these people coming from various parts of Lango should have known since they live there.  Could the Minister tell us whether these Langi were covering up something or something is wrong with the information given to the Government?  

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the Minister also talked of some names which were found as a result of the incident.  In this country, we have been told so many times of list of names for this and that, can we somehow get these names known so that we know who have been collaborating with such incidents?  Thank you.

MR. LWANGA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to thank the Minister of State for Defence for having made the statement that he has made; and I wanted to thank him that this time, he took his time. But, Mr. Speaker, I am bothered by the Minister's statement to the effect that Maj. Mwesigwa was misquoted by the press. I seek clarification from the Minister that in view of the seriousness of the 'misquotation' by newspapers, and in particular New Vision which is a Government owned paper, is Government in the process of taking New Vision to the courts so that they prove that what they put in the papers was a misquotation? Because it is very, very serious for most of us here as Members of Parliament when such a statement comes out through a Government owned paper.  

MS. BAKOKO BAKORU:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I just want a clarification from the hon. Minister.  I want to thank him for his statement and I also want to thank him that hon. Omara Atubo came out very safely after the invitation to Gulu barracks and spent a safe night there.  The clarification I am seeking is, is it because the hon. Minister read from the press that hon. Atubo was threatening to sue Government that he has made a statement today after ten days?  Thank you.

MR. AWORI:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am seeking very simple clarification from the hon. Minister of State for Defence on a matter of the anatomy of the deceased.  Could the hon. Minister tell us whether there was post-mortem on the late Brig. done after the incidence; and if so, how did the fatal bullets enter his body? From the front of his body, or from the back; and how many bullets hit him;  and was there a rifle near the deceased's body?

MR. KYEMBA: Thank you very much indeed, Mr. Speaker.  I was one of the Members who expressed great concern at the statements made after the death of Brig Opon Achak, and I would like to thank the Minister of State for Defence for coming up with the statement to clarify some of the matters connected with the encounter.  I would like some clarification however from the Minister as to what has happened to the spokesmen that this country was told were supposed to speak on military and Government matters? I do not seem to remember having heard the name of Maj. Mwesigwa among those who were supposed to comment on matters affecting the army.  If I missed it, then I am sorry.  

I just wanted to emphasise the point that, matters that affect Government and the army should really be at the highest level so that this country does not have to be told from time to time that some officer has been misquoted.  Certainly the Member for Kyamuswa said that this report was carried by even The New Vision, and we have a right to believe that the comments had something to do with the gentleman who made them. I would like to appeal to the Government to ensure that people who claim to speak for the Government should be the ones that we expect responsible statements from, because, as I did say, many of us were alarmed at the kind of carefree attitude that can be attributed to some of the statements, when events like these happen.  Thank you.

MR. OMODI OKOT: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  At a meeting in Lira, the man in charge of the reserve force for northern Uganda, Brig. Oketa, assured Ugandans that the list of collaborators and persons captured with the rebels was not there.  But, perpetually, we keep listening to sources that say that there are lists of collaborators maybe with the army, with other agents.  I want to ask the Minister to assure this House as to whether in his knowledge there is any list at all for people who should be arrested.  

I am saying this, Mr. Speaker, because this can be one of the idle talks which will lead people to run away. The rain has just come for people to settle down on effective and meaningful agriculture and this is the time for them to settle down.  Can the Minister tell this House whether there is any list at all, and who compiled this list, and when is it likely to be opened.

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  I thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all I want to tell the House that I am safe and fine here in the House.  Thank you.

Secondly, I want to thank the Minister of State for Defence, hon. Steven Kavuma, for the statement he has made to the House, particularly on the aspect which touches me. I am grateful because it has clarified what I have been wondering about all along; at least, I now know that I am being accused of driving a mini-bus and taking rebels to the place where the battle took place.  I thank the Minister for that, because there were so many stories I heard in the press and so on; and I do hope that this is the authoritative, decisive and final Government position on this matter.  

I will be coming tomorrow, with your permission Mr Speaker, on a personal explanation on this matter, and I will be giving a very detailed version of this matter. I will also explain my part of the story.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, I can assure you that with that statement, I am now fully armed on every aspect of my life. 

OKELLO-OKELLO:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like the Minister to clarify who carried out the investigations of Maj. Mwesigwa so quickly; and secondly if the report of the investigation is available. Could the Minister kindly avail that report to the Members so that we rest assured that it was thoroughly done.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mine are only two inquiries.  A year ago, I  and one newsman, Mulindwa Muwonge, were arrested and we spent two days at the Central Police Station. As if that was not enough, our Friend hon. Omara Atubo recently suffered the same crisis.  Is it by coincidence that all the MPs so far arrested on political lines have an inclination towards multiparty governance?  

The second inquiry I am seeking is related to the picture of the late Brig. Opon Achak.  I was passing on Kampala road, and I bought a copy of Etop which is an Iteso paper, it showed the picture of the dead Achak in civilian clothes. How come that the Minister told us that the Brig. was killed in combat uniform?

Lastly, Mr. Speaker, the story told by the Minister of State for Defence is elaborately associated to insurgency.  I would like us to be serious because the way he was telling the story went to extent of telling us that as early as January 1999, inquiries in Lango were started; and the way he was telling us the circumstances in which hon. Omara Atubo found himself in the barracks looked friendly as if he was being expected, as if he was going to be given coffee or tea in a jovial manner. The clarification I am seeking from the Minister, is that is he seriously telling us what happened to hon. Omara Atubo? Is he not exaggerating the story in view of what we have read in the papers?  Thank you very much.

DR. MALLINGA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  One clarification I would like to seek from the hon. Minister is, what the attitude in the army is, and how they regard Ugandan citizens?  In most armies, soldiers are to defend their nation and to defend the citizens against external aggression.  We are witnessing a situation where the UPDF is getting more and more involved in internal affairs, arresting the citizens, sometimes under very doubtful situations. So, I would like a clarification from the Minister what is the policy in UPDF? Are they to defend this country against external aggression or are they involved in the internal affairs of the country and to arrest the citizens?  Are they taking the place of the CID?  Are they taking the place of the police?  I hope the Minister will be able to clarify that.  

Secondly, I think we are all fairly intelligent people. To be honest, I am not satisfied with the Minister's explanation of the statement which was reported to have been issued by one of the officers-in-charge in Lira at the time all these incidents took place. The Minister would have been in a better position if he had taken disciplinary action against the said officer instead of coming up with a fairly lame excuse about the officer concerned -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, as I said, we are not debating the statement. If you have something to ask, ask it.

DR. MALLINGA: I think to wind up, I would say, is the hon. Minister absolutely sure that the statement as reported in the papers was not what the officer concerned said?  Thank you.

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I would also like to thank the Minister for that statement. The clarification I am seeking is, the hon. Minister said that hon. Omara Atubo was invited to Gulu Barracks for safety. Can he clarify who were threatening hon. Omara Atubo's life? He was released the following day. What steps did they put in place to ensure that he was safe that very morning and even today?  Thank you very much.

MS AKWERO ODWONG: Mr. Speaker, we have all eagerly heard the explanation given by the Minister of State for Defence. But I just wanted to hear an assurance from him that after that operation, the CAMP or the Citizens Army for Multiparty Politics has been crippled totally; I am yet to hear whether that operation has succeeded in completely disbanding the CAMP operatives. 

In the same explanation, Sir, the Minister said some rebels were arrested and were still helping the army in investigations. Does it mean that the Army Commander up to now is still stationed in Gulu waiting to receive other visitors arising out of the investigations?  Thank you Mr. Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE (Mr. Kavuma): Thank you very much Mr. Speaker and hon. Members. Sir, I want to thank the Members for the understanding they have displayed in receiving this report, and I will briefly answer some of the questions raised. 

Hon. Okulo Epak raised the question of different rebel groups, CAMP, and then another one in Serere, and he was actually wondering whether some people are safe.  Sir, I can only say that not even the devil knows a man's mind.  But the assurance I can give to law abiding citizens of this country in any corner is that no harm will accrue to them if they are not engaged in any dangerous activities against the security of this country.  

The hon. Member asked about Col. Ogole and Ogetta. Now I did not mention the names of those citizens of this country in my statement, and I can only say that should circumstances arise at any given time to warrant me to address my mind to anyone of them, I will definitely do so; and if it warrants that I come to Parliament and inform you hon. Members about what opinion I have formed, I will definitely do so. As of now, it is not called for. Again as I said, not even the devil knows a man's mind

Hon. Ongom raised the question of people denying any recruitment going on in Lira and Apac. I want very categorically to state that not all people from Lango are bad; not all people from Lango are acquiescing in rebel activities. But I also want to say that there are a few of them who have been tempted to tread this very dangerous path. It is possible that among the people that talked to hon. Ongom, there were those who were denying that there were any stories of recruitment maybe out of ignorance that that kind of thing was going on. Normally these things are done in secret and it is not public knowledge to everybody. It is also possible that others were merely denying as hon. Ongom said. As you know Sir, even when a man knows he is accused of having killed somebody and he is absolutely certain he killed that person, when circumstances arise for him to plea, he will tell the court and the world that he did not kill him. He denies. But what I can say is that we shall leave no stone unturned by way of investigating and bringing to book all those involved in activities that are injurious to the security of this country. 

Hon. Tim Lwanga wondered whether Government was about to take The New Vision to court because of the mis-statement that appeared in the press. I have not thought it appropriate nor is it warranted at this juncture to interfere with the very cherished freedom of the press because of this small matter. I only want to appeal to all the people involved in the profession of informing our people to do so accurately and with a degree of professionalism that will not undermine their image among our increasingly sophisticated society in Uganda.

Hon. Bakoko wondered whether I made the statement today because hon. Omara Atubo had threatened to sue Government. The answer is no. I did explain at the beginning of my statement that first of all, I was out of the country on official duty. When I came back, it was not possible to address Parliament because we had gone into our weekend recess. Yesterday would have been the first opportunity, but as you know, we did not have a sitting. So today is the first opportunity I have had and I want to request all Members to accept my explanation otherwise if any suit is instituted against Government, we do not defend it by statements in Parliament. We go to the court and defend, and should any matter arise out of this transaction, I am sure Government will defend the suit.  

Hon. Awori asked questions about whether a post mortem was carried out on the body of the late Acak. All I can say is that when the relatives of the deceased requested that they wanted to take the body, Government allowed them to take it. I do not know what happened with it thereafter. They could have gone for an autopsy. I would advise hon. Aggrey Awori to contact the relatives on that question.  

Secondly Sir, he asked me about where the bullets entered the deceased; whether the shooting was at close range. I can only refer hon. Aggrey Awori to our experts in this field who are not very few in this country.  But I want to reiterate and I think this will take care of hon. Lukyamuzi's question when he asked what I meant by saying that the late was killed in combat. I want to stress and repeat that the late Opon Acak was killed in action and as hon. Aggrey Awori knows very well. He knew it before I learnt it.  (Laughter).  

Hon. Kyemba asked about the spokes people that were appointed. I share the concern hon. Kyemba expressed, but I can also say that here was a person who was in the area where the incident had taken place being approached by press men to say something, and somebody makes an inquiry. I think it is out of a desire to try and quench the thirst for information to the press who asked about the circumstances of the death that Maj. Mwesigye responded to the question. Otherwise we shall internally look into this matter.  

Hon. Omodi Okot and some other hon. Members also raised a question about a list. I think I was careful and I remember the words I used. I talked of documents being recovered which were of security interest. But it seems some hon. Members may have more information than I have about lists of collaborators. I will definitely be very grateful if they could supply us with this list so that we could enhance our capacity to get as much information as possible. Otherwise I talked about no lists and I would want to leave it at that. 

Hon. Baba Diri asked whom was hon. Omara Atubo being protected from? Sir, I did say that when some of the soldiers who had been engaged in the operations saw hon. Omara Atubo and received information from those who had been arrested that actually the mini-bus had ferried some of them to the battle ground, they became agitated. Hon. Members, going to war, fighting, seeing a colleague shot dead is not as simple as being in Parliament here and we make statements; and it became necessary for the safety of our colleague that all quick measures should be taken to forestall an incident which could have been unfortunate. I have no apologies to make. I think the officers and men who acted, acted responsibly and in the interest of this country and in fact in the defence of our democracy - this was one of our Members - in the interest of our young but growing democracy. Even in those difficult situations, your sons and daughters in the UPDF can exercise restraint and look after your security and safety.  

Hon. Mallinga raised the question of the role of the UPDF in all these activities. I must remind hon. Members, including hon. Mallinga - actually for hon. Mallinga I understand he was out of this country for quite a long time. He has just come back. But as all of us know, all the pillars of this State, the pillars of State meaning the police, the army, collapsed during the decades of misrule. We are still in the stages of rebuilding the police but because it is the cardinal duty of your daughters and sons in the UPDF to protect the lives of Ugandans and their property, they cannot fold their hands when they see lives of these Ugandan being terminated through acts of insecurity. So when a situation arises and the UPDF has to step in, I think we should all understand it as leaders of this country.  When time comes for us to say yes, the police can now do their duty and do it to the satisfaction of all of us, I can assure you UPDF will disengage.  As Minister of State for Defence, I know your daughters and sons in the UPDF would also want to be deployed in those areas which are traditionally areas of the Army, but it is the peculiar conditions that are obtaining which, in the first place, pushed them to go even to the bush, that still cast this heavy burden onto them, and I think we should be grateful and understand it that way.

I think the last question was whether the Army Commander was still in Gulu ready to receive other visitors.  For security reasons, I do not disclose the whereabouts of my commanders, and I would request the Member to allow me not to skate on very thin snow.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members (Applause)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF WORKS, HOUSING AND COMMUNICATION (Mr. J. Nasasira):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  First of all, I want to thank you for understanding that I had to get some information a bit late as Parliament was starting because they were still clearing the collapsed roof, and we were still doing some further investigations before I could make a statement in the House.  

I wish to inform hon. Members of Parliament and the general public through this House that yesterday at 5.30 a.m. a quarter of the Eastern Wing of the concrete roof over the Members' lounge of Parliament buildings collapsed. Fortunately, there was no injury to anybody and no serious damage was done to the rest of the Parliament buildings. The project consultants, the contractor, Parliament and Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications technical staff carried out a fact finding on the spot inspection immediately they were informed.  

It was established that the failure of the steel trash beam that caused the collapse of the Eastern Wing of the roof over the Members' lounge was due to the initial faulty design of the 15 metre span steel  trash that was constructed in the mid 50s. Since that time, there has been repairs going on for a number of times adding on extra concrete on this roof.  The faulty design steel trash had been weakened further by the intermittent roof leakages that had been experienced over the years.  The leakages through the concrete roof of the Members' lounge had been assessed by the consultants and contractors, and the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications had accepted the consultant's recommendation of 8th July 1999 of demolishing the heavy concrete roof over the Members' lounge and constructing a lighter pitched roof in lighter materials. Unfortunately the contractor had just completed demolition of the Easter, Northern and Southern roof wings and was due to demolish the Eastern wing this week when the failure occurred.  

The heavy rains have caused increase of water on the open terrace under construction and flow under the failed roof causing some leakages into the main parliamentary chamber. The consultants are continuing the thorough conditional assessment of parliamentary building and the contractor has been instructed to stop this leakage immediately.  Meanwhile, the rest of the current phase of the rehabilitation work which commenced on the 26th of April l999 will continue and is expected to be completed on the 30th of August 1999 as had earlier been planned. 

I wish to give hon. Members a bit of background about the parliamentary building.  This complex which was built in the late '50s with high quality materials and finishing, is among the most prestigious buildings in the country and important national monuments.  During its life, the building has suffered structural damage as a result of intermittent strife, inadequate provisions for maintenance and repair.  On 15th February, 1990, the Central Tender Board gave authority to the then Ministry of Lands, Housing and Physical Planning to engage local consultants for the provision of the necessary consultant services on the rehabilitation project of the parliamentary building. Surveys of the building were carried out by these consultants and bidding documents were prepared for comprehensive repairs and renovations. Invitations to tender were issued to three contractors, namely, Sterling, Roko and Wade Adams.  Only one bid from Messrs Wade Adams construction company was received and evaluated at a contract sum of 8,788,885 dollars.  This amount could, however, not be mobilised at ago due to many demanding rehabilitation work at the time in the country with a constraint Budget.  It was, therefore, decided to carry out the work in phases beginning with stopping roof leakages.  

The contract for the first phase was accordingly entered into with Messrs Wade Adams construction company to seal roof leakages at a cost of 346,000,000/- in 1991.  Towards the completion of the first phase, Wade Adams was taken over by Messrs Skanska Jensen Uganda branch.  Messrs Skanska Jensen International signed a second phase on the 30th April; and this phase, as I said earlier, is the one which is going on and expected to be completed by the end of August. This second phase comprises the following repairs:  repairs of the third floor, that is the Members lounge including roof repairs; partial rehabilitation of the independence arch; partial repairs of electrical installations and partial repairs of plumbing installations.  The contract sum for this second phase is Shs. l billion.  At the end of this phase, the leaking problem will have been solved and the Members lounge will be fully operational.  

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I with to state that the major repairs of the entire parliamentary building will require over 7 billion shillings as had been estimated in 1990 which has to be mobilised in the near future.  This is the present status on the rehabilitation of the parliamentary building, but I want to assure hon. Members that all efforts are being made to ensure that the building is made usable and secure within the next ten days so that hon. Members can return to their chamber while the rehabilitation work continues as was the case before yesterday's incident. I want to thank you for your attention, Mr. Speaker. 

MAJ. J.B. KAZOORA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the hon. Minister for that explanation.  This country is not short of shameful scenarios; you will recall that His Excellency the President, had to run away from State House in Entebbe and put up somewhere else. The State Lodges all over the country are in horrendous situation. You know very well that our Police have abandoned the small tents they have because of such damages on their houses. Now, the whole Parliament of the Republic of Uganda has had to run away from their historical seat and we are here. Mr. Speaker, I would like the hon. Minister really to make serious assurances that there is a way forward about these national institutions.  I thank you. 

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My worry is the Independence Arch and the water tower;  layman as I am, when I look at them, I think, any time they are also collapsing.  What immediate plans are there to work on that water tower, because you just mentioned that it will be repaired, but how soon because it is also in a very, very bad shape.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

MR. WAMBUZI GAGAWALA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I wanted a clarification from the Minister of Works; when he said that Skanska inherited a contract from Wade Adams - because from what I know, Wade Adams seems to have failed on most of the projects in Uganda. Is actually Skanska international and qualified or it just inherited the Wade Adams contract? I think, I would like clarification, Mr. Speaker, on that aspect of it.  Thank you. 

BRIG. KYALIGONZA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want also to be clarified by the hon. Minister regarding the water tank tower. Indeed a lay person who is not an architect would get more concerned when you look at the leakages and the pieces of concrete that are giving way, and it is on record that some time in 1989, when hon. Mutebi Mulwanira was also doing the same duties as he is doing slightly lower, he assured the NRC, that the structure of National Assembly is so reliable that it can even carry another two stories; and today we are being advised that there was concrete added and it was the cause of that collapse. Are these the same engineers who advised Mutebi Mulwanira then, or these are different?

MR. KASIRIVU:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wanted also to follow up on hon. Gagawala;  I understand Roko Construction was contracted to expand the chamber, and there is a rumour that these people were not paid.  Could we get the clarification so that we are aware whether other contractors will come to do a job well knowing that they will be paid, and they do a good job.  Thank you.

MR. HASHAKA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Yesterday when I was also moving around to see the cause of the failure of the structure, I realised a very serious structural failure where the TRC heavy beams were just joined with ordinary welding, as if they were welding my door or anybody's door;  and this is where the problem of the failure, in spite of the rains that had weakened the concrete, really came from.  I want to find out, there are contractors who had done job - I remember when I showed the point to the hon. Minister and the consultants, they were equally shocked.  I wonder, these contractors, at least, who did this job, whether long ag,o are there.  The consultants who keep coming, Ssentoogo, Waligo - these could have been the same fellows who were involved in the same structural designs.  Can these people not be brought to book or be sued according to contractual law?  Is the Minister going to keep quiet about this? 

On top of that, we were wondering how such a design would be made and no structural support would be given leading to such failure. I would wish really to know from the Minister whether he is going to keep quiet and he is not going to find out contractors who were involved in this structural error, they are still there I believe, and according to the contractual law, they should be sued. 

MR. KAIJUKA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to thank the hon. Minister of Works, Housing and Communication for that explanation and I do appreciate the problem he has vis-à-vis failure to obtain adequate funding for having the job done for the entire National Assembly .  That not withstanding, Mr. Speaker, I have three comments to make.  

One, when I hear of faulty designs going far back to the 1950s, I get worried whether or not it is a historical designs fault overtaken by up to-date designs, and if so, whether he can assure the House that these project consultants and his experts have ascertained the fact that this kind of occurrence will not re-occur.  Tomorrow we do not want to hear that another floor is falling apart.  Can we get that assurance for a fact if we may;  that is number one.  

Two, if he cannot find adequate funding within our development Budget, have  you looked at the idea of opting for commercial operation, if it is possible to even have a bigger structure, let Parliament end up having its rooms rented or whatever, since we are able to pay, is it one million a day here now.  We might as well look at commercial options, I do not know whether he has done so, or whether or not he has also had a chance to discuss this matter with the Minister of Finance vis-à-vis priorities that we normally address.  

I happen to be a Backbencher looking at supplementaries on the Committee on Finance and Planning.  If this is a priority it had better come and we look at it in that sense. What is there?  In other words he has given us an explanation but left us hanging vis-à-vis optimal solutions for the future. I will be happy, Mr. Speaker, if the Minister could clarify that point.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe, before we proceed, hon. Members you are reminded to mention your name when you start contributing because we do not have cameras as we have on the other end so to be recognised.  

MR. KARUHANGA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning when I woke up at 7.30 I looked at news on Television by LTV and there was Parliament being opened, and then there were these pails scattered all over in the main chamber receiving drippings of water from the roof, and I was very saddened. But I also remembered and I confirm what the Minister has said, that in 1990, 8 million dollars were approved by Central Tender Board to repair Parliament and only 32l,000 dollars were approved for partial repairs by Wade Adams.  

In 1992, the situation was so bad and many of us in NRC at that time, including myself, asked whether Members of Parliament at that time were insured; because any time that tower was going to collapse, and the Clerk to Parliament made a report to the Presidential and Foreign Affairs at that time, which was in charge of Parliament, that the tower was about to collapse, and that 8 million dollars be found to repair the State House. We then went on the floor of the House and demanded that immediate money or a loan be found to repair Parliament, because in the event of Parliament crushing down on Members of Parliament, no amount of money would  be able to compensate this country's loss of its political leaders; that is in 1990/91 we are now in 1999.  

The Second phase which was approved for Wade Adams of 321,000 dollars was then taken over by SKANSKA to do a job for 1 billion shillings which is 1 million dollars, having moved for the same job of 321,000 Dollars which had not been availed.The actual amount of money probably stands now at higher than 8 million dollars to be able to put that House into a serviceable and useable Parliament.  We are now squatting here at a very high price. Hon. Kazoora has pointed out what has happened to us and to the head of State himself running away from a building that was about to collapse on him in Entebbe. 

I recently went to Crested Towers trying to see the Minister of Education. On arrival at the reception I was hit by such a strong stink of latrine, and as I went to the lift, I could see everybody's mouth and nose was disturbed. When you drive around Nakasero and you find our civil servants, especially from the Ministry of Gender, you find them staying in houses which must have been condemned 20 years ago which should have been razed to the ground, and these properties are occupying children and citizens of this country. 

I do not want to talk about foreign Missions because that is a subject we are going to bring at the appropriate time to this House.  Why is it that Kampala is with buildings which are so condemned; why is it that this state of rot is allowed to continue?  Why is it that the responsible authorities do not take this situation in hand and save what our Colleague has described as shame?  How long are we going to be in this type of scenario?  

It is very disturbing, Mr. Speaker, and I think it is high time we found the actual money required to repair our Parliament; this is one of the pillars of the State; it cannot be taken the way it is being taken and we should be insured before we get into that property again.  Thank you.
		
MR. MWANDHA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My understanding of the way Government works is that they work on a basis of policies. Now realising that all Government buildings are in a sorry state, not only in Uganda, but even our embassies; is there a policy of Government, has the Ministry of Works come up with a concrete policy to make the buildings of the Government of this republic have continuous and preventive maintenance?  That is my first clarification. 

Now that we are rehabilitating Parliament House, will the Minister of Works use this opportunity to make Parliament house accessible to people with disabilities? Even the entrance could have wheels, there could be a ramp so that even people who are blind, people with physical disabilities can actually access the building and people in wheel chairs can access the building.  We have seen all the buildings in other countries which have been modified to enable people with disabilities to access these buildings, including toilets. Mr. Speaker, is the Minister taking trouble to see that this Parliament Building in the course of the rehabilitation will be accessible to people with disabilities?  
		
MR. KATWIREMU: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am greatly perturbed that a whole leadership of the country as we are gathered here can be in a building for whom nobody can give assurance that we are safely seated there. This is very disturbing.  

The hon. Minister has talked about faulty designs, and we have also been informed that even the current repairs which are going on - on the Parliament House now - are being supervised by an architecture and it is said that he does not even have structural engineers designs even at this stage.  Could he confirm whether that is true or not, and if it is, could he assure this House what steps he is going to take to make sure that the kind of right consultants are actually looking at the building in which lives are at stake. 

I am also informed that some money totalling to about 1 billion shillings was returned to the Treasury in the last financial year and this money was meant to rehabilitate Parliament House.  I am told the reason that this money was returned to the Treasury were that those who were responsible did not want to go through Central Tender Board.  Could the Minister confirm whether this is true or not and if so those who are involved in this kind of thing could be brought to book.  

Three, the biggest problem as the  Minister has informed us is roof leakages. If Members went to the top of that building ,there is a ring beam that runs on the very top with some pillars supporting it, and I am informed that that was meant to be the last floor on that building.  Given shillings 1 billion I would think that the hon. Minister would be able to put a roof on top of what should have been the last floor because our biggest problems are coming from leakages that are taking place at the moment from the top.  The first solution you would aim at is to stop the leakages and then work on the other things when you have no leakages going on.  What steps is he considering in one, because if that floor was put up, it would even solve some of our problems of accommodation as at the moment.  

Lastly, the Minister talked about the cause of the collapse of the roof above the bar as partly being addition of cement screed I think over a time; what kind of supervision have we been having of the people who have been repairing Parliament Building?  Has this just been left to amateur or have we been just not been carefully enough on the building of this importance?  Because of the above, what assurance do we have that in future any other repairs on this building are going to be properly supervised so that we do not have a recurrence to what has happened? Thank you.
		
DR. NKUUHE:  I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like the Minister to assure me on a number of issues.  First of all he seems to suggest that money has been a problem but in fact, when you look at the history of this Parliament I do not think money is really a big problem because in the basement of Parliament they have just installed equipment like computers and a modern digital library and so on at a cost of 2 million US dollars.  

Now, if you are going to put that kind of money in a building that is leaking, surely that money is going to come to waste, because with computers, all you need is to pour water on them and they are all gone.  So, who takes the priorities for what sort of aid is given to Parliament, because I understood that UNDP wanted to help Parliament, USAID wanted to help Parliament.  In other words, the donors were running over each other trying to assist Parliament and yet we could not even see this basic thing.  The roof that was leaking, the roof was threatening to fall on us, in other words, who assess the priority for Parliament as to what should be done and what should be done first.  

Could the Minister of Works assure us because this is part of the collective responsibility that, in fact, everything is in order that what they are doing now will not be undone by some other action one month or two months down the road.
		
MR. LWANGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  What I want the Minister to tell us is whether he is aware that the archway which has got about one ton of steel hanging from it, is coming down any time, because I am reliably informed by my colleagues in the construction industry that it has been checked by certain engineers who are very good at civil works and actually found that the steel inside has been eaten to say about one half - I believe originally one inch steel bars were used and are now remaining on less than half an inch; so anytime this thing will come down.  Can you tell us what steps you are taking if you are aware of this problem?
		
MR. KIIZA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would also like to thank the Minister for Works.  I also visited the site and I was appalled to see the structure which was really very poorly constructed, and I concur with the Minister that it was a poor design. But it was also a poor construction because the loading on such a structure would not have been done.  I am wondering whether through the contractor, through his working he was not part of the cause for the collapse, because once the House was sitting and somebody raised a point of order whether it was in order to continue with such a noise and through such vibrations from the contractor. The contractor had to be stopped because  the noise was too much; there was a lot of drilling, there was a lot hammering and I am wondering whether the contractor does not take the fault.  I am also wondering whether an assessment was done before he started working.  So, Mr. Speaker, I want clarification on those two matters.  Thank you very much.
		
MR. AWORI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am seeking clarification from the hon. Minister of Works on the matter of architectural designs of the House.  I raised this concern last year that in the course of moving the Ministry of Housing from their former building from were they were evicted unceremoniously by the Ministry of Internal Affairs, a number of important architectural designs were thrown about and I witnessed this. I am wondering if these designs have been found, how else can they check on the structure of that august House without having the original plans and designs of the building?  How can they carry out tests on the structure of the building without the designs have they found them? 
		
Finally, Mr. Speaker, once again I rise a matter of concern for our support staff.  While we are renovating the building, do we plan to create some kind of little room somewhere for our drivers who experience sun, rain and all kinds of weather difficulties while we are deliberating in the august House?
		
MR. KANDOLE: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to learn from the hon. Minister if the 7 million dollars  he is talking about that is required to repair the structure puts into consideration the parking space to accommodate the number of vehicle which have increased 45 times from the original number of vehicles that were designed when making that structure.  Thank you.
		
MR. OMODI OKOT: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We are talking about the top floor, but I want this House to realise that the general condition of the House right down to basement is bad. There are areas that are leaking, I hope the Minister is aware of this.  

Two, Mr. Speaker, realising that even the facilities in the House as of now are inadequate, the chamber in which Members are meeting was designed for less than maybe, 100 people. The toilets 100 Members of Parliament on the men side use, they have to line up to go into the toilet; I do not know what happens from the ladies side!  Mr. Speaker, I just want to know from the Minister, it may not be his jurisdiction but I want to know whether there is a plan by the authority concerned of putting adequate facilities, adequate rooms, chambers, toilet facilities for Members.  This is evident in what is obtaining at the moment. 
		
I would like to request that where possible, the authorities concerned should always try to focus on things without having to react to situations which are already bad.  Now, supposing Members were in the House at this hour, Mr. Speaker, I cannot imagine what was going to happen.  I want the Minister concerned to assure the House that they are always on the alert because this leaking of the House has always been there since this Parliament was in, I think.  So, I want assurance from the Minister on this, Mr. Speaker. 
		
MR. CHEBET MAIKUT  (Kween County, Kapchorwa):  Mr. Speaker, I would also like to thank equally the Minister of Works for coming out with this statement and I submit that this matter is very serious because, in yesterday's Spectrum programme, some of the people who were giving their views, did say that they wished all Members of Parliament to die.  I hope that some of you listened to that programme Spectrum last evening.  Some people were saying, and I want to repeat because some people have asked me to, that they wished that the collapse of Parliament should have resulted into the death of the hon. Members of Parliament, and of course, they gave their reasons, for those of you who listened to that Spectrum programme.  

So, Mr. Speaker, I would like, therefore to get clarification from the hon. Minister:- what concrete plans or what plans does the Ministry have to have periodic inspection of all buildings in this country to ensure that the safety of persons utilising those building is insured? 

Related to that, I would like also to seek clarification from the hon. Minister to advise us which wings of Parliament now are about to fall, because, we have been told that some Committees can continue working in Parliament.  So, we would like to be assured whether there is still a risk again of continuing to work in Parliament for some Members of Parliament.
		
I would like to know who is meeting the cost of utilising these premises here at the International Conference Centre which we are told is not less than US $100 per day.
		
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Well, I do not know whether that is the concern of Ministry of Works as to who pays for accommodation here.  I do not know.
		
MR. CHEBET MAIKUT:  Okay, Sir, I agree with your wise counsel, Mr. Speaker. I thought that as a Minister responsible, in terms of the structure, he should be able to give guidance to this honourable House.
		
I would also like to hear from the hon. Minister on what concrete plans his Ministry has towards renovation of the entire building infrastructure of Government in this country, because a lot has been said about different buildings. 

Lastly, I would also like to hear from Government as to what has happened to the earlier Government's decision to set aside Shs. 1/= billion per annum towards construction and renovation of buildings, because, nothing has been said for a number of years although that decision was taken.  I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF WORKS, HOUSING AND COMMUNICATIONS (Mr. John Nasasira):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker and I would like to thank all hon. Members who contributed and wanted clarifications. Before I respond to individual clarifications, I wish to make one general statement, that the role of the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications in respect with works of Parliament is of a technical advisory nature, because when hon. Members were talking, it was assumed that the Budget for repairing Parliament is under my Ministry.  It is not.  The budget is under Parliament vote.  If you have got one shilling, we shall advise you with what we can do with one shilling.  If you have got 5/= million, we shall advise you what we can do with 5/= million.  So, some of the questions you are hinting, 'what are you going to do, why can you not get the money', it is the duty of Government and Parliament to look for this money to repair the Parliamentary Building, and my Ministry is working technically under a constrained financial position to do its best in its technical advisory capacity.   I just wanted to make that general statement so that whatever you respond to, it is clear from the beginning that even this 1/= billion; even now the money that we are using at Parliament is under the Parliamentary Vote.  For us, we go to our architects, and our engineers go there to see what the consultants and the contractors are doing but we do not hold any shilling from here, it comes direct from Parliament and it is paid.  If Parliament said, 'do not spend it', we would not go there to spend it. 
		
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, let me now tackle the questions by hon. Members. Hon. Kazoora who also happens to be the Chairman of the Committee on Government Assurances wanted an assurance as to whether that historic building is going to be repaired satisfactorily; and hon. Kazoora also mentioned that the President ran away from the State House in Entebbe.  Again, for a statement of general nature, really, we should realise that a lot of decay has taken place in our country following decades of misrule.  What should have been done 20 years ago is still pending, and we are continuing the rehabilitation of the country and it takes time to complete all those rehabilitations within the budget which we approve here ourselves as Members of Parliament.  So, the Government is also constrained in how much it can do. There are priorities of priorities and you can see that they affected the President for him to shift to Kampala so that Entebbe State House could be repaired. But anyway, an alternative accommodation was found for the President at Nakasero and we are looking for the money for the State House.  But what I can assure you is that as soon as we get the money for Parliament, the faults are known, the work required is known, it is the money that we require to do the work, and that is when we can give you that assurance; but unless the repairs are all completed - I cannot see check every wall and every bar and say 'Oh, Parliament is safe', I would not risk to tell that to the Chairman of the Committee on Government Assurances.  But we are doing our best and the structure has been assessed, the faults are known and the dangerous areas on the structure are known, but the main Parliamentary Building structure is sound according to the assessment that was done.
		
Hon. Col. Mudoola asked about the Independence Arch, how soon it could be repaired and I would combine this with the same question that was asked by hon. Tim Lwanga.  Yes, from the reports of the consultants, one of the critical structures in the Parliament Building is actually the Independence Arch.  The Independence Arch is in a bad shape and it is going to be repaired under this contract for the work that is supposed to be finished by the end of August. The Independence Arch, the water tank plus the leaking roof were the most critical areas.  Unfortunately, under this contract, we have not found money or Parliament has not found money for repairing the water tank.  So, the repairs for the Independence Arch are there but the repairs for the water tank, the funds are not yet available and that answers hon. Kyaligonza's question about the water tank.
		
Now, hon. Kasirivu said that there is a rumour that ROCO did some work and was not paid.  I am sorry hon. Kasirivu I have not heard this rumour, I will try and find out more about this rumour, I do not want to speculate but I have no record to show that ROCO had done any work here.  He was invited to tender for the repairs but he never put in a bid.  If there is some work he did earlier and he was not paid, I have not heard of this rumour and I do not want to comment more on that. 
		
Hon. Hashaka who also saw the failure and who is very knowledgeable about construction; can a contractor be sued?  No, this building was finished in the late 1950s and there is what we call, defects liability period which must have expired one year after it was finished, and you cannot take a contracter who did the work some 33 years ago for a failure that has taken place now.  There was no quality assurance contract then, and the defects liability period expired and the contractor was given a certificate of completion and you cannot now go and take him to court.  
		
Hon. Kaijuka was more concerned about whether we can consider private sector funding.  I support the idea.  We can look into this.  Again, it is something that has to be agreed with Parliament.  If Parliament thinks we can go in private sector and rent part of the building for the contractor to recover his money and we remain with some of the chamber, this is purely again in the hands of Parliament and I think it is a good idea, knowing the shortage of funds.  

The other issue is why not find supplementary budgeting and finish the job at ago?  I think your guess here hon. Members, is as good as mine, especially now that we discussing the Budget.  So, I will leave that answer to that level.  If we can find supplementary funding and Ministry of Finance can assist, then we will do the work again.  
		
Hon. Karuhanga, how long are we going to be in this situation?  I appreciate his concern and his worry about decaying buildings, but I think on the whole, for some years now, the decaying buildings in town are getting less and less.  I am sure hon. Karuhanga can agree with me, it is my hope that some few years to come, continuing with the growth of our economy and our stability, the decaying buildings will be finished.  Again, the process of rehabilitating this country is not yet completed.  That is the only answer I can give him.
		
Hon. Mwandha, I want to thank him for adding another department of works to my Ministry but I think the point of facilitating the people with disabilities is a solid point.  My Ministry now is going to put it in all its designs of buildings.  As you realise, I think in this country and in many other countries, people with disabilities had not been considered, but now all designs, like we do environment impact assessment, all buildings, all structures will have to cater for people with disabilities and these are not words.  Yes, we have a policy of continuous maintenance but what has been the problem is that, money budgeted for maintenance has not always been adequate, and some of the structures are at an advanced stage of reconstruction rather than maintenance and you find that that money is not enough.
		
Engineer Katwiremu said that 1 billion shillings was returned to the Treasury because some people did not get this money from CTB.  I have a sequence of events here on this money of 1 billion shillings.  The information I have is that on 7th December 1998, the Clerk to Parliament confirmed the availability of 1 billion shillings on the budget and approved the scope of works.  On the 23rd November 1998, the Ministry wrote to CTB seeking the approval of the contract award to SKANSKA as evaluation to the contract was orginally signed by Wade Adams. On 20th January 1999, CTB requested some clarification about the contract award with so many details.   On the 19th January 1999, M/S JENSEN SKANSKA International extended their bid validity because it was expiring.  On 2nd February, 1999 Ministry of Works made a clarification to CTB as requested and on the 2nd February 1999, the Clerk to Parliament, on request by Ministry of Works also requested Ministry of Finance to confirm availability of these funds and I think the Clerk is still corresponding with the Ministry of Finance on these funds.  So, as far as we are concerned, whenever we get instructions from the Clerk about the money, we moved to do our technical work and we have not had any reason to delay work on CTB as I have explained here.  
		
What kind of supervision, again hon. Katwiremu wanted to know.  We have got top Ugandan consultants on this job and I think hon. Members can go and check on this. We have got top consultants on this job who sometimes have worked without being paid quickly on time. These consultants are Messrs Sentogo and Partners as architects, Kiwagama Kiwanuka and Partners as Quantity Surveyors, Messrs Abraham Waliggo as electrical engineers and consultants for structural associated engineers.  All these are the top Ugandan consultants in the country and that is what has been hired.  
		
Now, hon. Nkuuhe was asking, who sets priorities.  I do not have the details and if I am wrong the Speaker could correct me, but I think Parliament does fund raising from different sources at different times, and you might find where fund raising was done for computers and the library, that response was faster than where fund raising is being done for repairing the building.  These priorities are not set by my Ministry or by Government directly, because, Parliament has been doing independent fund raising, and I think this offer of computers and books was given directly to the Speaker.  But the Speaker, if I am wrong, maybe the Speaker will correct me and I will want to apologise.  So, it happened that the books and computers were there before the contract for the roof could be finished. 
		
Hon. Tim Lwanga, I think I have answered his question. I agree with you, the report we have assessed of the arch and this time assessed with proper laser beam gadgets that the arch is in a serious structural problem and the contractor is trying to address it during this rehabilitation.
		
Again, hon. Engineer Kiiza wondered whether the contract could have been responsible for this collapse.  All the reports we have received from the site of works, and especially that even the collapsed roof took place at 5.30 a.m. in the morning, we have not found the contractor responsible, but investigations are continuing. If there is any information to that, if it is possible that he was partly responsible, we shall hold him responsible.  At the moment, we do not have any information.
		
Hon. Awori, on the documents that were lost, I am not aware of any documents that were lost when the department of housing was moving but I can find out.  I cannot say for certain that no documents were lost, but I am not aware of it. As for shelter for all our drivers in the park, we have taken that into account and when the full money for rehabilitation is found, this could also be included; I think it is a good point. 
		
Hon. Kandole wanted to know whether we can create more space for parking.  I am assuming that when Police and Foreign Affairs leave, the other park at the back, that will be also an extra space for parking our vehicles.  
	
Hon. Omodi Okot wanted to know about more facilities.  That is a project for expanding this Parliament.  I think that one has to be considered separately.  But at the moment we are still squeezing within what is available.  And I am also aware that the space is not adequate, but that is about all we can do. 
		
Periodic inspection of buildings which was a request from hon. Chebrot.  Yes, but periodic maintenance of Government buildings is supposed to be handled through individual votes, not directly through the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications.  Each Ministry with a public building is supposed to budget and spend to ensure that the building it is in or it owns is maintained. But we quickly check on them to the best of our ability.  

Which wing of Parliament is safe?  The information I have from our consultants and from inspection is that the sections the Committees are using now and most of the Parliament is safe. In fact, the reason why we moved from the Parliamentary Chamber is not that because the structure was unsafe.  It is because the full ceiling of Parliament was leaking and we did not want water to get in touch with maybe live wires and cause a fire.  So we wanted to isolate that area and of course there was no way Members of Parliament could continue working in the Chamber while it was leaking.  But it was not because that the structure was unsafe.  I heard from radio this morning that the third floor of Parliament collapsed.  There is no third floor of Parliament that collapsed; it is a quarter of the roof of the third floor that collapsed.  If the third floor had collapsed, I think the Chamber would have also collapsed.  
		
I think, Mr. Speaker, these are the questions that have been raised and clarifications that were required.  I want to say once again that our role there is of a technical nature and it is both the joint responsibility of Parliament and Government to search and look for funds so that we can save our building.  I want to thank you once again.
		
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you very much, Mr. Minister.
	    
MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Speaker, last week when we raised the issue which came from the Chairperson of the Committee on the National Economy on the Co-operative Bank, we were promised that the issue will be discussed in the course of this week.  We have seen the Order Paper and the programme to follow, and at the same time we have received some very serious documents indicating that the co-operative Bank was sold long before it was closed in February.  And I have documents which I can put on the Table.  In light of these very serious documents, should we know whether we shall have an opportunity to discuss the issue of Bank of Uganda and Co-operative Bank in the course of this week as this matter is concerning many, many Members and members from our rural Constituencies?  I would not like to move by asking to suspend the debate in order to move on this important matter, and I do not want to take you by surprise.  All I would like to know is to be assured that we shall be able to discuss this matter tomorrow, as we had been promised last week by your good offices, and since tomorrow is the end of the week.  Or if this is not possible, then would you allow us to move a motion on the Floor of the House tomorrow to suspend the debate such that this intention of procedure then becomes notice?
		
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Well, certainly you know how to move a motion under that Rule, and that you will have to see the Speaker and discuss it and so forth.  So I cannot really say that tomorrow we shall place it on the Order Paper, but I am aware that I promised that sometime in the near future we shall have a debate on that Report.  As for tomorrow, I certainly cannot say it will be debated and I do not know whether the Parliamentary week will end tomorrow, in view of the fact that, yesterday we were unable to sit, we may have to extend it maybe.  But I cannot tell now. So what we can do is to proceed with today's business and then we shall consider the Order Paper for tomorrow. I think tomorrow will take into account other pressing matters.
		
MR. KARUHANGA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  May I now put the paper I have on the Table or should I leave it until tomorrow?
		
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Why do you not wait when you are actually debating?  I think it will be more relevant when you are debating this issue so that you bring it up.
		
MR. KARUHANGA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
	
STATEMENT
	
MR. ADOME LOKWII (Jie County, Kotido):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  According to Rule 18 and 34 of our Rules of Procedure, and in accordance with Article 94 sub-section 4 of our Constitution, I wish to clarify on the issue which appeared on our dailies, that is, The Monitor newspaper of July 4th 1999 No.195 and The New Vision same date Volume 14 No.166, where 15 and 10 UPDF personnel respectively were killed by the Karimojong warriors.  

From the start Sir, allow me to condemn the perpetrators of this incident, in the strongest terms it deserves.  Before I dwell on the actual incident, allow me to give a brief of the events that led to the unfortunate incident of 10th July, 1999.  Due to escalating insecurity, due to both external and internal raids, the Members of Parliament from Kotido drew a programme and requested Oxfam United Kingdom for funding.  This was accepted and peace meetings were conducted in all sub-counties of Kotido District especially those prone to cattle rustling menace and those from whom cattle rustlers originated.  After a protracted one month's crusade, the people of Kotido District came up with the Kotido Peace Accord which was signed by people's representatives at all levels.  

For the purpose of this statement, one of the relevant articles therein included the following:  (a) That Government using UPDF vigilantes and that is, Anti theft Unit Personnel and Local Authorities to recover all raided cattle and give to the rightful owners as soon as possible.  This was to curb vengeance. (b) That the LCs, vigilantes, opinion leaders and kraal leaders should help in identifying cattle rustlers whenever suspected.  (c) That deployment of UPDF, Police and vigilantes to strategic areas should be effected soon.  (d)  That grazing of Jie and Dodoth, tribes people should be merged to avoid mutual suspicion.
		
I would like to report that separation of these people is responsible for the inter-tribal raids and road thuggery between Kotido and Kaabong towns.  The people of Jie responded to the Peace Accord as quickly as they could, first they tried to return some cattle they had rustled from Dodoth County.  These were handed over to the County Administration in turn to hand-over to the rightful owners.  To the contrary, no Jie cow was handed over from Dodoth County to Jie.  

The reason given by the RDC's office and that of the Commanding Officer 25th Battalion based in Kotido is that; one, there have not been any logistics necessary for the operation, and two; that there was a security threat to the district from rebels, and so soldiers were ordered to be on standby for the rebels.  The Jie people on the other hand took this to mean that Government had decided to ally with the Dodoth to recover the Dodoth cows and forget the Jie cows which were in Dodoth County.  

In the same spirit of the Peace Accord, the Jie vigilantes with the help of the LCs recovered some 54 cattle raided by the Jie of Panyangara sub-county from Matheniko County of Moroto District.  These cattle were handed over to the District authorities of Kotido District.  It was until recently, no one knew the whereabouts of these cows until the vigilante commander was implicated in the matter.  For reasons best known to the District Security Committee, they handed over these cattle to this commander who is said to have sold off about 53 cattle for his own benefit.  Mr. Speaker, he is on the run now.  

The most important things to note here is that, as the recovery of stolen cattle was going on in Jie, nothing was going on to recover Jie cattle rustled by either the Dodoth or the Matheniko.  All such an activity precipitated further internal conflicts between the Jie and Matheniko on one hand, and the Jie and Dodoth on the other.  

As these inter-county thefts continued on a daily basis, there was no attempt to recover stolen cows.  The warriors in these three Counties took advantage of this situation.  Prior to the Panyangara incident of 10th July, 1999, some four warriors from Panyangara sub-county avenged on the Matheniko and succeeded in getting away with some 37 heads of cattle.  The vigilantes and UPDF from Moroto District tracked these cattle until they entered Lomokori village, Rikitai Parish, Panyangara sub-sounty in Jie County.  These reported the matter to the Commanding Officer 25th Battalion who mobilised the Jie vigilantes and UPDF in their first head battalion to go and recover promptly these stolen cows.  Failure of the operating force to get the cattle of the suspected thieves, prompted them to collect any other cattle within the parish so as to force the innocent owners to track the cattle thieves.  
		
Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, what is interesting is that, all these developments took place without knowledge of the District Leadership, later on the Sub-County Authority.  And this was a new method of work which took everybody, including leaders, by surprise.  

According to the survey I carried out on the 14th and 15th of this month, three issues resulted into a clash between the UPDF, two vigilantes and a Jie warrior. One, was the presence of vigilantes from Moroto District in the operation was interpreted to mean Government has sided with the Matheniko warriors to launch a raid on Jie, yet their cattle were held up in Matheniko. One vigilante from Matheniko by the names Amunya, was killed when entering Jie kraals, because he uttered war morale chants further provoking anti Matheniko sentiments among the population.  

Point two, that the operation was launched with ulterior motives to mean that the Jie never caused a threat or the resistance whenever they were asked or forced to return stolen cattle, because their terrain is easily accessible with minimum military action, unlike areas like Dodoth and other counties whose terrain makes it difficult for Government to do an operation to recover stolen cattle.  The military also, Mr. Speaker, expressed this fear by saying that it requires better machines than what it has to do the recovery.  

Thirdly, the raids between the Matheniko and Jie with no Government recovery attempts, and three raids carried out that very day by the Matheniko who were involved in the cattle operations escalated people's resentment and anger.  The resistance therefore, was launched with questions like: 'Why does Government always start the recovery of cattle operation in Jie County and ends there?' 'Where are all cattle recovered from Jie, have they reached the rightful owners?' 'If Government was seriously recovering all stolen cattle, why not recover this cattle in all counties at once and not to start with one and give excuse of lack of logistics or no recovery of cattle in other counties? ' 
		
Mr. Speaker and hon. Colleagues, these questions in the minds of the people precipitated the unfortunate incident where two buffalos - these are UPDF Army vehicles - were destroyed.  15 UPDF soldiers were killed, seven Jie warriors who were vigilantes were killed and one pupil and many others were injured by stray bullets.  Several villages were run down by the army  vehicles before the fateful fight ensued.  Many people fled their homes and by the time of reporting, were still in the bush.  This is undesirable in the fate of eminent family.  

At the time of organising this report, Jie people living in Moroto District were being openly searched for in order to be killed by the Matheniko; a habit that has prevailed since in the presence of Government organs.  It is reported that two people were mob killed in Moroto Municipality and others are hiding in missions and Police barracks for their life. However, I am happy to report that there is calm now prevailing in the town.  
		
BRIG. KYALIGONZA:  Point of procedure.  Mr. Speaker, I am raising on a point of procedure.  Our Rules of Procedure, 18 and 38 are very clear on personal statements.  I am now getting surprised, the hon. Member seems to be making a Ministerial Statement regarding the incident that took place in Karamoja; while it is the duty of the Minister to inform this House and the country at large over the losses of our troops, the losses of our equipment and so on.  Is the hon. Member therefore, procedurally correct to start giving a statement which should have been given by the Minister as if he is acting on behalf of the Minister of Defence and Government or is he in charge of Karamoja Affairs?
		
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I think the hon. Member is procedurally correct.  You see when you look at Rule 38 says: " Statement by Members and personal explanation".  That Rule has got two parts.  Because if you read it, 38(1) says: " With leave of the Speaker, a Member may make a statement on any matter of urgent public importance relating to the functions of the House or to explain a matter of a personal nature at a time appointed under Rule 18; but no controversial matter maybe brought forward under this Rule, nor may a debate arise upon a personal explanation."  So the issue here is, you are saying, anything affecting Government, a statement must emanate from a minister.  Suppose a minister is not interested in making a statement on a matter that is public, a Member of Parliament under the functions of Parliament under this Rule can make such a statement and it is under that particular provision that this statement is being made. It is not a personal statement but a statement affecting matter for which Parliament is concerned.  Parliament is concerned about killing of UPDF people, about rustling, so it is a relevant matter and the procedure is correct.
		
ADOME LOKWII: Thank you Mr. Speaker, for that wise ruling.  In fact, when Members were debating the address of His Excellency, they made reference to this kind of incident and I thought that the public was -(Interruption)
		
MR. MURULI MUKASA: Point of information. Thank you Mr. Speaker. I have listened with increasing unease to the statement made by the hon. Member.  I was at an opportune time intending to intervene, but Sir, I want at this stage to clarify the position to you, Sir, and the House, that the Ministry of Defence and indeed Government take a very serious view of what happened in Karamoja on that fateful day, to an incident which cost the lives of UPDF soldiers who were lawfully going about their duty; an incident where expensive and indispensable equipment of this State was destroyed.  

We have set up an inquiry at the ministry, I expect a report very shortly of that inquiry and it was my intention and still remains my intention that when the report comes out, and after we have studied it quickly, we shall come up with an appropriate statement in this House on the matter.  I thank you, Sir.
		
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER; So, this does not prejudice the Ministerial Statement which will be made as the hon. Minister has stated; but the point I was only making that, yes  a Member of Parliament can make another statement which is not a personal statement, that is what he is making. Please, proceed.
		
MR. ADOME LOKWII: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In conclusion, I wish to state that there is need for serious implementation of economic, political and social programmes in Karamoja.  The security turmoil inflected by Karimojong on the neighbours and themselves due at times competing for the use of scarce resources, in terms of water, grass and food are just a tip of the ice berg, of the untold internal conflicts taking place in Karamoja on a daily basis. Many lives are lost, a lot of property destroyed and a wastage in terms of both human, animal and other resources is rampant and unrecorded, leave alone unattended to seriously.  

In the meeting of 14th July 1999 between the people's leaders and the district authorities, it was agreed that Government should seriously continue to recover all stolen cows and probably return to their rightful owners to avoid sentimental vengeance. Two; that Panyangara warriors should return the guns, the walk-talkies and the Government property taken during the scuffle.  Mr. Speaker, by the time I came back on Monday, 12 guns were returned, one receiver of the radios was returned, one walki-talkie was returned and a jacket was returned, but the LCs and chiefs were still serious on search -(Interruption)
		
BRIG. KYALIGONZA; Point of order. Mr. Speaker, I am increasingly getting disturbed by the hon. Member from Jie, when he continues confusing and misleading this House by giving us a verbatim report including numbers of guns recovered. I have never heard him being commissioned or reported as a Minister of Defence, or for Internal Affairs or anywhere to be in charge of any security agency; the House should be given verbatim and correct information.  If it is the report of the warriors, we need to get this report from the Minister himself and the Minister has promised that he intends to make a statement.  

Is the hon. Member, therefore, in order to continue disguising in the form of a personal statement to give a statement of the warriors who were actually responsible for killing Ugandans and even destroying the equipment of Ugandans; because he is talking of two guns, three guns, he has not talked about how many have been arrested. The Jie, those people who were responsible for returning these guns, were they arrested? Tell this House! Is he in order therefore, to continue talking on behalf of the Minister when there is a substantive minister in place who could inform this House substantively? 
		
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think, hon. Member, you have not taken time to internalise the details in Rule 38.  If you look at 38(2) 'Any statement other than personal explanation may be commented upon by other Members for a limited duration of time not exceeding thirty minutes.'  The observations which you have just made can constitute a debate, and as I have said under the Rule, any Member is free to make such a statement.  So I do not think we have revisit this ruling that the Member is in order, procedurally he is correct and he is covered by the Rule; he can complete his statement, then you can contribute to a debate.  I thank you. Proceed.
		
MR. ADOME LOKWII: Thank you Mr. Speaker.  -(Interruption)
		
MR. MAO: Point of procedure. Thank you Mr. Speaker. I have noticed that increasingly the Rules of this House are being abused by people who purport to bring points of order when they just want to make prolonged and annoying statements.  I would therefore, request your guidance, Mr. Speaker. Why don't people who raise points of order quote specific rules which are being contravened? That may save the time of this House otherwise, frivolous points are being brought forward to interrupt important statements being made by people and since points of orders are supposed to be raised when people have contravened Rules of the House, it will benefit us, Mr. Speaker, if those who raise points of order are required to name the rules which they say are being contravened.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.
		
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I quite note the observation you have made.  As you realise, this started as a procedural point, it was clarified, then a Member also raised it as a procedural then at the end of the day he ended with a point of order; but as I had said, the Member is procedurally protected and therefore, he is to complete his statement and then we can have a debate if Members are so interested; but the point is, a Member is free to make such a statement which is not a personal statement, and I agree with you, if a Member calls out a point of order, he should say what rule has been contravened, instead of just using a point of order so that a speaker can listen, and then at the end of the day, he finds it is not a point of order but a mere observation.  So the Member should proceed.   
		
MR. ADOME LOKWII: Mr. Speaker, thank you very much.  In other circumstances, the Brigadier would appreciate -(Interruption)
		
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER; No, do not talk about the Brigadier, you complete your statement.
		
MR. ADOME LOKWII: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Point number three raised in the 14th July meeting is that, peace initiative programmes should be funded to enhance effective mobilisation. 

Point number four is that food security strategies and famine prevention should be implemented as soon as possible to avoid the 1980 crisis since there is more crop this year in the whole region. 

Point number five is that commanders of security organs in Karamoja should avoid operational mistakes in the regions because such lead to loss of lives and property and that they should involve local leaders in all their endeavours.  

Point number six; that the Panyangara incident is undesirable and totally condemned. The culprits, especially those that made it happen, the way it happened be brought to book and I emphasise this Mr. Speaker.
		
Point number seven is that the prosecution of cattle rustlers be expeditiously handled and that such criminals should be jailed outside Karamoja to avoid prisoners' escaping, hence jeopardising the work of local counsellors and Government organs.  

Point number eight is deployment of the UPDF and the anti-stock theft unit personnel and the vigilantes to strategic positions be implemented as soon as possible to promptly check on security threats in the region. 

Point number nine is that Government should fulfil its pledges in Karamoja to avoid unnecessary clashes with the neighbours and deny political and military opportunists from  taking advantages of the situation. 

Point number ten;  the office of the RDCs be strengthened financially for mobilisation purposes. Point number eleven; that MPs, local counsellors and opinion leaders should meet frequently to reduce the information gap.
		
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I wish to state categorically that there was no anti-referendum sentiment in this incident but people in town and other trading centres who are more politically enlightened took advantage of the situation and started seeking clarification. Such as: is there any difference between this Government and other regimes which inflicted the same military offensive to the people? At the closerse of the meeting, Mr. Speaker, such issue were clarified and leaders were urged to take the message back home.
		
Allow me Mr. Speaker, to say that, the people of Jie are behind the Movement and the referendum.  All what is required is economic empowerment and fulfilment of the recommendations from all peace meetings, seminars, workshops and fora on Karamoja.  I hope I have been clear enough, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
		
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you.  The nature of the statement can attract a debate for not more than thirty minutes.  So, I do not know whether there is anyone of you is interested to make a contribution to this. 
		
MR. MAYANJA MOHAMMED(Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank the hon. Member for that statement which opens our eyes to what is transpiring in the region. 
		
First and foremost, I would like to thank Government for including the Karamoja Region in the NURP Two, that is the Northern Uganda Reconstruction Programme Two, and I think this answers very well the plight of the leaders and the people of Karamoja who for long have yearned for Government intervention to see that the plight of the people in the region is attended to, but I would also like to encourage the leaders and the people in Karamoja to take special interest in creating peace in the region.  
I remember we had cattle rustling in Teso, in Pallisa and parts of Mbale but the vigilance of the leaders and the people in abating insecurity and cattle rustling was very fundamental in the return of peace in that region.  Similarly if the Karimojong could awaken to the need for creating peace in the region, supported by the forces in the region and by Government, I think this would solve the long term problem once for all.  I would, therefore, like to call upon both Government and the leaders in Karamoja to work together. Government has got to sustain the interventions that it has started.  We should not only wish to see NURP Two active in Karamoja, but we would also like other interventions; for instance, the provision of adequate water for both animals and human beings, the provision of other social economic activities in the region, because Karamoja is not only a problem to the Karimojong region but it is also a problem to the neighbouring districts. Once there are dry periods in Karamoja, then people in the neighbouring districts start to worry and wonder whether the Karimojong will not strike the next day.  

So, Mr. Speaker, that is my brief contribution, but most important of all, I would like the people there and the leaders to cherish peace because it is the only precursor to development. Thank you very much.
		
BRIG. KYALIGONZA (Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Mr. Speaker, I thank you very much and I thank the hon. Member for that elaborate Statement which he has made to this House.  
	
Mr. Speaker, I want to make some two observations regarding his concern and explanation he has made to this House. First of all, in 1988, while in NRC, there was a resolution passed in regard to the arming of the Karimojong. It was resolved that the Karimojong should be let free to keep the guns for self defence and against external aggressions, because their reasons were that they were all the time being harassed by the Turkana and Pokot from Kenya. I

n reference to what the hon. Member has given referring to The Monitor report which we also saw; because we have not heard any statement from Government in this regard, either in confirmation or opposing what the press wrote; and it is again the responsibility of Government to keep its citizens informed.  This is a serious matter regarding the citizens of this country who are allowed to continue loitering with guns, armed and terrorising their neighbours in the form of self defence and guarding ng themselves against the possible raids from the neighbours. To my surprise, these are internal conflicts between their own tribes which have spilt over and against the spirit of the resolution which was passed under the understanding which was made by Government with the Karimojong.  Now I am wondering about the Government policy; is it now a lifestyle, is it a style of particular individuals to be allowed to go around armed in the name of protecting themselves and their animals? We have also received a trek of cattle keepers in Buhaguzi county along the Lake Albert and they are armed. I am wondering whether all cattle keepers are being allowed to move around with guns in form of protecting their animals.  
		
The Karimojong were allowed to keep their guns in defence of any possible raids from neighbours. Is it now a policy of Government - because they have not made any statement, we have not been informed whether it is true that the 16 soldiers who were reported dead and the Mamba which seems to be a heavy calibre weapon was being deployed against the Karimojong, or whether it was being deployed against possible invasion from neighbours.  All this we need to be informed of by the ministers that be, but we were now getting increasingly concerned when we only get some voluntary statements from the concerned area MPs.  Constitutionally we are entitled to know the fate of our troops.  
		
Soldiers are not supposed to go around to be killed by armed citizens within the Country and we call it a day.  If there has been a declaration of war, either against the Karimojong because the Mambas were taken there, was it for the protection of our boarders, or was it to truck down the armed Karimojong?  All these clarifications need to be given. At the same time, I want to put it to Government that it is really wrong for us to continue nursing this situation which is going to extend to other regions of our country.  
For instance, now we are getting armed cattle keepers in the form of protection of their animals.  Next time we shall have people who have no animals also protecting their goats using pangas.  So, if this is the life style, then all Ugandans should continue being armed, and when you find troops moving around, you ambush and kill them and no statement is made. I think it is also important for Government to inform us, and keep us informed so that our constituencies are assured of total security.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
		
MR. KWIZERA EDDIE (Bufumbira East, Kisoro):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members.  I see there is a contradiction on the side of the Government because on this one it is very clear that there are double standards. It is very unfortunate to see that Government can allow the Karimojong to move with their guns to protect themselves and their property.  Why, while in Kisoro, it is the Government doing it? I even think that the Ministry in Charge of Karamoja should be abolished, because almost nothing has been done since it was established.  
		
The issue of arming one tribe against another tribe is going to be like people in Rwanda and Congo who are going to finish each other, the Somalis, the Ethiopians.  Now, this trend is coming here to the great lakes region.  So, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, I can see a great contradiction.  How would you know the warriors in Karamoja and how would you know the rebels?  Why should the Karimojong fight the soldiers?  What is the difference?  So, this issue of arming the Karimojong and the other cattle keepers is becoming a very very big problem.  I think that even the situation in Karamoja is at stake because, if there is no growth in population, these people are going to finish each other and the army is also going to finish them.  
		
If you are talking of internal aggression, what is the use of the army in Karamoja?  Why can't the army go to those borders and defend them?  So, Mr. Speaker, I think we need at least a change of attitude and change the way we have handled the Karamoja issue. It seems we have not done much as Government.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
		
MR. ONAPITO EKOLOMOIT(Amuria County, Katakwi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker and I thank my Uncle from Karamoja for once more raising the issue of cattle rustling in the august House. Certainly to many Members, this issue is so old to the point of becoming boring, that is why many of them have walked out. My view is that the problem of Karamoja has been misunderstood and continues to be misunderstood.  Even from the previous submissions, the common perception is that Government has the capacity to disarm the Karimojong but the does not want to; I say "no".  Government has failed and cannot disarm the Karimojong.  This is because the approach of armed force has been tested before and it has failed.  I am sure even this Government has wanted to use force but it has failed. The hon. Brig. here knows better. The problem in Karamoja is that rustling is a life style, it is a culture, and I beg to differ with people from Karamoja and any one who thinks otherwise.  When I say, it is a culture, what I mean is that the ordinary Karimojong does not understand that rustling is illegal - that it is wrong.  

To many of them this is the life style they have lived through, and feel it is a way of survival. Not only do they need cattle for economic use, but also for social status.  Power lies in the kraals, power lies with kraal leaders who control cattle.  But unfortunately this issue has not been addressed at the social level.  How do you change attitudes among the Karimojong so that they appreciate that cattle rustling is wrong?  Because to them, they do it as their parents have done before. But everyone seems to think you can just go and push it down the throats of the Karimojong, and it is not working.
		
Those who know better will tell you there are about 100,000 guns in Karamoja.  I do not think the official estimate of UPDF strength in small arms is more than 50,000.  So, how can you disarm with such forces?  Unless you are ready to commit genocide on the Karimojong.
		
I think the thing to disarm is not the arms, but the mines of the rustlers.  If there are people in other parts of the Country walking with guns and they do not rustle, why should the Karimojong in particular be rustling?  Which means there is something socially wrong with their life style.  I think it is time Government really started a sustainable programme of disarming the Karimojong, not necessarily of the guns, but of the attitude.  That means creating the awareness in Karamoja that there is alternative life style.  That you do not have to rustle to have cows. That you do not need to have a thousand cows to be respected.  

All these are issues which can only be understood if we go down to understand the attitudes in Karamoja.  Otherwise, the present approach where we are all crying that disarm Karimojong, Government knows it cannot because the recent clash in Kotido clearly shows that there is enough fire power in Karamoja to match Government unless if Government is ready to commit genocide to wipe out all the armed Karimojong.  Thank you.
		
MR. ILUKORI SAMSON (Dodoth County, Kotido): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The issue of cattle rustling in Karamoja which has been taken to be a culture is actually not so.  This is notoriety which the state of Uganda must face, and face squarely.  It is hardly a week from now since after the Panyangara incident which has not only occurred now but even occurred in 1987, when I was in that district as a mobiliser.  During that incident, most of the UPDF soldiers were killed and a number of properties were destroyed. 
		
On the 24th of this month, a truck left Kabong for Kotido, and an A'level student was shot dead in a road ambush on the same road - Kabong-Kotido - a UPDF soldier was wounded by the Jie armed warriors.  Mr. Speaker, there is no way now you can proceed to distinguish. The issue is of notoriety in the region. This gun must be removed.  Mr. Speaker, I come from there.  I have survived a number of times road ambushes, in the course of mobilising these people. To behold the bullets directed at me were not nice; it was quite bad.  We cannot, Mr. Speaker, at this particular time, proceed to behave beyond our body temperatures.  The issue at hand is criminality committed in the name of cattle rustling is indeed a matter that must be attended to.  
		
The administration in Karamoja, the magic of mobilisation that I personally participated in with a number of hon. Members here present, has completely died down.  We had already gone ahead to zero in on this cattle rustling on individual basis and not the whole tribe of Karamoja.  They are notorious people, which the administration has refused to face and face squarely.
		
The hon. Brig. Kyaligonza, was once based in Kabong - my county - and we did collaborate to reduce this cattle rustling. While passing a message of condolence to the departed souls of our soldiers and those who were murdered innocently and their families, I would like to thank the UPDF that has continued to look after that region.  It is the UPDF that has been looking after that region and this very gun which was becoming friendly has now been turned round to kill these Ugandans.  

The question of distinguishing, saying Dodoth verses Jie and a, b, c, d should not arise. The issue is to address the question of guns. In the course of mobilisation at that time, the Karimojong had gone ahead requested Government to deploy at strategic places where they knew warriors from Kenya and Sudan usually pass when they come to attack them.  
		
The challenge is in the hands of the Government.  Deploy and take away these guns. May I appeal to fellow Ugandans, at our level of leadership that we had better address the problem of cattle rustling and not these mini-issues. Let us focus at the programme which will liberate this Country, which will liberate Karamoja. Insecurity has been responsible for the continuous lagging behind developmentally of that region; for Ugandans will never go there and work with a free mind.  
		
So, the question of distinguishing, saying, 'who is who'?  The question is, proceed on the issue of the legal gun.  Take away the gun and let the Government of Uganda take charge of the borders and get hold of these guns. I have lost and Uganda has lost a citizen who could have been in this House from that county - he has been killed by a cattle rustler. I would rather we proceed on a programme to liberate the Karimojong's mind and take away the gun so that the legal gun takes charge of the region.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  
		
MR. SEMBAJJA SULAIMAN(Bukomansimbi County, Masaka): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The issue of Karamoja is not new.  Some of us who were in the NRC saw some Members of Parliament by then who were almost fighting each other in this very House.  I remember a Member of Parliament from Dodoth, having organised a reconciliation meeting with the Jie, one turned against the other. The issue came on the Floor of the House in order for the House to resolve the issue of the Karimojong. This issue has continued. 
		
Hon. Brig. Kyaligonza will agree with me that we even took time in the NRC to discuss the issue of the Karimojong and what to do with the social benefits of Karamoja, and that is why the Ministry was created.  But I am getting worried for the Karimojong to say that because they have no water, they can resolve to rustling and killing our UPDF soldiers. I am even worried that time is going to come for them, instead of embarking on rustling, they are going to be power hungry and take over this Country through such type of revolutions.  Who knows?  These guys are power hungry.  One day they will wake up and overrun this Country when we are looking.  So, it is high time that these people do not kill our soldiers under the disguise of no water.  

I think if the hon. Speaker can avail this Committee, put aside the way it happened in the NRC, we solve the issue of the Karimojong once and once for all, and the political leaders can take responsibility for any short-comings of the death of our people.  I thank you.
		
MR. MAO NOBERT (Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to console my Friends from Karamoja.  This is what happens when there is a lot of prejudice.  I remember when we used to talk about the problems in Acholiland, people would talk to you as if they really know what you are talking about.  
		
Let us allow representatives of the people to represent their people.  Not everything they will say will flatter our own opinions. They may say things which are unpleasant. But we are from a different people.  You cannot expect an MP from Jie to speak like an MP from Nyabushozi, or to speak like an MP from Makindye.  We represent different parts of Uganda.  So, our speeches cannot be uniform.  
		
I am really sorry that there is a lot of prejudice.  I think it was Lenin who said, prejudice is further from the truth than ignorance.  I rather deal with ignorant people than prejudiced people, Mr. Speaker.  So, I would like to warn against prejudice in this House.  I am not prejudiced against anybody.  I would like to advise that the Karamoja people should just remain consistent and hammer their point until they are understood because you are the most reliable voices of the people of Karamoja.  We are not going to rely on any other voices apart from the voices of you who represent the people of Karamoja.  I have my own personal example to attest to that. These prejudices will be overcome and the hard liners will be transformed if you are consistent and insistent.  
		
The problem of Karamoja is a problem of illegal guns and that is the major concern of this Government.  There are many neighbours.  The few points that clash on this Floor of this House are the few points of those who are from Karamoja and the few points of the immediate neighbours of Karamoja and then the rest of Uganda.  The majority of those from the rest of Uganda think it is a nuisance.  The neighbours think it is an inconvenience.  The Karimojong feel neglected and I think the Karimojong are right to feel neglected.  The rest of Ugandans have adopted the colonial attitude of treating Karamoja as if it were an anthropological museum. 
		
We must condemn this attitude, instead let us educate our people.  When you hear on the Floor of this House people talking as if any Ugandan life lost - whether it is UPDF, whether it is warrior, whether it is Karimojong, as if one corpse has more value than the other.  Mr. Speaker, we must look at all human life as equal. Innocent people have suffered more than those who are holding the guns.
		
The neighbours of Karamoja see this problem as a problem of unequal application of the law. While somebody who is found in Teso or Soroti neighbouring Karamoja with a gun will be arrested, in Karamoja people move with guns freely. Who is supposed to ensure that there is rule of law and to apply the law?  It is the Government.  So, apart from illegal guns we now come to the question of unequal application of the law.  I blame this on a lack of a serious and consistent policy, in fact a dubious Government policy about Karamoja.  

When the President went to Karamoja to address them and to talk about this issue, he was saying these are my friends, I think the problem is now going to be solved.  He held out as a warrior and the Karamoja received him as a warrior, I recall that they gave him a walking stick and he came back.  He thought he had solved the problem.  Now, several years later, this problem is not solved, the President has his walking stick from Karamoja but there is no proclamation on the part of the Government about what they will do about Karamoja.  

A seminar was held I believe in 1992, a lengthy report entitled, "All Eyes on Karamoja" was published, all Members of this House, we have that document.  I do not know how many of the good recommendations have been implemented.  The problem therefore, is not that the Government has not been told what should be done.  In fact whatever we are doing here, we are just repeating.   The question to put now is, is there a will to solve that problem?  The Government is just fire fighting instead of building fireproofs; it is thinking that it can always rescue fires through fire brigades.  When there is a problem in Karamoja, they send 4,000 UPDF troops - that is not the solution. There are those who stand up here and say, this problem must be solved once and for all.  Believe me, you are not the soldier going to the field tomorrow. You do not know. I have spoken to many soldiers who have had to deal with the problems of Karamoja, and they will testify that, guns alone will not solve it.  

It is important for those who are terrorising innocent civilians to know that they are not free to do it, that one is okay, but to send a message to Karamoja that the policy of the Government is to occupy Karamoja, because that is what it amounts to, is wrong. Are we going to endorse a policy of occupying Karamoja?  Where is the front line?  These armed bands have infiltrated the whole area, where is the front line?  When you send armoured vehicles and tanks and you are neglecting, you are being advised now to work through civic leaders, and you are neglecting the empowerment of offices.  

What is the message you are sending to the ordinary Karimojong?  Mr. Speaker, I am strongly opposed to putting force as the policy on Karamoja. If force was the policy - those who attempted previously would have been right - the problem would have been solved. However many times you repeat the wrong approach, you will never succeed.  If something is wrong, by doing more of the wrong thing, you do not make a right thing. More force is not the solution to the problems of Karamoja. The problems of Karamoja require a serious policy on the part of the Government which should be implemented over time. It is not going to be a military operation.  The problem with some of the thinkers in this Government, is that every problem is solved as a military problem. Every problem is a military challenge.
		
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Mao, I think you wind up because we have exceeded time. 
		
MR. MAO:  I rest my case.  No force in Karamoja.
		
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Now hon. Members, the rules provide for debate not to extend beyond thirty minutes, we have gone to thirty five.  However, the rules then tell us what we do at the end of the thirty minutes. I think I should end this matter by putting a question on the statement which has been made by hon. Adome Lokwii.  I now put the question.
		
(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  With this we have come to the end of today's business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose and adjourned until Thursday 29th July 1999 at 2.00 p.m.).
	     
		        
