                                                   
Wednesday 21st July,1999.

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS.

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi,  in the Chair).

(The House was called to order).

STATEMENT BY THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON THE NATIONAL ECONOMY.

MR. ISAAC MUSUMBA (Buzaaya County, Kamuli):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, this is a short statement on a report that we prepared for this House on the closure and sale of the Co-operative Bank.  

Mr. Speaker, we did circulate a report two and a half weeks ago, however, owing to the busy schedule of this House, it did not find time or space on the Order Paper in time to cause this House to participate in the deliberations relating to the closure of the Co-operative Bank and its subsequent sale, until now, Sir, when you have afforded me opportunity to give a short update.  

Mr. Speaker, you will recall that Bank of Uganda closed the Co-operative Bank on the 20th of May,1999.  On the 2nd of June,1999, the Committee on the National Economy got a presentation from the share holders of the Co-operative Bank that Bank of Uganda had unfairly and unjustifiably closed the Co-operative Bank Limited.  The petitioners were seeking for the intervention of this august House to cause the Governor and his officials to meet and discuss various pertinent issues concerning the grounds for closure of the Co-operative Bank.  Indeed, the Committee was informed that all efforts by the share holders to meet the Governor had been futile so they sought our intervention so that at least the Governor can listen to them.  

The share holders believed then, and still believe today, that the bank should not have been closed and that the intended liquidation was based on false premises which grossly undervalued their bank.  They also complained that the bank seemed to have been offered for sale to pre-selected buyers in a manner that was pre-determined and its fate pre-destined.  Mr. Speaker, they gave ten grounds why they thought that their bank had been closed unfairly.  

They said, Sir, that of all the banks that were in that category, the Co-operative Bank was the most liquid at the time of closure;  it had a liquidity in excess of 50 billion Uganda shillings in the bank.  The grounds for closure which have been mentioned as insolvency by the Bank of Uganda were also contested on the grounds that the insolvency which had earlier on been put at 4.8 billion shillings was actually not of that magnitude, especially considering that one; Shs. 3 billion had already been recovered from bad loans but the Bank of Uganda had ignored  to consider it while determining the bank's level of insolvency.  Two; that there was shs. 1 billion which was supposed to be refunded by USAID for disbursement to finance eighty loans using customer deposits.  

There was also another shs. 1 billion which was expected by way of a matching grant, but most important, Sir,  that there was shs. 14.4 billion which Government owed to the Co-operative Unions which, as share holders, had borrowed money from the Co-operative Bank but could not pay back in time because Government did not pay this money.  So, interest was accumulating, yet Government which had disabled them from servicing their loan was not paying and is in arrears of Shs. 14.4 billion. Their contention was that it was wrong for Government on the one hand to owe them that amount of money and then on the other hand turn around and order for their being locked up on grounds that they were insolvent.  

They also mentioned other monies; some shs. 0.5 which was supposed to be refunded by USAID for depositor funds used to finance the Equipment Purchase Programme and there was another 2 billion shillings which was duly approved for disbursement by USAID and Ministry of Finance.  They also went further to say that the premises upon which they had said USAID had capitalised the bank by 28 billion was false because the actual amount of money that was received in the bank was only 14.3 billion shillings, about 50 percent.  

They also said the Bank of Uganda had used wrong premises for provisioning for debts; that the whole basis of the Co-operative Bank was to finance agricultural activities, industrial and infrastructual activities and they contended that loans to peasants to the rural areas which were geared towards agricultural development do meet several hazards, therefore, the way they should be classified should be different from those of trade or commercial loans.  So, they argued that the subjective methods of provisioning were detrimental, they were erroneous and they culminated into causing the bank to appear insolvent when in fact it was not.  

They said the manner in which their bank was being cannibalised, their bank was being quietly sold under the carpet, their bank was being handled in a manner that was not transparent showed that there was an agenda other than the normal transparent way of dealing with banks that have run into problems.  
They also said that the mismanagement in the Co-operative Bank was solely an issue of USAID which Government invited into their bank, and that Dr. Kalema and Joseph Nsereko were appointed on the Board to represent USAID interests.  John Muwanga was also appointed on the Board to represent Ministry of Finance and that the Managing Director was appointed by USAID and he was an American who had excessive powers that were even bigger than that of the Board.  They say, for example: "The Managing Director shall have all the powers and perform all management functions including the powers to hire and fire all the company employees, and to manage and direct them together with all the company operations and shall, notwithstanding the foregoing, have powers to vote at all meetings of the Directors which he attends during the interim period up to the expiry of the USAID project, that is 18th June, 2000."  

In effect, therefore, the management was solely and wholly in the hands of USAID, and that, therefore, the ills or mistakes that were committed by the Managing Director who was appointed by USAID, who managed the company or mismanaged it on behalf of USAID, were used to try and bury them along with the bank. 

They also said that there was a calculation to extinguish the share holders' interest in a manner that was seen to be fraudulent and in a manner that was under-handed.  They also said that the share allotment was itself manipulated.  They say over 17 billion was not accounted for by USAID management and records with the Registrar of Companies indicated that neither returns nor the allotment of shares were ever filed since the date of incorporation.  Share holders, therefore, were wondering where the 17 billion was.  Then they do talk in detail about the Government indebtedness.  

When the Committee invited the Bank of Uganda Governor, and at a subsequent meeting invited him together with the Minister of Finance and hon. Gabriel Opio did come, their submission was as follows: That the Co-operative Bank had been performing negatively since 1978, and that by 1991, the survival of the Co-operative Bank was by loans from Bank of Uganda. That the operations of the Co-operative Bank have been characterised by poor lending practices and fraud. That Unions who were the original owners of the bank were heavily indebted to the bank and that the Unions have been heavily represented on the Board of the bank and that they have even provided chairmanship, and therefore are stopped from claiming bad management. That in all cases where a bank has been closed, share holders will always claim that their bank has been closed unfairly and so be it with the Co-operative Bank. That the Co-operative Bank lost 17 billion in a period of 4 years, and has been kept afloat only by infusion funds from Government through USAID grants.  

Having considered all that and listened to both sides, the Committee made the following recommendations:  One, the Committee recommended that Bank of Uganda invites the Co-operative Bank share holders to reconcile their accounts. This is a matter of figures.  One is saying, you did not take account of 3 billion, one is saying, the 3 billion where is it?  We look at the accounts and determine, if the 3 billion is there, that it be applied.  Two; that the Government which was stated to owe 14 billion to the bank, that this amount be verified and that once this amount is verified, Government should arrange to pay the share holders that it is the Co-operative Union so that they can in turn make good obligations towards the bank.  If this had been done, probably the insolvency would have been wiped out.  

The third recommendation was that Bank of Uganda restrains itself from selling Co-operative Bank in a piecemeal manner, mindful that every opportunity should be availed to the share holders to raise the required capital and subject it to an acceptable investment and management plan. The share holders should be allowed to retain their bank.  Four, the Committee's recommendation was that the share holders be availed further opportunity to find an acceptable core investor who would bring in capital and management acceptable to Bank of Uganda.  

Subject thereto, there were in fact reconciliation meetings held and it was established that the 3 billion referred to by the Co-operative Bank was in fact received in the bank, but had not been reflected in the Books of Accounts as presented by Bank of Uganda.  This caused the level of insolvency to drop from the original 4.8 to 3.6 billion, having allowed for the recoveries that were not to be allowed towards the settlement of the insolvency.  The Bank of Uganda further informed the Committee that they now require the reserve capital to include 2.3 billion for further provisioning and 1.8 billion cash ratio requirements.  This brings the total required capitalization to 7.7 billion. 

The Co-operative Bank share holders subsequently came back to the Committee and informed the Committee as follows that, one; they had got offers for core investment from a consortium of Nile Bank and Orient Bank.  There are copies of these letters which I will, at an appropriate moment in the course of this debate, lay on the Table.  Two, that they had also got offers from First National Bank of Granada to inject 5 million dollars instantly, and a further 5 million dollars plus an additional 25 million dollars while management was to be hired internationally, and the management would have to be accepted to Bank of Uganda.  But for the First National Bank, they were not keen on managing the bank but were prepared to have a pay-on-sight guarantee from a first class bank for their investment commitment, subject to due diligence.  

The share holders also stated that they have not heard from the Government on the verification of the indebtedness and its unpreparedness to pay.  That surprisingly, Bank of Uganda was continuing to send officials of Standard Bank to Co-operative Bank premises to take stock of what is there and behave like they were already owners. That was then, Sir.  

The Committee looked at the legal ramifications and they did find that under Article 93, the Committees of Parliament have powers to assess and evaluate activities of Government and other bodies, and report to Parliament. And under Article 162(1)(c), it provides that: "The Bank of Uganda shall encourage and promote economic development and the efficient utilisation of the resources of Uganda through effective and efficient operation of a banking and credit system."  Also, under Article 162, sub-article (2), it provides that:  "In performing its functions, the Bank of Uganda shall conform to this Constitution, but shall not be subject to the direction or control of any person or authority."  

Under Section 5 sub-section (2) of the Bank of Uganda Statute of 1993, the Bank of Uganda is enjoined to supervise, regulate, control and discipline all financial institutions.  Further, under section 31 (i) of the Financial Institutions Statute, the Central Bank may take possession or seize a financially insolvent institution where the bank deems that the continuation of that financial institution's activities is detrimental to the interests of the depositors.  

Now, where such seizure is effected, section 32 provides that the Central Bank shall be vested with exclusive powers of management and control of the affairs of such seized financial institution, and it shall be up to the Central Bank to continue or discontinue the operations of such a financial institution, re-organise or liquidate the financial institution. It further says that,  after seizure and taking possession of the financial institution, the Central Bank shall make an inventory of the assets of such financial institution, and transmit a copy of it to the Minister.  

Where, as a result of an inventory, the Central Bank determines that the financial institution is insolvent, the Central Bank may, in consultation with the Minister, close the financial institution on account of its inability to meet its obligations to its depositors and other creditors. Upon a financial institution becoming insolvent, the Central Bank or its appointee shall be the receiver of the financial institution.  The Central Bank, as a receiver, may either arrange a merger with another financial institution or proceed with liquidation of the insolvent financial institution.  

In determining the way forward for an insolvent bank, the Central Bank shall take into consideration the following: 
	
(a)	The estimated cost of the Central Bank with regard to the shortfalls to be recovered through acquisition of all deposit liabilities by the acquiring financial institution;

(b)	the impact on, or and loss to depositors; 

(c)	the overall impact on public confidence in the stability of the financial sector in general as a result of acquisition or liquidation.  Those are the powers of the Bank of Uganda. 

In conclusion, the Committee posed the following questions:- In light of the legal provisions set out above, is Bank of Uganda beyond reproach by anybody because it says it is not under direction of any authority?  Does that mean that the Bank of Uganda is beyond reproach by anybody?  Can Parliament intervene in any Bank of Uganda issue where it feels that injustice is about to be occasioned by the acts of omission of the Bank of Uganda, or, is the Co-operative Bank matter - was it and is it still a lost cause?  Did the Committees of Parliament sit to consider all this to make their modest recommendations to no purpose?  If this Parliament, having considered everything, is of the view that Bank of Uganda rescinds its decision to sell a bank or to close a bank or to liquidate a bank, is it in the powers of Parliament to say so?  Is the Bank of Uganda beyond making mistakes?  Have they behaved in the past in such a manner that for them they are beyond listening to anybody or this august House?   

This is a statement arising from a report that I did circulate to the House, and it is for the purpose of updating this House to the developments. Bank of Uganda never came back to us, the Ministry of Finance which was supposed to verify the debts never came back to us. We simply read in the newspapers that they have now sold the bank in a piecemeal manner, quietly  - as the share holders put it - at mid-night, not in a manner that was transparently inviting tenders or interested parties.  The prices at which these scratches are being sold is unknown. 

The statement that I am giving ends by seeking from this House, guidance on the way forward as to how Parliament should relate to the bank, as to how we should review all the issues that relate to Bank of Uganda which touch on the economy of this country, and which touch on the citizenry of this country.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you very much.  But perhaps before you stand and raise a point of procedure, I want to observe as follows that, ideally, when such a report or any report from any Committee is presented, it should not be discussed at the same time when the chairman presents the matter.  Therefore, the purpose of this statement which has been made and the statement is effected by rule 38, namely that any debate - since it is not a personal statement - any debate that may arise is only restricted not to exceed 30 minutes. But in view of the importance of the contents of this report, it has been made on the understanding that no debate is going to arise from this report today, but ample time will be given exceeding 30 minutes some time next week when you have also analyzed the report and you have made your own research and so forth, so that you can make meaningful contribution to the report, rather than acting immediately now and you are only restricted to 30 minutes.  So, the statement has been made and I thank the chairman. We shall move to our next item on the agenda.  But next week, you shall be given opportunity to discuss it.

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY H.E. THE PRESIDENT TO PARLIAMENT ON WEDNESDAY 2ND JUNE, 1999.

(Debate continued)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  As you remember, yesterday we adjourned the House when hon. Okumu Ringa had spent five minutes of his time.  Therefore, he should not take advantage of yesterday's adjournment to go for 30 minutes. You are given seven minutes to wind up your speech.  

MR. OKUMU RINGA (Padyere County, Nebbi): I would like to thank you, Mr. Speaker, for allowing me to continue with my contribution and as you may recall, my contribution was just at the beginning when I was interrupted by the issue of lack of quorum - (interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I think to put our record correctly, the adjournment was not prompted by lack of quorum;  nobody raised that point.  The adjournment was first of all prompted when one Member, namely, hon. Kazoora observed that the Prime Minister had been deserted by the Front Bench and therefore, I observed that it appeared both the Front Bench and the Backbenchers were a bit tired, therefore we adjourned.  So, it was not quorum, it was precisely that.  Proceed. 

MR. OKUMU RINGA:  I would like to thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I support the Motion on the Floor because it is provided for under the Constitution, under Article 101. Mr. Speaker, it states that: "The President shall, at the beginning of each Session of Parliament, deliver to Parliament an address on the state of the nation."  It is in this respect, Mr. Speaker, that I support this Motion, but allow me, Mr. Speaker, to mention that, whereas I do support the State of the Nation Address presented by the President, I would like to raise some issues that advisors of His Excellency the President should do more work whenever there is an issue with regard to the State of the Nation Address.  

I am saying so because, when I look at the overall content of the State of the Nation Address, I believe that certain issues are grossly missing and glaringly missing.  A State of the Nation Address is supposed to look at what we have done for the last 12 months, build on and report on what we have been able to achieve and what we have not been able to achieve.  So, in this State of the Nation Address, I have noted that some of these issues are missing, however, allow me, Mr. Speaker, to concur with His Excellency the President on the issue of security. 

This country is more secure now than it was during the last State of the Nation Address.  I would like to note that in large areas of the North, there has been peace and we are praying and working hard to ensure that in districts bordering troubled states like the Sudan and now the Congo, people work hard to ensure that there is peace.  

Nebbi district, Mr. Speaker, borders the Democratic Republic of Congo, and I have noted with concern that in the President's address, nothing has been mentioned completely with regard to the state of affairs in the Democratic  Republic of Congo where our troops are defending our borders.  I even note with great concern that in spite of the fact that the Chief of Staff of the sovereign State of Uganda is operating in the Democratic Republic of Congo to defend peace and security of our State, there has been no report with regard to how we are doing in Congo.  I do hope that may be in a different forum this issue will be looked at.  

I am raising this matter because, according to our Constitution, Article 124  is very clear on how the sovereign State of Uganda should engage in whatever may be considered as a military confrontation with another sovereign State.  Article 124 Clause (1) states: "The President may, with approval of Parliament given by resolution supported by not less than two thirds of all Members of Parliament, declare that a state of war exists between Uganda and any other State."  Of course, ours has not been a state of war, we are defending our borders but we have been there for two years and that is why I say there must be at least a report to the nation with regard to our state in as far as this situation is concerned.  

I do support that our country must be secure, but I should not be misunderstood that maybe I am diverting.  I would like to say that this is a very important House, it should not be only when hon. Awori stands up to ask this question that  someone asks why hon. Awori is asking.  It should be the concern of all Ugandans that these issues be looked at without any double standards.  

On the economy, I would like to recognise that the state of the economy has improved, and I would like to agree with His Excellency the President that indeed, the economy has done very well; the economic growth is appreciable and if you look at the various sectors, you find that within the industrial sector, there has been growth bit in agriculture, growth has been stunted because of drought. In areas of construction, when you move places, you find indeed there is growth but, Mr. Speaker, allow me to state that even though we have had economic growth, there has been a general outcry in this country since the closure of banks, so we need an explanation from the Minister of Finance on the closure of banks.  

In view of the above, if you look at page (3) paragraph (2) of the President's State of the Nation Address, it reads: "The closure of insolvent banks should not scare us."  Yes, I would like to agree that banks which are insolvent should be closed but insolvency should be defined in precise economic and accounting terms. In accounting terms, insolvency means that a firm has not been able to meet its day-to-day cash-flow requirements.  In other words, a firm has been failing to meet its demands on cash to pay its day-to-day demands of cash. 

In case of the banks,  insolvency does not necessarily mean bankruptcy unless declared by a court of law or certified by an audit.  So, as some of these banks were being closed, I did not know and I had not even heard nor even read in the newspaper whether somebody went to present a cheque and the cheque bounced because there was no cash available to pay. Of course my argument is not to defend inefficient banks, my argument is that if banks are to be closed, there should be a proper method of evaluating them before closing them.

MR. LWANGA MUTEKANGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank you honourable Member for giving way. You are talking about insolvency and you are telling us that insolvency does not mean bankruptcy, could you please clarify to me; at what stage is the difference between insolvency and bankruptcy in the case of a bank, since you know?

MR. OKUMU RINGA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Tim Lwanga for that question.  In case of a bank, insolvency would mean that the bank is not able to meet its day-to-day cash requirements because banks operate on a given cash ratio and the cash ratio is defined in many ways, one of which is by the fact that a bank must be able to honour its obligations as and when there is demand for cash or financial instruments, as the case may be.  When a bank fails to do that, then the bank is insolvent.  

Now, when you go to liquidate a bank, it means you have taken into account the insolvency and the actual asset net value of the bank, whether positive or negative. There are many accountants and economists here who may argue this matter. In accounting terms, the equation of assets equalling to equity plus liability stands.  Now, a bankrupt situation means negative asset value and that the liability of a firm is much more than the assets. That is when you may wish to liquidate a company, in this case a bank.  

So, if we should liquidate banks, there must be proper analysis so that we do not have complaints like we have in the case of Greenland Bank, in the case of ICB; like we more or less have in the case of the Co-operative Bank.  I believe that  what I am saying is not strange. Those who know it will appreciate it, those who want to go by deception will say it is wrong.  

Allow me, Mr. Speaker, to end my contribution by stating that I do agree whole-heartedly with the statement of His Excellency the President that our firms or companies are suffering from what we call "economic exposure" as a result of changes in the exchange rates.  Unfortunately, the Minister of Finance is not here, I wish he was.  That since May 1987, the Uganda shilling has depreciated by 2,400 per cent.  Since May 1987, the value of the shilling has gone down by 2,400 per cent!  This simply means that if you take the base year 1987, when one dollar was used as the value of Shs.60 and you divide that by the current value of the dollar to the shilling, then you get the percentage I am talking about.  

Now, a company which had contracted a debt in 1987 or 1990, today has to look for more shillings to pay these debts in dollars and that is what we call transaction exposure as a result of such economic exposure.  You can refer to that in terms of transaction exposure and in terms of the actual loss within the economy.  So, I would like to agree with what His Excellency the President  says on page (14) that our companies have become less competitive partly because they have paid their debts.  For example, when the shilling was 500 to the dollar in 1991, a company which  contracted a debt then, today has to pay one dollar at the rate of shs. 1,500 per dollar.  

This is a big strain on the economy and the individual companies. I would like those economists in the Ministry of Finance to come up and clearly explain this to us because, if one were to use the rate of the dollar at the 1987 GDP and equate it with the rate of the dollar today, it would be interesting to extrapolate the figures and reflect the economic growth. Actually, the whole thing says that the economy has grown, the shilling has lost value, but it has maintained a degree of purchasing power.  This again, is academic, but it is important that the planners in the Ministry of Finance look at this argument critically. 

I would like, Mr. Speaker, to end by thanking His Excellency the President for his speech, and I would like to call upon all the Presidential Advisers, once again, to assist us and ensure that when there is a State of the Nation Address, let it be comprehensive because we are not talking of individuals, we are talking of the presidency as an institution. We know that His Excellency Museveni is an articulate leader, he is an intellectual and I am sure we would like to have it on record that in the 1999 speech, the President was comprehensive.  

In conclusion, I would like to say that such remarks or criticisms are not negative, but evaluative and constructive whereby you apportion and appreciate.  So, I am appreciating the speech of the President, and I would like to thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. NTACYOTUGIRA (Bufumbira North, Kisoro: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I wish to thank His Excellency the President for his clear and comprehensive address on the State of the Nation, as demanded by the Constitution.  I wish further to thank him and hail the Movement Government for the successive achievements in the field of the economy, security and politics.  

On the field of the economy, definitely quite a lot has been achieved by this Government since it came to power.  I recall the period when there was almost nothing in this nation; no soap, no salt, no sugar, no hoe.  I recall the time when we used to line up for essential commodities but as of now, we have almost everything.  

On the side of security, I recall the most horrible period when people were being murdered and I especially recall the year 1976 when the Acholi and Langi were being murdered in cold blood. That time I was in Kabale and so many were murdered and dumped just along the roads.  At that time, I managed to hide three officers in my bedroom.  Maybe you know some of them, Mr. Speaker. They were Mr. Aliro Omara,  Mr. Opio, Mr. Moris Lagwol. We helped them to escape and because I was also being hunted, I had to escape and I spent some days here in Kampala.  So, Mr. Speaker, what I want to say here is that at least now there is some relative peace, although of course there have been incursions of banditry, murders, abductions and so on and so forth.  

I am happy to note that in the President's Address, he says that there is peace in the North, peace in the West and elsewhere  but when His Excellency talks about that, he does not talk about the internal security, especially here in Kampala.  It is yesterday when hon. Lukyamuzi talked about people who have disappeared from his constituency.  It is at this juncture that I wish also to observe that a certain constituent of mine disappeared two years ago and was made to disappear by the state officials two years back.  Mr. Speaker, this person who disappeared is called Mr. Paul Bagaragu. If you give me permission, Mr. Speaker, I will read a note which was dispatched to me.  

It says: "Mr. Paul Bagaragu was arrested on 28th May, 1997 on Wednesday.  He was arrested with one Kamugisha by two people travelling in motor vehicles 450 UCH, 328 UPG.  Kamugisha was taken to Katwe Police Station and detained under Ref.71/28/5/97.  For Bagaragu was not detained here.  On 29th May, 1997 Kamugisha was released and signed for by one Tumwebaze from the State House, carrying identity card No.7026 of the State House.  He was with one Muyima Siraji, carrying identity card No. 7137 also of the State House.  The wife reported to Wankulukuku Police Post, but she was told that the husband was arrested by the State Officials and advised to be patient."  

When I got this note, I quickly wrote to the Minister in charge of security, hon. Muruli Mukasa and here is the letter:  "MYSTERIOUS DISAPPEARANCE OF MR. PAUL BAGARAGU ON 28TH MAY, 1997.  The above mentioned person comes from my Constituency, Bufumbira North, Kisoro District.  He has been residing and working in Kampala, operating a restaurant at Kabowa Ssembule Division.  I have been approached by his relative to assist them locate his whereabouts for it is alleged that on 28th May, 1997 two persons travelling in two motor vehicles number 450 UCH and 328 UPG came and picked him from his place of work, saying that they were security men hailing from the State House.  I am also informed that he was arrested together with another person called Kamugisha who alone was left in Police Custody at Katwe Police Station and detained under Ref: 71/28/5/97.  As for Mr.  Paul Bagaragu, he was taken to an unknown destination. His relatives do not know his whereabouts.  Mr. Kamugisha was later released under the directive of one, Tumwebaze from State House, bearing identity card No.7026 and that he was in company of one, Muyima Siraji, bearing identity card No. 7137 from State House."  
Mr. Paul Bagaragu is a citizen of Uganda, and he is entitled to fundamental rights and freedoms. Article 23(1) of the Constitution of Uganda states: "No person shall be deprived of personal liberty..."  
Clause (2): "A person arrested, restricted or detained shall be kept in a place authorised by Law."  

Clause (3): "A person arrested, restricted or detained shall be informed immediately, in a language that the person understands, of the reasons for the arrest, restriction or detention and of his or her right to a lawyer of his or her choice. 

Clause (4) further states: "A person arrested or detained shall, if not earlier released, be brought to court as soon as possible, but in any case not later than 48 hours from the time of his or her arrest.  

Clause (5) states: "Where a person is restricted or detained, the next-of-kin of that person shall, at the request of that person, be informed as soon as practicable of the restriction or detention"  - his wife does not know where he is to date.  
(b): "The next-of-kin, lawyer and personal doctor of that person shall be allowed reasonable access to that person."  I went further to write to hon. Muruli Mukasa -(interruption)-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member you may abridge the letter so that you then go to your conclusion.

MR. NTACYOTUGIRA:  Article 28(1) states: "In the determination of civil rights and obligations or any criminal charge, a person shall be entitled to a fair, speedy public hearing before an independent and impartial court or tribunal established by Law."  
Mr. Speaker, hon. Muruli Mukasa wrote back and he only said: "Reference is made to your letter of 17th July regarding the disappearance of Mr. Paul Bagaragu.  I have instructed the Police to investigate and report back immediately."  To date, I have heard no information from hon. Muruli Mukasa about the disappearance of this person.  This was two years ago.  Now I ask, where is this person? He was unjustifiably arrested -  actually, we may even call it a kidnap or an abduction.  Where is this person who hails from my Constituency?  

It is quite a pity that hon. Muruli Mukasa is not here but the people of my Constituency would wish to know where this person is, and I beg that he really reports about this.  We want Mr. Bagaragu back home!  He was arrested by State House officials.  Even if you go to URA, you will find that these registered numbers of the vehicles belong to State House.  Can these fellows be arrested, Kamugisha and the like?  Why can they not be arrested?  Let them tell us where they are.  We are definitely annoyed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, I thought Kamugisha was a victim rather than people who arrested him.  I mean, I thought you said that Kamugisha was arrested together with Paul?

MR. NTACYOTUGIRA:  Here I mean Muyima Siraji and Tumwebaze.  These are the fellows who made Bagaragu disappear. 

MR. AWORI:  I would like to inform my hon. Colleague that given our recent experience, especially with our Colleague, hon. Atubo Omara, he was a guest of the State because he had been escorted to a gazetted facility by operatives of the State.  This case sounds very similar to hon. Atubo Omara's experience.  So I would suggest he checks in State House. He could be still a guest at the said place.

MR. NTACYOTUGIRA:  I better leave it at that  but, we read in the newspaper that -(interruption)-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:   Hon. Member, you have now taken about 15 minutes.

MR. NTACYOTUGIRA:  Mr. Speaker, allow me to wind up and please  give me more time because this one is a contentious issue.  

Mr. Speaker, in His Address, His Excellency the President talks about security elsewhere, and how security has improved in various areas but he forgot to talk about Kisoro District where thirteen persons have been murdered in cold blood by the Interahamwe roaming the plains of the Democratic Republic of Congo. He does not talk about the eight tourists who were murdered in Bwindi Impenetrable Forest.  He forgot to talk about this!  At one time, Kisoro was taken over by the ADF for seven hours, we were rescued by RPF from Rwanda but the President did not talk about this!  

Mr. Speaker, he talks about security roads.  The people of Kisoro have been urging for a road across Bwindi Impenetrable Forest and National Park.  The distance is only five kilometres but for so many years the road has not been constructed.  If this road had been there, these foreign tourists, I believe, would have been rescued because UPDF had camped across only five kilometres away.  If this road had been in place, I am sure these foreign tourists would not have died.  The people of Rukungiri and the people of Kisoro request Government to construct this road.  

This road would serve as a security road among other security roads that are being constructed in the whole country.  We would also wish that another road be constructed along the Western Border of Kisoro such that the tourists who will be coming will definitely be protected.  You see, at times we talk about these issues, the Government ignores them and eventually people die - (Interjection)-  I do not have time my dear, I am trying to wind up.  

This road is very important.  For example, now I cannot visit hon. Dr. Kinyatta who is next to my Constituency,  I cannot travel through the forest.  I have to travel 200 kilometres in order to go to Rukungiri.  I have to move around.  This road would give us access to Kasese and then Kabarole, and the distance would be drastically reduced but when we want to go to Kasese, or Kabarole for that matter, we have to move around;  pass via Kabale, pass via Ntungamo, Mbarara, then Ishaka and then to Kasese, and yet there is a short-cut.  It is only that distance, five kilometres!  We request Government to assist us construct this road.  We want it.  It is another exit.  It will assist the business community.

Mr. Speaker, allow me just a minute to wind up.  I want to talk about the Road from Kabale to Kisoro.  I wish the Ministry of Works, Transport and Communications could tell us how they calculate the internal rate of return in order to know which road to begin with to upgrade to tarmac. First of all, this road  leads to two borders. Secondly, there are two tourist sites along the road; Bwindi and Mgahinga. Thirdly, there is a lot of coffee there.  

Now, when you say you calculate the internal rate of return using the number of vehicles passing there, I think this is a wrong method because when a road has got very many potholes or when a road is bad, vehicles will definitely avoid it, for example, the road from the Democratic Republic of Congo.  We avoid this road and pass via Kigali.  Vehicles from Ruhengeri will avoid this road and pass via Kigali.  So, using the traffic flow  and the number of vehicles passing by as a method of rating is a wrong criteria.

THE MINISTER OF WORKS, HOUSING AND COMMUNICATIONS (Mr. Nasasira):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I want to thank the hon. Member for requesting to know how we create internal rate of return for a road.  First of all, the internal rate of return for the Kabale-Kisoro Road  was calculated at 13 percent which makes it viable for bitumenization, and it is on the programme.  Secondly, we do not use just the traffic on the road.  We work out traffic growth and that is a big component of the internal rate of return.  

We do not only use the traffic that is on that road and its condition at the time, we work out the traffic growth when the road is tarmacked, depending on the activities. That is how we arrive at it.  I did not want him to, in a way, misinform the House that the internal rate of return is based on the existing traffic.  Apart from traffic, we consider whether the road is for international tariff traffic, we consider what is in the district and what the road is likely to generate.

MR. NTACYOTUGIRA: But then, Mr. Speaker, I think we should consider the development of a certain area.  If you look at Rubanda County, the place is not developing quickly just because of bad roads.  Rubanda itself is adjacent to Kisoro, it is not developing.  So, if you want to develop an area, you make sure you give it a good road.  I do not know which comes first; is it development or a road? I think it should be a road first.  

Mr. Speaker, I have more to talk about but since you are limiting me, I wish to further thank His Excellency the President and his government for trying to bring peace in Uganda, and for trying to correct the economy. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR. DOMBO (Bunyole County, Tororo)  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, about a month ago, His Excellency the President gave his State of the Nation address to Parliament. I first of all wish to thank him, despite some omissions, some of which have been highlighted by other honourable Colleagues, and some of which I wish to mention in the course of my contribution.  
First and foremost, I wish to thank him for introducing and starting the UPE programme, but one most important thing I have come to note when I pass through my constituency is that the immediate gain from UPE is about numbers, but the fundamental problem which needs to be addressed now is the issue of quality in education, especially where UPE has come to coincide with automatic promotion in classes.  

I have had an opportunity to discuss this with the former Minister of Education and the Prime Minister, and raised the concerns which I had got from my constituency that without serious supervision at the various district headquarters and with automatic promotion in schools, many children are being promoted to various classes without comprehending what they ought to. So, we should either consolidate on supervision or we devise a mechanism on how this good policy is to be strengthened.  Otherwise, the products of UPE ten years from now - that is when we shall be looking at the real quality - might be victory undermined.  

This does not augur well, especially when it coincides  with the closure of TTCs.  I have seen the number of qualified teachers in my constituency, many of them are not qualified. Even the qualified ones for sure require retraining or a refresher course or something similar to that; but when you begin closing the TTCs at a time when we require more teachers - I do not know what policy government had in mind, could be the Leader of Government  Business will come with a better explanation in case the Mover of the Motion in not in position to.

The other element I wish to raise here is about electricity. Hon. Members, you will realise that the President did talk about electricity and quite often, he has been quoted in the papers as saying that some Members of Parliament, if not all, could be retarding development by delaying to pass the law or to okay the AES agreement. My biggest concern with this is that His Excellency the President is on record as having criticised an  existing agreement between the Republic of Uganda and Kenya because of such a bad law. The Uganda Government was being cheated in terms of revenue that would have been raised from Kenya.  It had to take the intervention of the President himself to ensure that this agreement is normalised.  

It is my wish that the President allows Parliament to effectively do its duty to ensure that government comes up with a proper law so that it does not require the intervention of future Presidents to ensure that such agreements are normalised for the government to get what is due to it. I know we are hurrying for development, we are hurrying for modernization but hurried modernization might be like the hurried privatisation where in certain aspects we have hit a rock. 

This brings me to agriculture: I remember reading the President's manifesto correctly and yesterday I was just going through it and one of the fundamental things the President did raise was modernization of the economy.  Given that the biggest part of our economy is aggro-based, there is no way we are going to modernize the economy without fundamentally and drastically modernizing agriculture. But when I look at my constituency in Bunyole, many people cannot even afford a hoe. This is what has been there.  Many people are poor and that is  the very reason why the President decided to introduce the UPE programme - (Interjection). I will take the information later, but I wish to inform the House that one of the fundamental ways we can transform agriculture in this country is by making the agricultural inputs accessible and affordable.  Yesterday I went to Massey Fergusson to negotiate for a tractor and the minimum price you can get a good tractor is above 50 million shillings. That is going to be difficult for many people to access the modernization that we are talking about.  

The other time I visited India and I also reached a certain country in the neighbourhood and I could see that they have a deliberate policy to make sure that the farmers do access the improved inputs for them to be able to improve their output. Here in Uganda, we are talking about improved research but where is it? The seeds are inaccessible, where they are available they are very expensive and we are not going to transform agriculture that way!  I think it is high time the people who advise the President came up with appropriate policies so that the time the President comes to account to people  about his manifesto, we are talking about physical things on the ground that are a result of  deliberate government policy other than talking to the people just because we want the people to support us or because we want to get their votes.

This also reminds me of the President's statement about mangoes for eastern and northern Uganda.  I think that one is good but, I have had an opportunity to drive through western Uganda and if I may compare the western and the northern regions, some of the conspicuous things that I have seen are the products of hon. Mondo Kagonyera when he was still Minister of State for Agriculture in Charge of Animal Industry. In many areas, you will  see that there are so many cooling plants.  Not a single farmer in western Uganda would have afforded to purchase a cooling plant by himself but because it was a deliberate government policy to institute these cooling plants, they have tremendously enhanced the small farmers in western Uganda  because their milk can now be preserved. Likewise, I wish to pray for a deliberate government policy to enable the people of eastern and northern Uganda to harness their mangoes. This could be fundamentally fine.

MR. BAMWANGA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I thank hon. Dombo for giving way.  I would like to give information to hon.Dombo that it is not only milk products that are seen along the route to western Uganda. There are also irish potatoes, there are bananas, there are beans, there are peas. I am sure, hon. Dombo, if those mangoes  from your constituency were to be transported to  Kampala, if there was a way of you arranging with the businessmen to fetch the mangoes, every family would be able to buy a hoe. I really wonder how the families there survive if they cannot buy a hoe of 2,500 shillings and the mangoes are rotting on the streets! Thank you.

MR. DOMBO: Thank you very much, hon. Member. First and foremost  -(Interruption) - I will take the information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think you should limit the information because you are going to take opportunity to contribute.

MR. NYANZI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank you, hon. Member, for giving way.  I would like to inform the hon. Member that, here in Kampala in Industrial Area, we have a company known as Britannia. They are processing fruits and they are lacking mangoes. So if at all you advise your people to grow mangoes, there is a ready market in Kampala here.

MR. DOMBO: Mr. Speaker, I think, the honourable Members informing me were a little bit absent minded when I was making my contribution. I did say that in Eastern and Northern Uganda we have the mangoes, just as there is milk in Western Uganda but the people of Western Uganda were enhanced when cooling plants were made available. 

When the cooling plants were made available, we had Dairy Corporation here in Kampala, it was buying milk. Were the farmers in Western Uganda carrying the milk to Dairy Corporation? They were not! Therefore, for us also to enhance the production of mangoes, we wish to have a deliberate intervention by government to create a system of how our mangoes can be effectively transformed into marketable products, by government deliberately investing down there in Eastern and Northern Uganda. 

The President did mention something about corruption and, Mr. Speaker, you remember yesterday I gave a piece of information and I said that I was giving the information at the risk of being misunderstood.  For sure, like I anticipated, some people did misunderstand me but before I come to that, Mr. Speaker, allow me to talk about the issue of corruption.  

One thing which surprises and scares me is that the President has been in office for thirteen years along the road but everybody like him is lamenting.  What shall we do?  Right now, he has come up with the Commission of Inquiry into the Police.  This is very commendable and for sure the time that has been given, I must tell you, hon. Members, is not enough.  

For instance, in my home district, I have a case where the Police connived with a medical doctor to write a postmortem report to show that somebody had been murdered by the LCs and that he had fractured ribs. I had to intervene myself and make a statement at the Police to say that the body be exhumed at my expense and  taken for an X-ray so that we can see the broken ribs which the postmortem report was talking about. Everybody declined, including the police officers who were saying the person had been murdered. 

Such and many other things are the lot within our Police and other departments but one of the fundamental things which is happening in this country is that many people exploit their proximity to the State House and to the powers that be to undermine the investigation process in this country.  

Last week, a gentleman calling himself Outa came before the Commission of Inquiry to say that he was an employee of State House, and that he had been mandated by the State House to do a,b.c.d. Although State House came out later to deny him, but the man had put his facts on the table. Just last month, this same person had intimidated one of the investors in Kampala, waving a headed paper from State House saying that he had been instructed by State House to investigate that person.  State House was duly informed about this and one thing that surprised me is that, State House was also lamenting; "that man is like that, he keeps doing the same thing"!  I also learnt from State House that the same officer had earlier intimidated a former Minister of Finance saying that he had been sent by the President to investigate the Minister, and he wanted a bribe from the Minister because the Minister was not doing well, but that he wanted to write a good report before the President.  

Now, one thing which surprised me - and this is the concern I was raising - is that many people take  advantage because they are close to State House to create an impression which is not necessarily reflective of State House.  The President may not at all know what is happening but he becomes unfortunate.

As I end finally, I wish to state one of the things that the President was probably not advised in time to talk about in his State of the Nation Address. You remember, honourable Members, a few years ago I stood in this House and complained that while the President was looking for votes, they brought equipments, they brought some white men whom they called contractors and they said they wanted to construct the Budumba bridge, but  that immediately the people of Bunyole voted, every thing was removed. Honourable Members, I wish to state that the President forgot to tell the world and the other people in Uganda that finally, that pledge has been fulfilled because the construction of Budumba bridge is right now under way. May I, at the same time, as I end, thank the hon. Minister of Works, hon. Nasasira, for the support and for the commitment he put to ensure that the Budumba bridge is constructed. I commend the President for his Speech.  Thank you very much.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have got so many people who have been listed here wishing to speak and, therefore, I appeal to you to restrict yourselves to 10 minutes, and maybe concentrate on few points instead of all the points.

MR. NDEEZI(Rep. of Persons with Disabilities): Thank you Mr. Speaker, at last you have seen me.  Since last week, I have been itching to make my humble contribution to this debate. Mr. Speaker, the purpose of this Motion is to praise the President, to thank the President. Hon. Members, His Excellency the President has done many wonderful things for this country in general, and for my constituency in particular, so really he deserves our praise. I must join all of you in praising the President.  

While we praise the President, I feel that there is room for some improvement.  Many Members have been lamenting over the lack of comprehensiveness in the President's speech.  Where is the problem, Mr. Speaker?  Members are complaining that certain important issues were not addressed but I think the weakness lies in failure by the President's advisors to help him comply with the provisions of the Constitution.  

The President's address to Parliament is provided for under Article 101. The National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy provide the yard stick, the guidelines for the speech the President must make.  Mr. Speaker, I will read the article for the sake of the Members who did not come with their copies of the Constitution. Under the implementation of the objectives, Objective (I) (ii) says: "The President shall report to Parliament and the nation at least once a year, all steps taken to ensure the realisation of these policies, objectives and principles." 

I would like to believe that the Members of the Constituent Assembly did trust that whenever the President would make a Speech to this Parliament, he or she would comply with all the principles stated in this Constitution. Many areas have not been covered during the last three years. I have been deeply concerned that the President has never reported on the progress made in empowering people with disabilities and yet this is clearly stated here in the Constitution.  I am aware of the progress so far made, but it is important that the President reports.

Mr. Speaker, you allocated me only a few minutes but since I feel this is a very important area that must be covered, I wish to submit a humble request to the hon. Prime Minister, and also the Minister in Charge of the Presidency, to please advise our President.  Next time, we would like to see a speech that complies with the provisions of the Constitution, particularly the National Objectives and the Principles of State Policy.  Otherwise, we shall continue to be worried, we shall continue to come here and lament over the lack of comprehensiveness of the President's speech.

The second point is directly from the President's speech.  This is on the question of the economic recovery.  We agree our economy has been growing but we continue to be deeply concerned about the scenario whereby we have impressive economic figures existing alongside poverty, mainly in rural areas. We are worried about a situation whereby the rich are erecting mansions everyday while the poor are sinking deeper and deeper into poverty.  Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, can we not perceive development with a human face?   

The President did mention the question of the crisis in the banking industry.  He did make an analogous explanation of this phenomena.  I have some reservations, particularly about comparing the banking crisis to human beings because the human life or the human cycle is not an artificial phenomena; it is a natural phenomena in the sense that we, human beings, have limited control over our lives but in the banking system, this is an artificial phenomena:  Human beings have control over what is going on. They can be able to monitor the situation, they can be able to supervise, they can be able to predict so, Mr. Speaker, I would like to believe that the institution that is charged with the supervision of our banks must be blamed, instead of saying that our banks just die like human beings.  

If our banks are dying, it is because of some unscrupulous institutions that have failed to perform their job.  These institutions are the murderers, they are the killers, they are the traitors of the small depositors who failed to get their Easter because banks have been closed. Mr. Speaker, many of us were pleased to note that the President has appointed a Commission of Inquiry into the Police Force.  What we are now appealing for is for a commission to be appointed to probe Bank of Uganda; people are tired!

Mr. Speaker, only one more point about security.  Security, I believe, is a human right - security of our lives, security of our known material assets and the security of our families.  Many Members have expressed their worry about security matters but I have one deep worry about the withdrawing of the State in the provision of security.  The State is continuously withdrawing from colonial security, particularly for individuals. That is why we have many private firms being set up, and that is why the few of us who can afford private firms are depending on private firms for protection and yet this would be a human right. Now, if you are saying that you must pay for security, where are our poor people going?  Who will protect them?  Who will defend them?  Can we not have this arrangements to protect also the poor?  

I was pleased to notice that the President has boldly come out with the issue of a blanket amnesty for rebels or armed opponents of the State, but this pronouncement reminds me of what one of the famous Kings said one time that: "My words are the law and the thing is legal because I wish it".  Mr. Speaker, this was in the 16th Century but today, it may be difficult for us to place our arguments on such statements because we may not give sufficient guarantees to those we call rebels because, if a pledge is made by way of mentioning a few words, the same thing can be reversed within a few minutes. Mr. Speaker, what I am calling for is that the Government introduces an Amnesty Bill to this House.

Mr. Speaker, I seek your indulgence.  I have one more point.  My worry is particularly about corruption.  I am pleased to notice that our Government has been able to set up various institutions to combat corruption, and some of them have done a very commendable job but I feel I should seek your guidance on one of the institutions.  This is the institution of Ethics and Integrity.  

On 15th of July, 1999, I read that the Ethics and Integrity Minister, Mrs. Miria Matembe ordered the Police in Ibanda, Mbarara, to arrest Bernard Rukwate for allegedly terrorising his wife with a panga.  Mr. Speaker, I am seeking some guidance, particularly with regard to the mandate of this Ministry.  Probably this time it was Mr. Rukwate, tomorrow it could be me!  The Minister could issue an order and by the end of the day, I find myself behind bars!  Or, tomorrow it could be other MPs here.  These words must be taken seriously, particularly if they are emanating from one of our institutions.  Are we saying that all our Ministers have powers to arrest or to order arrests?

At one other time, the Minister did order for the release of certain girls who had been arrested on allegations of terrorism.  I wish, Mr. Speaker, you could help me here.  Otherwise, Mr. Speaker, thank you very much for giving me this chance to contribute to this debate.

MR. KAKOBA ONYANGO (Buikwe North, Mukono): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I want to add my voice to that of the other Members who have supported this debate on the President's speech.  Mr. Speaker, there are a few areas which I would like to look at.  To begin with, I want to look at the economy and, Mr. Speaker, my concentration here is on Poverty Eradication.  

This is an issue that has come up a number of times in the President's Speech and in the Budget, and it is again mentioned in the President's Speech this year. Mr. Speaker, my concern is that, apart from mentioning this Poverty Eradication many times, it looks like we have not got on the ground to tackle the problem because of the issues that we are talking about concerning Poverty Eradication have just ended on paper, yet our people down on the ground are quite poor.  

In the Speech, the President talked about the Entandikwa Scheme as one of the ways of tackling this issue but Mr. Speaker, if I can remember, this Entandikwa Scheme is not new, it has been in place for a number of years but the programme has not worked well.  I wonder what miracle is going to be put in place now to make sure that the programme works well. 

I believe that if our people are to benefit from the improving economic situation, then we need to make sure that our people at the grassroots can earn a living that can make them have a standard that is acceptable.  Mr. Speaker, personally I believe that if we are to tackle this problem, then we have to improve on agriculture because the majority of our people in the rural areas depend on agriculture, and definitely we have to look for areas, for ways of modernising agriculture, for ways of extending inputs and implements to the farmers, and for ways of extending to them facilities in form of loans that can enable them to acquire these inputs.  Mr. Speaker, I think this is one of the ways that we can improve and work on Poverty Eradication.

The problem we have in villages is that our farmers, normally after a lot of toiling, sell their products at low prices. So, if they are to benefit from this, then we have to improve the marketing.  Mr. Speaker, this is a task that is quite big, but I believe that if we had a scheme for aggro-related industries, this would help because this would help the farmers to have their products processed before they are sold.   One of the problems that we have is that the farmers sell the products when they are not processed and at the end, they are cheated.  

I believe if you are talking about aggro-related industries, then we need to have rural electrification.  This is a programme that we have to work on.  Mr. Speaker, as I speak now, most of our areas are not served with electricity. I hope  Government will put in place a programme that will work on rural electrification in order to assist our people to get out of poverty.

The other issue that I would like to tackle is that one of industrial development.  The President hinted on it in his Speech.  Mr. Speaker, we are talking about this industrial development, but if you look at the industrial development that we have now, the industries and the investment that are coming into the Country now are mostly centred around Kampala.  In fact, we have gone up to the extent of destroying a number of wet-lands to create room for industries, yet if we move upcountry, there are areas that can cater for these industries. For instance, in my area at Njeru, we have 200 acres of land that we need industrialists to develop.  Definitely, Njeru is an area that is quite accessible.  So, I would love to have a situation where Government puts a lot of emphasis in spreading industrial development countrywide.

The next issue that I would like to talk about is that one of security.  Mr. Speaker, I must thank the President for his Security Speech because, for the first time, I believe the President came out publicly to accept that there is a security problem, unlike in the past when he would not acknowledge it, and I believe this is a way forward. It may help in solving the security situation.

Likewise, I welcome the amnesty because this is one of the ways of bringing about reconciliation.  It has worked in a number of countries. For instance, the Late Vice President of Zimbabwe  who died had to come out of the bush; he had been fighting.  We have had it in Mozambique - the Renamo - they came to an agreement after putting in place an amnesty. In Sierra-Leon, it is the same thing that is working.  Even in Uganda we need to encourage it  but before we encourage it, we need to have the law in place so that the people can benefit.  If we really want an amnesty, let it be an amnesty, not just in talking while in the action we are doing other things.  Mr. Speaker, I believe that if we moved along that trend, then we may have everlasting peace in the Country.  

On the issue of security again, I would like to touch on the issue of cattle rustling. The President, in his Speech, said that the problem of cattle rustling is almost over but in Karamoja, this problem is still there and I do not know how it is going to be tackled because recently, we had a situation where some soldiers were killed in that area.  This security situation in Karamoja needs to be tackled, Mr. Speaker.  
My last point is on corruption.  I would like to thank His Excellency for the investigative mechanism that he has put in place to tackle corruption in the Police.  I believe this is one of the ways that we can tackle corruption however, Mr. Speaker, I found it a bit disappointing that the President in his Speech referred to us as always throwing unguided missiles against each other in form of censure Motions.  Mr. Speaker, I believe these censures have helped us and I believe if we are to fight corruption, we have to tackle it from all ways.

The President has once and again said that there is political will to fight corruption but I believe if we are to have political will, it should not only be said, but should be seen to be done.  But if you look at the way His Excellency has handled corruption, especially in reference to the cases of censured Ministers, there is a lot to be desired. Mr. Speaker, you may recall that when a Motion was about to be tabled, hon. Kirunda Kivejinja resigned. It took the President a considerable time to acknowledge his resignation.  Later, when it came to the censuring of other Ministers - hon. Kutesa and hon. Jim Muhwezi, with due respect - the President also took his time and eventually, when these issues came out, the people who were censured and those who resigned actually emerged as if they were heroes because some of them were even given other government posts like we have the case of hon. Kirunda Kivejinja now serving at the Secretariat. It is more of a promotion. 

I believe that if we have to fight corruption, then we all have to tackle it and there must be seen to be political will to fight this corruption.  Mr. Speaker, my own point is that instead of making these people appear as if they are heroes, we should put in place a mechanism that should follow them up.  We should put in place a mechanism that should ensure that once someone is censured, then he or she is followed and prosecuted, and if possible, a verdict passed on them.

The problem we have is that we as Parliament do not have that power.  But I believe that if we passed a resolution here that all the censured Ministers should have their files forwarded to the Criminal Investigations Department and that action be taken, that will save us. Otherwise, it will not benefit us and it will not help us to censure Ministers or any other officials and the matter ends there when money is lost and no action is taken.  

In due course I may have to move this Motion that we pass a Resolution that will call for the prosecution of people who have been proved by Parliament to be in the wrong, and this may not have to apply only to Ministers, but even other categories of public officers.  Mr. Speaker, with those remarks, I would like to thank you very much for giving me this opportunity.

MS. SARAH NAMUMBYA (Woman Representative, Iganga):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the President for his Address on the State of the Nation, and also to support the Motion but, Mr. Speaker, I would like to do so with some few remarks. The first one is on the status of agriculture in Uganda, vis-a-vis what other countries are doing.  

We have heard a lot concerning the weather changes in Uganda. To me this really has been a very big problem and it is continuing to be a big problem.  What the concerned ministries and the concerned departments are doing is just to inform the farmers whether the rain will come or not, but what I would like to ask the government, since His Excellency did not mention anything about it and yet it is a big issue is, are we going to continue relying on the rains from God?  

We are talking about agricultural modernisation and we are talking about globalisation whereby other countries are ready to trade with Uganda knowing very well that they have the comparative advantage.  In Uganda, even where we have the good soils, we can not really compete with other countries all over the world because we have that shortcoming of the rains.  It is a problem because farmers are being told to use modern methods of farming like using high yield seeds when planting but, I wish the concerned authorities could go on the ground and really find out what the effect of these weather changes is on the incomes of the farmers because they are spending a lot to buy the seeds and in the end they can not get anything!  For me I think the government really should come up with a national, long term plan such that this problem can really be solved.  For example, if farm implements like those for irrigation can be got on small scale or on credit, it would really help the farmers, whether at the constituency level or village level, then we can be able to talk about modernisation of agriculture and globalisation.  

The other thing I want to comment on is the President's address on women councils and youth councils.  He said that youth councils and women councils are going to get entandikwa and some support in terms of transport. Mr. Speaker, I think this is very good because some of us who were elected by the electoral colleges were being condemned and challenged to prove whether we do not use those institutions for purposes of coming to Parliament and it was difficult because we do not determine their budget. 

When we come here to speak, I think sometimes we just speak for purposes of getting our names in the Hansard but now that this time the President has come up to really assure the whole country that youth councils and women councils are going to get some money, it is very good and I am very sure this is really a way forward but, my question here, like hon. Onyango Kakoba, is that, let this entandikwa be different from the entandikwa we have now.  If it is the name that is confusing the people, let the name for the entandikwa or for the grant for the youth councils and the women councils be changed. Why can't government go down and evaluate what the Entandikwa has done for the people and find out whether it has benefited them or not?  If it has not, why and what is the way forward?  What can we do such that the next grants that go through those channels to help the people can really do exactly what they are supposed to do?  

The name "entandikwa" has been attributed to money that the President always gives when time is due for campaigns or when we are nearing campaigns such that people do not mind whether they are utilizing it, or that they are eating the sweat that they used when giving His Excellency the votes.   So, Mr. Speaker,  let the government get a policy analyst to evaluate what went wrong with the  scheme and really to make sure that, if there is something that went wrong, then they should review and this time this grant, let it not also carry the name of Entandikwa.

Another point I would want to comment on is security.  I thank the President for the security but there is a remark I want to put here about child abductions.  Mr. Speaker, I am a parent and I am getting scared by these rampant abductions of children. Mr. Speaker, it is unfortunate. I do not know whether to us we take insecurity only to be where there are rebels or only where there are bombs but, Mr. Speaker, child abduction is really an insecurity, both to the parents and to the children. 

The children are being slaughtered like animals, and even the concerned ministry can not come up to tell us really what is happening; whether they are witch doctors, or it is just another way of terrorism. If they are witch doctors, can we not come up with a policy of checking those witch doctors?  Are we going to continue reading in the press that children are being abducted, that  Shammim is slaughtered, Rose is slaughtered and we just fold our hands and look on when there is a full ministry in charge of children's affairs?  Mr. Speaker, we must be sincere and not call children affairs minor incidents whereby government can not even come up to give a  statement.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. Member for giving way. The question of murdering children is a criminal activity.  We have laws for that and we have institutions in place. So, I do not think it is correct for the hon. Member to say that people are murdered and government sits with its hands folded. That is not correct.  The truth is that when a person is murdered, the appropriate authorities are informed and investigations do take place.  Mr. Speaker, when the culprits are apprehended and there is evidence for them to be prosecuted, they are prosecuted in courts and if they are convicted, they are punished according to the laws of the country.  I thank you.

MS. NAMUMBYA: I thank the minister for that information, but I think you have got the point.

Another point I want to talk about is concerning the strategic national roads that His Excellency talked about in his Address.  Mr. Speaker, one time I stood here and I talked about the Tororo- Iganga road.  We have been informed here that roads can be maintained or constructed, bearing in mind whether they carry security or economic importance.  Mr. Speaker, I am not saying this because I come from Iganga, but because I know the value we are attach to that road.  

When the El-Nino came, I thought it was a blessing to the users and to the government but after the, what the government through the Ministry of Works did was just to repair a small part between Iganga and Jinja and that marked the end of the repairs on that road. Mr. Speaker, if it is possible, Members who come from that side could also come here and testify whether it is really possible for heavy vehicles to use that road at the same time with the people -(Interruption).

MR. TOSKIN: Thank you very much, Mr,Speaker, and I also thank the hon. Member for giving way.  Mr. Speaker, I want to inform this House that I think the Ministry of Works tried to do some renovation on that road by pouring murrum and soil between Nalwerere and Tororo. That is what they did.  Thank you.

MS. NAMUMBYA:  Mr. Speaker, when I stood here, the minister concerned stood up and informed me that in fact funds had been allocated but now as the honourable Member has given me this information, is that really the care that would be give to a road which opens Uganda to other countries? Mr. Speaker, I think the Minister of Works should be sincere this time and if it is budgeted for, I thank him, if it is not budgeted for, then let him take it as an emergency because the people who suffer are the poor people from Iganga, Tororo who use the pavement for riding their bicycles. And because it is on those pavements that there are no portholes, these heavy trucks try also to make sure that they doge the portholes and instead they affect the road users who use bicycles and who are on foot.

Finally, I would want to support this Motion but bearing in mind the question whether the government will come up and tell us whether really that problem of the weather, we are going to continue surviving on God's mercy or there is a national strategic policy to address it.  Thank you.

BRIG. JIM MUHWEZI(Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to add my voice to support the Motion before the House, and to express my appreciation to the President for fulfilling the constitutional requirement by giving us his address about the state of the nation on the 2nd of June 1999.  Mr. Speaker, I support all the things said here by Members which the government has done in form of development of our country but, Mr. Speaker, I would like however, since the time is limited, to clear the air on what an hon. Member said here yesterday.  

Hon. Dombo yesterday talked about me and others, and in a way prejudiced this House and the country, as the matter was widely reported in the New Vision today and in the Monitor.  Mr. Speaker, there are two points I would like to make remarks on.  The first one is in regard to the wedding of the son of the President and the daughter of one Member of this House which the hon. Member Dombo referred to and the second one is in reference to me as a corrupt person who should not be in company of the President.  Whereas I had decided to keep quiet on this matter regarding my censure, and whereas my statement in this House was that I harboured no grudge against the House or against any Member here, I expected the same attitude from my Colleagues, the honourable Members of this House.

As regards the concern of the hon. Member on the attendance of the President's family wedding, I wish humbly to make a personal view about this matter.  I believe that it is legitimate for Parliament to raise concern about state affairs including those in President's office but I find it difficult to accept that Parliament should control even the President's private affairs.   

Many people have asked why some people attended the wedding and others did not, both in the House and outside.  However, I would like to inform this House that at that wedding, as one of those who were present, in church at Rushere, the President laboured  to explain the formula he tried to use in order to reach every Ugandan.  He said that it was difficult for him to select his friends or his relatives because they are all over the country.  He, however, decided to use a representative formula and in fact he asked the hon. Speaker who was present to stand up and he said he was representing this Parliament.  So all of us were represented at that wedding - (Applause).  

As regards censured ministers associating with the President, how can one stop the President from associating with any member of the society, let alone a Member of this honourable House?  Do we not associate with all members of our constituencies ourselves?  Can any member of our constituency question any of us why we probably associate with  a person who is his rival in the local politics?  Why then should we attempt to bar the President from associating with anybody, especially, peoples' representatives?  Thirdly, Mr. Speaker, the Presidency or the Executive is an independent arm of government, the other two being the Parliament and the Judiciary.  None can dictate how or what the other should do, how it should run.  The Ministers can not question you, Mr. Speaker, why you invited a particular person at your home.  

The President has expressed his views about the censure; his views may not be the same as those of this Parliament but he is entitled to his opinion.  The President also interacts with all Ugandans including those who are opposed to the Movement politics.  Why should anyone attempt to ostracise Members of this House who are also members of the Movement from associating with the President? The same person has been arguing very strongly that people should have the freedom to associate even politically yet he is attempting to stop people from associating socially. What a contradiction! (Interruption)

MS. KIRASO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker and thank  you very much hon. Muhwezi.  Yesterday I happened to be in the House when hon. Dombo was making his submission, and I have also looked at the papers, and I am also listening very attentively to hon. Muhwezi's submission. I know that hon. Muhwezi was hurt by those comments, I would be hurt too.  However, I want to inform hon. Muhwezi because he was not in the House yesterday when hon. Dombo made his submission. 

The statement he made was that actually he did not want to stop the President from associating with relatives, friends, combatants and the rest of that. He was talking about investigations and he said that he pitied the people who are carrying out investigations so much because the people that they should be investigating in connection with corruption seem to be very close to the President. Then he brings out that example - I did not like it myself but he used the example to show that the people who were censured were actually an example of the corrupt people in our society, and that it is not easy for the investigative organs to reach them because they are very close to the President. Thank you.

BRIG. MUHWEZI:	Well, Mr. Speaker, this matter was widely reported today. It is a headline, it is on the front page of the Monitor, and I take it that hon. Dombo as a serious Parliamentarian reads papers before he comes into the House. He has just made his presentation. He did not deny. He was quoted to have said that I escorted the President - as an example - that I was the chief escort. So I know what I am talking about. Thank you very much. 

I wanted to talk about corruption because many times I have read in the papers my name being mentioned and you can hear, even here it is being mentioned as an example that censure means someone is corrupt.  Now, I want to state here - and there are many lawyers in this House - that corruption is a crime and it is on our Statute books. If one is convicted, he is heavily punished. 

I have never been charged in any court of law for corruption, let alone convicted. Even this House never charged me with corruption as far as I remember. Therefore, for anyone to refer to me as corrupt using the immunity in this House is not fair, Mr. Speaker. If he is sure that I am a corrupt person, he should take me to court or else, let him repeat the words outside the precincts of this Parliament and we sort it out. (Laughter).   Mr. Speaker, talking about attending weddings, really, how many weddings have we attended? Several of them and nobody has raised a finger, including honourable Members of this House not long ago where some of you were not invited. If I was not a good person to be invited, did you ask your friends who had weddings recently why they invited me? If they were inviting good people, I am one of them - (Laughter). 

I would like this Parliament to concentrate on pertinent matters. If they want to challenge the government and question the behaviour of members of the Government, I am waiting to see because if the press is anything to go by, I think there are several cases, in my opinion. I would like this Parliament to be consistent because this country is watching us to see whether we are consistent. 

I have quietly been discussing my case through kakuyege with honourable Members of this Parliament. I decided not to raise it again but I have quietly been interacting with hon. Members of this Parliament and I am convinced that many of them believe, after so many events that have occurred, that I, Jim Muhwezi, did not have my right to a fair hearing - at least protected. If it was not violated, it was not protected. So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask my Friends and Colleagues the honourable Members of this Parliament not to drag the censures outside this Parliament. You heard my Colleague, hon. Kakoba, proposing that they should follow up the censured Ministers elsewhere and hunt them down. 

AN HON. MEMBER: Order!

BRIG. MUHWEZI: Well, I withdraw "hunting down", Mr. Speaker - (Laughter). That was my personal addition for emphasis but the hon. Member here said that the point was taken. So, what hon. Kakoba is suggesting could mean that while some Members of Parliament are genuinely concerned with some behaviour of Ministers, there could be people with another agenda. How else does one explain the suggestion that this Parliament should go further than the Constitution provides? Because, the Constitution provides that if a Minister is censured, the President should take appropriate action. Full stop!  I wonder what hon. Kakoba will invoke to follow the Ministers in their private lives, probably to say that their daughters should not get married by children of the President or they should not attend weddings! I find it very difficult. 

I would like to suggest that we should really be able to defend anything we say in this Parliament. If I say that someone is corrupt, I should be able to go outside, go on the Capital Gang and say that person is corrupt and I go to the CID or the DPP and report.

LT. COL MUDOOLA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am really confused whether hon. Jim Muhwezi is delivering a personal statement or he is debating the President's speech. From what I am hearing, I think the hon. Member is really delivering a personal statement which should have been notified to the Speaker. I need your guidance, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, there is no set format in which such a speech has to be made. In the first place, this is an appreciation - thanking the President for having made the speech. People have different ways of expressing pleasure over something. So I think he is in order but please, put a full stop to your contribution because you have now gone for 15 minutes when the actual time was ten. So please wind up.

BRIG. MUHWEZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker for your wise decision and ruling. Finally, I thank the President for this important and exhaustive address on the state of the nation, and I thank the hon. Members for listening to me and for agreeing with me - most of them - from the way I look at their faces. Thank you very much.

DR. NYEKO (Kilak County, Gulu): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand to support the speech of the President. Now, I would like to thank the President and the government in general about the improved security situation in Gulu and Kitgum. For the last six, seven months, our people have been enjoying some degree of peace and we really are very grateful and we would like the government to continue supporting our people so that total peace is achieved in our region. Our people have suffered for a long time: They have been living in camps, they have not been having enough food to eat. They cannot go to school and so many other difficulties. At the same time, I am also happy that the amnesty Bill is indicated here to be discussed during this session of Parliament. 

If you look at the President's speech on page seven, there are conditions for minimum recovery in the conflict areas. This is a very important topic for us who are in the conflict areas. Our people do not have the minimum conditions for recovering from poverty and the first measure which the President has mentioned is restocking. If you read the third or fourth line, it says: "I would like this to be reflected in the coming Budget. We should make a sizeable intervention in this area."  

This is a very important statement because from the time the President campaigned in 1996, his manifesto was very clear on restocking the North, and in the Committee of Agriculture where some of us have been from the 1997/98 Budget, we have been asking the Minister of Agriculture who was at that time the Vice-President; who should really implement the President's manifesto? The President has talked of restocking and there is nothing in the Budget year after year! So, I am happy this year the President himself stated that "I would like this to be reflected in the coming Budget. We should make a sizeable intervention in this area." So, the 18 billion shillings which is given as intervention in this area was, I am sure, the personal effort of the President. 

Now, what I am fearing, Mr. Speaker, is the implementation of this project. The President can put a lot of effort at this initial stage, the money can be there but this money will be used for building houses here in Kampala and other towns.  You will be surprised at the number of Pajeros which will be here in Kampala when the Budget is finally passed. In my own straightforward calculation, if you put an average of 400,000 shillings per animal, including the cost of transportation, the cost of labour, loading et cetera, 18 billion shillings should be able to supply 45,000 heads of cattle to these areas of the North and Luwero.  This should be a very simple and straightforward thing but this money will go for consultancies, it will go for terms of reference for tender, et cetera. 

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank you hon. Nyeko for giving way. I want to assure hon. Nyeko that the 18 billion shillings provided in the Budget has no provision for vehicles, it has no provision for consultancy. It is purely for restocking and the methodology on how they are going to be restocked will be worked out in the Prime Minister's Office. So, you should not be worried and you should trust what the President said. There will be animals coming for restocking the North without being part and parcel of buying vehicles. I thank you.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker and hon. Dr. Nyeko. I do appreciate the concern raised by the hon. Member that too often, project funds have been diverted to irrelevant uses. I do not want to know what is in my mouth. I can speak very well for myself. Mr. Speaker, can you protect me from hon. Awori? Mr. Speaker, I do appreciate the concern of the hon. Member but the Prime Minister's Office is determined and I promise on the Floor of this House that this money will be put to proper use and this House, through any of its committees, will be free at all times to monitor throughout the implementation how money has been put to use if only the leadership from the areas affected can promise cooperation. 

I have got information that more often than not, government projects have failed in certain areas simply because the leadership there have decided to misinform the people that all this is President Museveni's gimmick to buy these  people. So, if the local leadership and representatives in this House can promise to support the projects, there is no reason why we should not achieve the desired results, Mr. Speaker. I thank you.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to state that hon. Dr. Nyeko is a veterinarian, So he is specialised in this field and I want to call upon him and any other people interested to advise us and I am available as soon as this Meeting is over. We can have a discussion right away. I thank you.

DR. NYEKO: I thank all the Ministers for the information. It is precisely as a veterinarian that I said this money should be able to bring a minimum of 45,000 heads of cattle. I said this as a professional veterinarian. 

Another issue is that, in the President's manifesto, he also talked of compensation of people who lost their cattle during the insurgency. It is recorded that they were given to  the then NRA. For minimum recovery, as stated in the President's speech, the right thing would be for the Minister of Justice to compensate these people who lost their animals and there are proper records.  

On page 9 of the President's Speech, Mr. Speaker, I feel very sad to see that one or two years ago, only 500 million shillings was given as the University leavers' fund. Mr. Speaker, university education has become very expensive. Many parents in rural areas squeeze their resources to send their children to the universities. They pay very heavily at the university but after graduating, these children come out with their degrees but they have no jobs. They are not even sure when they will get jobs. The parents will have spent all their resources. 

I think government must come out very clearly.  Government has borrowed a lot of money in some dubious circumstances and the money has been squandered.  We have talked of the Livestock Service Project, 24 million dollars was borrowed and you cannot see anything on the ground.  The government should come out!  I will support any resolution here in Parliament if government is asking to borrow 20 million dollars to be given out as loans to graduates. 

If you give out twenty million dollars to university graduates, they will create employment for themselves.  If you give an average of say Shs.5 million or Shs.10 million depending on a project proposal, you should be able to employ something like three or four thousand graduates.  These people will be self-employed;  they will create opportunities for some other people besides themselves, they will be paying increased taxes to the government.  This is a cheaper way of employing our graduates but year after year, students graduate and get no jobs!  

The few students who get jobs are the few students who are from well-off families; these are students who have gone through university sponsorship, they have been sponsored by the government and because they have good connections, as Obedmoth was saying yesterday, these are the same people who get good jobs say in Revenue Authority and others.  So, you find that we are actually creating a society which has a very huge gap and the people from poor families, despite their level of education, cannot get employment!  I think  we should see a way of stopping this trend.  

Lastly, Mr. Speaker, when you talk of poverty eradication and food security, there is no proper policy, as far as I know, about food security and even poverty eradication.  We know year after year there is poverty in the East and parts of the North but each time we go out, we sensitise the people to grow the same types of food. This is the food which has let them down the previous year.  You are telling them to grow maize, why can we not try to diversify, try to give these people to start growing perennial crops instead of these same annual crops which are letting them down every year?  

You find that there is no policy.  When we talk about food security, then you will maybe talk about seeds for maize, seeds for sorghum and this is the same sorghum which did not grow last season because of the unpredictable weather.  So, I think, we must come out with a proper policy of introducing crops which are perennial, introducing cash crops which are also perennial to these areas.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  

MR. LWANGA (Kyamuswa County, Kalangala):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to support the Motion, but before I go on to make my humble contribution, I would like to take a few parts of the President's speech just to refresh the Members' memories.  

On page 3, he says:  "On the side of agriculture, the rate of growth has been 4 per cent per annum. The economy would have grown at an even faster rate if it was not for the lack of patriotism, efficiency and vision on the part of state officials directly charged with facilitating investment."  The President goes on to tell us that we are now at 4.5 billion US dollars as GDP, and that in the case of Belgium, it is 230 billion.  

I go on to page 9, and the President says: "A neo-colony means that you only produce raw materials for export and you have a bureaucracy to ensure that they are exported - this is what you call the "Public Service".  In fact it still means Neo-Colonial Service. This is the structure of our economy, although we have repaired it we have not yet transformed it."   On page 11 he says:  "If you take the example of coffee, we lose almost 20 times the value of what we would get if we were able to export processed coffee."  On page 19 the President says:  "In addition to adding value to products we are already exporting, we have got many ready exports which we would promote easily"  He also goes on to talk about competitiveness and he says:  "Another problem we must resolve is competitiveness of our industrial products."  

Now here, I tried to find out; what does competitiveness mean when looked at in micro economics. It is the ability of a country to achieve economic growth, attract investment or increase exports.  Now, if you looked at it from a professional view point as an accountant, or if one is advising a corporate body, it would be the real improvement in industrial and firm level productivity upon which sustainable growth in income ultimately depends.  

Now, on page l4 the President says:  "We must, therefore, resolve the question of the lack of competitiveness of our industries because they came into a situation where we had historical disadvantages and it is the work of the government to help those people to overcome those disadvantages, especially, if they are in strategic sectors such as coffee, textiles and power generation."  Of course he forgot tourism and Sese islands.  Then the President goes on to say:  "There is a lot of public investments in the area - he was talking about, I think, West Nile - in a form of brand new schools and proposed tarmac roads from Karuma to Arua, but there is no guided private investment taking place in the right areas that will bring optimal and sustainable results... In my opinion, cotton should only be grown by big farmers because peasants cannot grow cotton profitably for themselves."  

Last by not least, at the end he said:  "May I conclude by saying that the Movement has achieved a lot in the form of minimum economic and social recovery for the greater part of the country  - I am glad he said for the greater part of the country because as far as Kalangala District is concerned, there is nothing - Let us, however, eliminate the weaknesses I have enumerated above to ensure the transformation of Uganda's economy and society."

Having read the President's speech over and over again, I ask myself a question:  the Movement government has been in power - we really we have been in charge for the last 13 years and I am very grateful to the President and his team and everybody involved that we have reached where we have reached, as far as security is concerned.  We have managed to rehabilitate quite a few roads but I ask myself a question;  after 13 years, what should we be looking at?  

The President reminded us of the history of this country - and really, it is very nice because Ugandans forget very fast so when you keep on reminding them, they remember and keep it in their mind - that peace should not be taken for granted.  However, I ask a question; what does the future hold? What about our economy, where are we going?  Are we zeroing on a particular area, are we going to become experts in tourism, are we going to become experts in manufacturing, are we going to - what are we going to become?  

A few years ago, the President was talking about Uganda as a possible bread basket for Africa.  I want to ask a question;  is this dream achievable, and if it is, is Government deliberately pointing towards that direction? Mr. Speaker, I would have been very comfortable if on reading that speech, I would have been able to see a vision of the future -(Interruption).

MR. KAIJUKA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank you hon. Tim Lwanga for giving way.  I thought I would take this opportunity to inform hon. Tim Lwanga and the House that, perhaps, if he is looking for strategic focus for this country, a strategic outlook for the way forward, I would like to invite him to look at Vision 2025 which is an exercise that I had the greatest opportunity to preside over. When I have time, I will spare some time to give you the inside of what this entails but I can assure you it is a focus study that I would invite all Members of Parliament to look at, if we may.  I thank you. 

MR. LWANGA:  Thank you hon. Kaijuka for that information, but actually, if you had waited for a few more minutes, you would have heard my comments on that, and if you want, I will give it to you now.  Vision 2025 is a wonderful document, quite a few million shillings spent to make but where is it? It is on the shelf just like all other projects that have been studied in this country!  We study so many projects;  the President has come up with wonderful ideas many times but they end up on the shelf!  What I am saying is, we want to see practical, forward-looking plans;  we want to see things being put into effect.  

Government has worked on the infrastructure to a certain extent, save for the wastage on Toyota VXs which are being driven by big shots all over like we are the richest country in the world!  Actually, we spend a lot of money on useless items.  It would only take you to have been at the heroes day to see how many brand new four-wheel drives are in this country. In fact, I was seated next to a foreigner who said "you people you must very rich, everybody who is coming in is coming in a brand new car bought by government."  Why do we not behave like we are?  We are a poor country so let us behave like poor people do.  

Mr. Speaker, we have got Malaba which is the entry point to Uganda and over a year ago, we advised the Minister of Finance to save some money from URA collections improve it.  Mr. Speaker, it is a sight! When you go to Malaba and you see what is happening there, and then you cross the border and go to Kenya and see what is happening in Kenya, you wonder where we are heading  -(Interruption).

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you hon. Tim Lwanga for giving way.  Mr. Speaker, Vision 2025 gives a projection of why we want to be in the next 25 years; that is a long term programme but each year, you have got to cut a piece of that programme and implement it in order for you to achieve what you want to achieve in the next 25 years. This is because strategic planning means you look at the future and you look at the past and you start one step at a time.  
I want to assure hon. Lwanga that given the resources of this economy, given the financial capacity of this economy, you cannot achieve everything in Vision 2025 in one year and nobody would.  Therefore, if you realise, in the President's State of the Nation Address, he is talking about, first of all handling those areas of the country which are much lower in terms of wealth than the others. Of course, if you have read the UNDP Development Project and you have seen all the statistics, they indicate that the North and North East are badly-off compared to the other two regions. So, the restocking is one phase of ensuring that household incomes are moved up a little bit in the regions that have suffered a lot.  

The second area is looking at the infrastructure, both physical and social because, in order for you to succeed in having a focused vision, you have to make sure that people have the basic necessities and have the basic infrastructure in order for them to succeed. I will also want to add that soon, we shall also look at the micro-financing aspect of the economy in order for us to give minimum access to financial resources in order for people to be able to do some small income generating activities.  We can only start small because the income is small, but I can assure hon. Tim Lwanga and the House that the Vision is there, the will is there and what is missing at present are the resources, but resources will be found over time.  I thank you. 

MR. LWANGA:  Thank you very much hon. Manzi Tumubweinee. You know, ministers are very interesting people.  I have a document here, this document is "The Final Cost of the Main Civil Works Contract for the Water Board," and it shows you the wastage in government and says that if such wastage continue, there is no way that those so-called visions can ever be achieved!  I will tell you,  Mr. Speaker, with your permission I am going to read it: 

Contract lot (1) was for 16.8 billion shillings, it ended up costing, according to your estimations, 23 billion shillings, a difference of 7 billion.  Next one: 7.9 billion shilling, your estimated total cost including your valuation and delayed payment and evaluation claims is almost 11 billion shillings.  What is the difference? 3 billion shillings!  Then we have lot (3): 14 billion shillings, end result of 16 billion shillings is the cost after they tell you the valuation price, then interest on delayed payments, then they talk about evaluation of claims and it becomes Shs.16 billion.  You look at another one: shs.12.8 billion, at the end the figure they have is shs.15.1 billion;  12.8 less 15. Over Shs.2 billion extra.  So, really, Mr. Speaker, -(Interruption).

AN HON. MEMBER: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Procedurally, I would like to request that the hon. Member tables that piece of information he is giving me here for my action because, quite often, people just stand here and say this happened and then we are unable to trace it.  I would be very, very appreciative if I got that thing tabled here for my onward action.  Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Member is using a document which he has been waving and I think the procedure would be that at the end of his contribution he is going to surrender it to you or to the House, then you can take time to study it and then make a comment.  But he cannot table it here and then  continue to use it.  So, that is what he is exactly doing. 

MR. LWANGA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for your wise ruling.  Actually, it is not a secret document, and I will table it at the end.  

Now, Mr. Speaker, when I talk about - I do not want to call it a hundred per cent lack of vision, but I want to call it lack of focus.  Mr. Speaker, our economy is unfocused, thank you very much. 

MR. BAKKABULINDI:    Mr. Speaker, knowing very well that recently we were accused of handling very important issues in this House without realising a quorum, and as I look around, Mr. Speaker, we are not realising a quorum.  Is it in order for us to continue on this very important debate of the nation?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Well, let me ascertain this.  Well we suspend the proceedings for ten minutes, meanwhile the bells should ring. 

(House was suspended and resumed after 10 minutes)
                        
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, with these debates, I have been adjourning the House at exactly 6 p.m. and because it is almost 6.p.m. I find this a convenient time to adjourn the House until 2 p.m. tomorrow. 

(The House rose and adjourned until Thursday, 21st July, 1999 at 2.00 p.m.)













