Tuesday, 21st July, 1993

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament Building in Kampala.

PRAYERS
   
(The Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair).

The Council was called to order.

MOTION

That the National Resistance Council do resolve itself into a Committee of Supply for the consideration and approval of:

(i) The Revised Revenue and Expenditure Estimates for the Fiscal Year 
    1992/93.                             

(ii) The Budgetary Proposals for the Fiscal Year 1993/94 Estimates of    
     Revenue and Expenditure.”        
                                
(Debate continued from 20th July, 1993)



MR. ELYAU: Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.  First of all, I would like to inform you and the entire House that the Budget of this year is a bit complicated and is being talked about up to the village level merely because there had been some departures from the usual for example; this Budget is asking the tax payers to contribute money to central government which is now a new area, because formerly the colonial government used to tax the Local Government shs.6 for their protection.  But, now NRM will be the first Government to depart to behave like the colonialist. (Laughter)  

I say so because, now we are trying to decentralise for example the district like Soroti which is not even in the list of those to be given the decentralisation programme this time; how can you expect Soroti to contribute to the central Government when first of all, it cannot even pay.  So, I am seeing some strange cases now although I appreciate the effort by the Minister in putting the Budget.  This one is causing a lot of concern to the people, especially so when you go, to page 31 about agricultural income, this is the page where millions in this country participate in the economy.  

Now, Komugisha was talking about if they will tax the learned and so on; because we are 50 percent of this country that are operating.  There should have been some revenue that is left untaxed.  I am telling you, now as I am talking, worrying areas, like Soroti and other areas, people cannot perform to the level of even survival, now where will I get surplus to sell, I am saying that we are lucky this country that people can subsidize themselves we would be in a case like Europe where Government pays some allowances weekly to feed the citizens which is not our case in Uganda.  So, I think we should calculate properly what is happening on the ground so that the people we are trying to ask to give us taxation, we should make sure that they are living and they are worth doing it.  

I get disturbed about the amount of the poll tax which is being raised, I am not disappointed about the maximum because there are those who can contribute I can even contribute to the maximum.  But the Minister should bring down the lowest possible so that those who cannot pay at least can also try.

Currently, in Soroti there are some people who have not been able to pay these taxes they cannot even pay their own areas, Mr. Chairman, where will these people get this money, their cotton is not bought; if bought when it is taken to the store it is there nobody is catering.  For example, currently people have gone back to the societies to withdraw their cotton that was formerly taken on credit at 250 they are now selling at a give away price to Bukedi at Shs.200.  

Now, some of them had borrowed money from the Commercial Bank Rural Scheme, the Bank is asking fro the money from the farmers, this is going to be a terrible situation because if we are going to succeed like we did in 1991/92, there must a programme on the ground where farmers are participating daily towards the economy.  Yesterday I told you about cotton; up to now we have not planted cotton, I have my special cotton called saatu I could not dig it because nobody is going to buy it and I have no seeds to plant, I am now idle I am forced to be idle by the circumstances of this country, you can see, so I think there is something to be done if we are going to collect revenue because revenue comes from the farm.  

Before we spend anything in this country we must make sure of where we get our resources.  I am worried that this budget will ashamed us; because those who are going to perform players are idle.  The players are the cotton growers, simsim growers, who have even got a terrible market up and down all the time.  Mr. Chairman, if it is really a good performance, all of us should be given to enjoy activities in this country to work together.  For example, also in spending it is disturbing, recently when we were passing the Supplementary Estimates I wanted to talk but I did not have the chance.  If you look at the Estimates - revised, let us compare this Parliament and State House who are the majority? (Laughter) 

This is very serious because if I compare the figures that were supplemented it was about Shs.4.7 billion but this Parliament was only about 97 million.  If it is correct then I am made to wonder that what is it, what are we doing, what is very special there? We should be given some education so that we educate farmers, taxpayers who should know why we are spending so much money in that way.  

Actually, we should be able to explain, people can read the accounts.  If the Supplementary Estimates can be 4.7 billions and we cannot articulate properly, what that money goes to do, that confuses a little because I want to know it, because I am entitled to know.  Can the Minister tell us what are those things, are they developmental so that we get assured that there is something getting developed.  I am where that the State House has got branches like in Soroti maybe, those ones, but I want more explanations so that we justify this kind of money which is worrying us.  

Also, the taxes on vehicles and others, you see, if you look at the Finance Bill really, sometimes it is better to pack a vehicle then do without a motor vehicles, you see, some of us are not actively commercial at home because we have nothing to sell, sometimes we have the goods which are redundant nobody is buying. So, until the economy is really variable or rotating, it is difficult to produce money that will sustain the Budget.  Me, I quarrel with the estimates but they should not be just there to fail.  

Another point, is that our country currently is again facing a drought, as we come from Soroti, Bukedi and so on, there is a slight thing again in the second raid which is expected and I know it that if rain does not come again we are going to suffer famine.  I have not seen any provision for famine in case it falls because all the same in our country here the Minister should provide some money so that if I go there without food he can come in for assistance, I do not seem to see any provision, maybe, I will see it in the figures as the Finance Bill comes.  But I am worried you are pressing it rough this time, cotton which would help us to pay school fees is not there to be planted, and as I told you yesterday Serere Research Station which used to be our main source of seed is now having a problem Cotton which is bought from Lango is ferried via Teso, Bugisu, up to Bukedi or Tororo because of disarrangement in Lint Marketing Board.  You can find that one lorry can lose about 1000 kilogrammes right from its way; there are no ropes for tying it.  These people just dump cotton on the lorry the cotton is driven through, falling everywhere they go.  This is a very sad economy.  I think we should get arranged ourselves because we cannot go on a business like this.  I think I heard the Minister saying that they have given us Shs.150 million in Teso that is not true. If it is there it is less than that, how can I end up by not even selling my cotton when I am in my country?  

While enjoying staying in as a citizen this should assist cotton farmers so that all of us enjoy, all of us can pay school fees.  Expenditure that is still swelling we thought by retrenching the army or demobilising the army we would reduce the expenditure, but if I see it is the supplementary estimates it is still swelling what is happening?  If we cannot gap these areas we will not develop because if you look into the estimates here you find defence takes about 7 ministries, are we really for war or what?  I am getting worried a little although we are one.  We must put in place money for development, and this Parliament has a right to answer to people.  I want to tell Members that if things go wrong we shall be number one to be blamed, because everybody is looking at us in Uganda and if we allow funds to go like that, today we are sensitizing the children everywhere in mucaka mucaka, to know more about the financial. These people will query us and we should be preferred to explain. So I think this is the time. As an interim time everybody is watching what is happening.  

However, I am happy that we have been so united. I want to tell you the story that pleases everybody in Teso today that we have been able to show that we are really changeable and we never refused to go to the people for the CM elections, because some people expected us to refuse here.  If that Motion which was put here allowed us to gang up and remain here, we would perish, but today people say you are good fellows come, so I expect most of us will come back.  You see let us not stick to power, let us allow people to lead and withdraw and I am telling you, our Parliament to be respected now, let alone about the ‘ebyaffe’ which was passed last week, people are happy because for us in Teso we have been friends to Baganda we do not have problems.  In 1895 when the Kabaka returned from England, we gave him 18 cows in friendship and there was nothing wrong, so there is nothing worrying us the Iteso. All we want is peace, and to share our national cake.   

One thing again which the Minister should help us to look into, although I appreciate teachers have been paid a little more, but there is an area which has been left out.  We are talking about education generally, that everybody at least must go to school for 8 years okay. That is fair for primary school but there is a complicated sign today that makes parents feel that they are really embarrassed, that is secondary school.   Who is going to finance secondary schools?  You will put all of them to primary schools but when they reach the level of Senior Secondary School, who will finance up todate.  Children who could go in Teso have gone back home because the parents cannot afford.  To make it worse, the headmaster demands if the child goes in the second term like this year they are demanding the people the first term as well Shs.50, 000. Why should they pay Shs.50,000 when the child has not gone to school?  

So, I think the Government should save somewhere about these positions and these schools that are cheating us and I am telling you good brains, because they are born from poor families, are going to be lost in this country, what is the Government going to do?  With these few remarks Mr. Chairman, I thank you very much.   							 				
MR. AKURE (Jie County, Kotido): Thank you, Mr. Chairman for giving me this time to contribute on the Debate. I have been moving around in town and I found a very miserable group that is a group of civil servants.  Since they left their offices they just went there, they sit, they have nothing to do, because the money is not there and it appears the Government is not taking the responsibility of the Civil Service.  How do you expect the Civil Service to produce a better job when you do not take care of them, one person can come from his home in the morning he goes to the office with his Shs.600 just for transport, he has nothing to eat during the time of lunch hours he just goes there to sit read his novels; the Government is not responsible and we expect these people to perform and I am told somebody says they drink, what do they drink?  And I think you must be very careful, the Civil Service must be recognised and you must ensure they are paid promptly because they cannot perform at all if the Government is not taking serious steps to pay Civil Service. (Laughter) 

I feel the Minister for Finance from time to time should ensure that on the 25th of each month these people must be paid. There is no way you can expect the Civil Service that these fellows are corrupt they must be because what could they do because we are the ones who are forcing them yes, it is Government if they steal you do not complain, because when they get money once in a while what do you do?  You must find a way and do what you want and of course once you do not pay them a living wage corruption will continue. (Interruption)

MR. NKALUBO WASSWA: Point of information.  Is the hon. speaker on the Floor in order to obey the corruption on the pretext that the Government is taking to long to pay these civil servants whereas the amount which is being embezzled is in millions and billions of shillings, is it in order to say that it is in order for a man to embezzle say 50 million shillings because he has not been paid Shs.10, 000.

THE CHAIRMAN: He is in order to express his views. Continue, please.

MR. AKURE: Thank you Mr. Chairman, for protecting me.  These are realities whether we like it or not these are the realities.  I know my Colleague of Public Accounts Committee, he has been negotiating over these cases and he knows the problems shy there is corruption.  You have been seeing on papers so and so have stolen this, so and so have done this, he has credited so many companies, he has to do this. Why? You know the answer yourself and, therefore, when these people do that I think it is we to blame because once we do not support them; when we do not pay them at the real time, one can get tempted and it is just something that has become normal for almost everybody.  You find too many millions have been stolen and the Government does not take any action. 

As for the Minister of Justice whether the lawyers are there or the Judges are there nothing has been done.  And in most cases even in some other districts, we have been having a lot of Judges in some areas, but in Karamoja is a place where a lot of crimes are committed and these people must be prosecuted when they are brought to the court of law, and in law they say; a culprit must not stay in the cell more than 24 hours.  But at times when these people stay up to two months, the police has nothing to give him to each and they are left to go on police bail whatever the case maybe, tomorrow this man disappears the same fellow -(Interruption)

MR. ONGOM: Point of information. Mr. Chairman, the point the hon. Member is trying to make is very important indeed, we have read many times in the Newspapers about these people who are languishing in Makindye military barracks some of them have been there for 6 years, 4 years, they have never been brought to court and the condition according to what we get in the paper is that I think this point must be taken very seriously by the two Ministries concerned; that is the Ministry of Internal Affairs and that of Defence thank you.

MR. AKURE:  Mr. Chairman, you find these culprits who are always arrested they stay in custody for so many years as the Member has said, they are not tried and met one is supposed to be tried in court of law.  Now what is the meaning making somebody to rot there? When even the evidence is there the Police have got to leave and say, well we have no food and in most cases it has happened, but I think there are areas which are being favoured.  There are areas which the concerned will not care whether crimes are committed or not, then tomorrow when this local person sees the man who has committed a crime is left by Government they say what is the use of arresting these fellows we have given you a culprit and now you are leaving him, the same man who arrests him tomorrow says, okay, I will deal with you, you know what it means in Karamoja they also have too many guns at times they get rid of your life.  The man must be prosecuted and he is taken to wherever, he is to be kept.  

About taxes, I think hon. Members have talked about taxes.  In our rural areas the farmers are not able to pay some of these taxes.  Sometimes back the Ministry of Local Government came up with a point which says; the highest tax you can pay is about 30,000 it was about two weeks ago when I saw somebody carrying a poll tax ticket of 40,000 I do not know whether they reduced the rate of taxes.  In the normal circumstances I want the statement of the Minister for Local Government to say the highest man will pay so many billions or 30,000 but of now I have seen people are paying 40,000 and so on I do not know exactly whether the law has been reviewed I may need to know from the Minister for Local Government.  (Interruption)

MR. CHEBROT: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that before the Minister of Local Government revised the rate to 30,000 we have received a number of representations from the local leaders from various districts who have recommended the upper limit should be 120,000 and this ranged from districts from Kotido to Mbarara itself.  Now at that time we decided that the upper limit should be 30,000.  However, this was reviewed later and the amount was increased to 40,000. So it is not illegal if you saw a figure of 40,000. But of course as you know, the upper limit this coming year will be 80,000 if it is approved. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. AKURE: Mr. Chairman, I thank the hon. Deputy Minister for giving me this information but I would like to tell him, it may not be possible that people can pay that amount of money.  Right now in my district as a whole, they have collected 621,000 in every County.  I do not know what is going to happen tomorrow when you bring in these taxes, therefore, even in terms of salaries first of all you are aware that the Minister for Local Government having promised to pay some debts in Karamoja, he will still have to pay 101,000,000 for Kotido District which he had promised.  Now, if we cannot raise that amount, where do we get the money to meet all these costs?  

I want to tell you that not everybody has cows; there are those who have cows, and I do not think each one of them has cows.  So, there are those who have the cows and even to convince the Karimojong to pay taxes is a bit of a problem and you know how many times you have been talking to them about taxes in some areas there are people who have not paid taxes since they were born to be honest. (Laughter) It is not a joke we have been having these problems and I think now when they have increased taxes it is going to be very difficult for local leaders in the district to collect these taxes. They have said things are difficult, but we have been explaining to them the use of taxes but they seem not to be seeing the importance of taxes.

The Government also, is making a lot of mistakes, because there are some companies in which the government has 100 percent shares, some of these companies are collapsing; the Government is not assisting them.  I do not know when these companies collapse, what will the Government say? Will the Government blame the management, will the government blame the Board members or whatever the case maybe?  For example like, Peoples Transport, UTC and so on.  These are Government-owned, and the Government has never taken trouble to finance or to capitalise these institutions; and they expect them to operate out of nothing.  You see, these are our problems, and I think, Ministry of Finance should take serious steps.  If these companies collapse, do not blame anybody, but it is you to blame, because you have refused to capitalise them.

Somewhere in the Budget we have been seeing the Clerk to the National Assembly asking for funds to rehabilitate this House.  It is a pity each time the money is requisitioned for, it is not given.  One of these days, this building will fall on us, and I do not know what the Government will say. (Laughter) And that time, if it falls on us, we shall have no Government by that time.  Because this is an important institution where we do a lot of business, but if the little money cannot be availed to rehabilitate this building, what are we doing?  What is the use?  Why are we here?  Why do we not go home? (Interjection)- Yes! Why do we not release this money?  It is not going anywhere; it is not entering somebody’s pocket, but is for rehabilitation of this building.  this building is not only rehabilitated because of us who are here, for others who are coming tomorrow.  They must find the building decent. (Applause) Why do you refuse this money?  The money is not entering somebody’s pocket.  I think you are worried of the money that it will enter somebody’s pocket, I am afraid.  I think you must be responsible as people who have the key to the Treasury; you are collecting funds.  You are saying the economy is picking up, but can you show us where the economy is picking up?  It is alright we know; because we do not want to - if we are poor we must say we are poor because you cannot say that the economy is picking, when we see nothing, when we see Civil Service suffering, we see everybody is suffering, what is this? (Laughter) You do not deceive us.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MR. AKURE:  This one Mr. Chairman, comes also with this very issue of Civil Service being retrenched.  It was very interesting last time to see, even dead people who have died some three years ago, being retrenched.  Mr. Chairman, this is news, I do not know whether these fellows are paid? I can give you an example.  There was some one from the Ministry of Education from my place, this man died in 1991, and now some two months ago I saw his name being retrenched.  Now, I really fail to understand the whole situation.  I failed to understand the whole situation.   How do you retrench a dead body which has already rotten in the ground, and you say it is retrenched?  It is not correct! 

If Civil Service is there you must say so and so you leave the service, go home.  But for a dead person, he will appear on the list that he is retrenched and yet he is dead.  And of course to make matters worse, you have not even paid them.  Once you remove me from office, you must pay me and I go away.  Why do you make me languish in Kampala? I have no other means of surviving here in Kampala.  I think the Ministry of Finance should find funds to ensure that civil servants who are retrenched must be paid and they go with their packages. I do not know whether the Ministry of Public Service is going to recruit more people? Where are we going to put these graduates, who are graduating from various universities?  Are we going to employ them or to just leave them hang there?

MR. WANENDEYA: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The World Bank was singing of Ghana progressing economically and the welfare of the people in Ghana has never really progressed that well.  That is the same thing in Uganda. We are being told, the economy is picking up. These people who collect statistics, do not go right into the village and, therefore, the economy is improving in reverse.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, when my Colleague was speaking, I thought I would spend more time listening but when hon. Wanendeya tells a lie, I must take exception.  Hon. Wanendeya was not dressing the way he is dressing now, two years ago. (Laughter)

MR. WANENDEYA:  Point of order.  Is it really in order for the hon. Deputy Minister to always divest on personal matters, especially if I am wearing a nice rose that  he is not? (Laughter)

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: Mr. Chairman, before two years ago, hon. Wanendeya could not afford to wear a rose, a fresh rose everyday.  Now, his rose is worn everyday, and it is getting bigger.  Therefore, he must be doing better. (Laughter)

MR. AKURE: In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, one; the Government should address the issue of public servants, because if we cannot address their issue, all what we talk, what we tell them to implement, will just be out of circle.  They must be paid promptly, so that each time they get their money.  Taxes should be reviewed completely because there are people who are not able to pay taxes; and it is a true fact whether you like it or not.  You go up country you will find these people crying and they have called May, the Budget as Mayanja Nkangi’s Budget and restoration of the economy.  This is what they are saying.  Then companies which are fully under Government control, should be capitalised so that they run their affairs of their organisation for our building here, must be rehabilitated so that we do not lose Members of the House when the building collapses.

Finally, the retrenchment exercise must be carried out very carefully, so that we sort out what type of people are to go.  Otherwise, if we just hurry, we may make greater mistakes, and I wish not to witness such a thing because the blame will come.  They will say, why is it this time there are too many people being retrenched.  You know, they have that feeling; why I have left service, they have question marks.  Mark you, they will ask some of us, sometime and say, during your time you retrenched us and it can also be another way of decampaigning Government by the way.  So we must be very careful when you get that group of people, you must give them a satisfactory answer.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. RWAKAKOOKO (Ruhama County, Mbarara): Thank you, very much, Mr. Chairman.  I want first of all to commend the Minister of Finance and his team for having presented an elaborate Budget Speech although I think for very many people who are not financially oriented, it was complicated.  And, therefore, I would suggest that a lot of education is undertaken so that people in towns and in the countryside do come to understand this Budget. 

The consumers of the Budget are the 17 million Ugandans and they ought to understand it.  In making my contribution, I want to propose some questions.  I will start with the question as to whether or not the 1992/93 objectives of the Budget were achieved.  In other words, I am reviewing the past year’s performance in order to lay a ground for the current Budget.  I will probably, single out one are which has been emphatically covered namely; the area of control of inflation.  At the start, inflation was at 63 per cent; at the end we have been given the figure of minus 1.3 per cent.  Let me make my position on this matter known so that probably when the Minister for Finance is winding up the discussion, he helps me.  

I do not agree that a developing economy like ours, in a very poor country like ours, inflation should be halted at such a speed.  Because as you know, if you are driving at say 63 Kilometres per hour and in a second you are at zero, or minus you are in reverse in this case, you will be very lucky to save both the vehicle and your life, and that of the passengers; if you are lucky, you will be thrown out of the vehicle but the vehicle will collapse.

So, similarly in a country that has been under inflation for a long time, it was necessary to plan a gradual, gentle fall.  Instead of jumping from one side to the other; the economy would get hurt. It gives us some problems to interpret some data when inflation is minus 1.3, and you have a Recurrent Expenditure Budget which is in excess of eighteen bill which we have just approved as Supplementary Estimates and yet we still have many local suppliers unpaid, for whom I would like to demand the Minister for Finance to settle their bills latest by September 1993.  (Applause) I am saying September 1993 because, I would like to anticipate Mr. Chairman, that, maybe the time when this Budget discussion is over.  I will take information. (Interruption)

MR. ASIKU: Point of information. Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the speaker holding the Floor that, by the Minister checking the inflation very quickly, he actually withdrew the money that is supposed to be used for development completely from the rural areas, therefore, nobody is developing and we are also moving negatively in our production.  Thank you very much.	

MR. RWAKAKOOKO: I thank you, hon. Colleague.  Mr. Chairman, I would also like to demand that in order for the economy to reflect correctly, that the money that is due on account of terminal benefits for the former employees of the East African Community, be disbursed to them. I would like to demand that the Ministry of Finance institutes for the local purchase the local letters of credit in order to avoid this House being bogged down in discussing accrued local debts year in year out.  I think the Government will help the performance of the economy once goods supplied are paid for when the payments are due.  

I would also like to demand as a matter of reporting systems that we marry the cash based reporting system, to a commitment system so that when we come here to review what has gone on in the year, the position, or the report given to us about commitments by the Government should be fully explained.  If you have a regular accountability of commitments against approvals, that should cause no problem.  But if we are going to depend on cash, that is, I am afraid, not sufficient information for this House to understand how the economy is performing.  Operating a strictly cash budget is to fight for development.

In the 1960s, I do remember towards the end of 60, there was a lady at Mulago Hospital, who was very highly qualified. She was a doctor, a consultant physician and also a specialist paediatrician. She has the fortune of having a baby son, to whom she was a loving mother. But because of so much care, she gave too many the drugs to the son, her only son, until the son got stunted.  I would also like to suggest that the Minister for Finance who likes this economy so much does not give it too many the drugs to get it stunted.  Too many drugs can stunt the economy.  So, I would like very serious planning so that when the economy is performing, we do not have very large inconsistencies in planning vis-a-vis the actual situation on the ground. 

There is a current move to change from these impersonal - the economic growth to human development.  I think we are more interested that the budgets in the future do pay more attention to human development.  I am happy that a beginning has now been made.  I would also like that the future budgets do pay special attention to areas that constitute the engine of development.  These areas are topped by agriculture.  Our agriculture has been marginalised, our agriculture has received very little attention, it has been modeled in the philosophy of liberalisation and subsidy healing. (Applause)  

We know, all Members of this august House know that those who are permanently selling the abolition of subsidies here are the same groups which usually put subsidy in agriculture on top of the list in their own countries.  This is because it is so important for food security and more so in this country because of our weather, our climate which is suitable.  This can act as stimulant for other areas of economic activity.  I know that since the Ministry is now lucky to have very highly trained economists, the Minister himself; his Deputy and the Minister of State.  But I want to suggest that they be careful, a little more careful because it is held that economists are not necessarily the people who are the richest, is it also held that in fact, lawyers are very poor advocates in their own defence.  I do recall, although I was young, in the 1960s when Mzee Cuthbert Obwangor was a Minister for Justice and had even not gone to Luzira to read much of the staff he uses to tell us, he was a very solid Minister for Justice. (Applause) 

So, I would like to suggest that the three who are not serviced by a very competent team of technical exports do become more sensitised and therefore, include in some dosage of other opinions.  So that we do not have something that is so impersonal, we do not have a Budget that is so impersonal, where it is indifferent as to the human behaviour, and conditions and is relying only on correctness or numbers we will get in trouble.  

Let me now comment on the need to determine by the Ministry of Finance, to determine the taxable capacity of this nation. It is my view that the Ministry of Finance has not yet established the taxable capacity of this nation and I think they must move very quickly to establish this capacity so that we can know how much capacity we have and within which we can very meaningfully design out expenditure budgets.  

Let me give you some indicative data.  First of all, before I give you this date, I would like to commend the NRM Government for having taken a very huge step in realising the potential in Revenue of this country. During the year 1981/82, the Government collected only Shs.243.90 millions in taxes.

During 1985/86, 86/87 the Government collected Shs.5.05 billion respectively.  During 1987/88, the Government collected Shs.22.262 billion which was 345 per cent above the previous year. During 1990/91, the Government collected Shs.137.23 billion that was 59 per cent above that of 1989/90, and during 1991/92, there was again another upward swing of Shs.182 billion which was 33 per cent above the previous years.  We have been given further that the Government last year, the out-turn is likely to be 287 billion.  

So, I think that in fairness those steps must be commended.  But let me give a warning.  You see, I have seen that even when the quantum is going up there is a decline in percentage performance. Therefore, I would like to sound a warning - that if the Ministry of Finance does not come quickly to establish other avenues of Revenue collection, we are soon getting into a ceiling because we are left with probably 33 per cent to exhaust the taxable capacity.  So, I would like to request the Minister for Finance to quickly put in motion the arrangement to look at various other avenues that will attract - for the Government more money.  I think it has been said and I agree with this that the Government has concentrated on fewer areas of income earning which have been very, very much over burdened.  I think this dependency must be got rid of.  The money that I read according to my list is coming from only sources.  But these are not enough.  No doubt, we are coming close to the ceiling of the capacity of this nation for taxation.  

So, I would like, when the Minister is winding up, to lay before us here, what complete steps are being taken to ensure that the tax proposals are going to be realised; particularly when the same kind of sources are now reflecting higher rates of tax.  I would also like to sound a caution to the Minister for Finance.  There is a decline, as he knows very well, in the F.O.B. export revenue in dollars.  I would also like to encourage the Minister for Finance to institute measures that encourage exports.  I know there are programmes, but these programmes are not very easy to tap funds from.  So, I would suggest Sir, -(Interruption)

MR. NYAKATURA: Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, at the beginning of yesterday, I thought perhaps our eyes were wrong.  When I continued to read the Order Papers, I found that we were supposed to be debating the Budgetary Proposals for the Fiscal Year 1993/94 Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure.  Where are these estimates? What are we discussing?  Is it in order Mr. Chairman, that we continue wasting time here, debating what is non-existent, what is not available to us?

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.  They are already with me here.  Can you check in your pigeon-holes? Hon. Kafumbe Mukasa, please, tell us.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr. Chairman, with due respect to my dear Friend, hon. William Nyakatura, Mr. Chairman, these estimates are readily available in the pigeon-holes and as far as you know, you already have a copy, the Clerk there has a copy and copies are available in your pigeon-holes.

ADJOURNMENT


THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.  Okay, if you do not have the copies then we adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m. after getting copies.


(The Council rose at 3.40 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 22nd July 1993 at 2.30 p.m.) 



