Friday, 27 July 2007

(Parliament met at 10.52 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala)

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this morning’s meeting which we hope will conclude the general debate on the State of the Nation Address. We have in the public gallery pupils and teachers of Mutundwe Church of Uganda Primary School, Lubaga South Constituency. You are welcome.

10.54 
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on the issue of guidance in the sense that today in The New Vision I read that the Vice President has been disqualified from the post, which was being vied for, the Chancellor of Makerere University. The Office of the President and the Office of the Vice President are two distinct offices. 

Through you, Madam Speaker, could we get the legal interpretation from the Attorney-General as to whether the interpretation of the law was correct in a sense that in future a Vice President sitting may be denied his opportunity when actually the two offices are different? Otherwise, there may be some misinterpretation of these legal provisions and they may cause mishaps here and there. I seek your guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have not been following that issue of Vice Chancellorship. However, it is a new situation to me. Let me ask the Leader of Government Business and Government Chief Whip to follow up the matter and update the country on it.  

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, when would you expect this? Right now the selection is going on. So, could we expect it say like on Tuesday? I need your protection. When I am speaking, I should not be booed by senior legislators like hon. Byanyima. I expect you to listen. Do not boo me, honourable member.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Of course the matter is important but the Vice President is not here just as the Attorney- General. I think Tuesday may be early. But shall we say sometime next week maybe towards the end? Honourable Chief Whip?

10.57
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Kabakumba Masiko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think Tuesday is too early because the Attorney-General is not in the Chamber and this is to do with research and looking at different laws. I believe Tuesday after next week would be ideal, a week after. Thank you.

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN AN ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY H.E THE PRESIDENT ON THE 7TH OF JUNE 2007

10.58
MRS WINIFRED MASIKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute on the State of the Nation Address that we received recently. I also like to join my colleagues who have thanked the President for –(Interruption) 

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, the Attorney-General has come.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know whether it is fair to – I do not know. He did not even hear. He was not in the Chamber.

MR BANYENZAKI: He was watching, Madam Speaker. Now that he is here, he could speak for himself.

MRS KABAKUMBA: Madam Speaker, let us be serious on the way we handle business in this House. I have indicated that I am going to pass this information to the Attorney-General. By the time the Attorney-General walked in, this issue was closed and I have not briefed him and maybe he does not even have the relevant laws. I am going to brief him right away but I do not think he can give the answer now. I think we should proceed with the next item on the agenda and this one will be answered when the relevant information is got.

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, let us operate as Parliament. I have a lot of respect for the Office of the Attorney- General and the Deputy Attorney-General. I am sure he is competent to tell us the position. Madam Speaker, through your Chair –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker with all due respect to your Chair, I am worried that the reputation of the Vice President maybe at stake and it has serious implications on the ordinary Ugandans to see the Vice President failing to get a lucrative appointment and others who are not Vice Presidents. So, Ugandans deserve an immediate explanation because it may have greater political implications.

MRS KABAKUMBA: Madam Speaker, is the honourable member in order to mislead this House and country as if the Vice President wants to be appointed just because he is the Vice President? If it is to do with the law, we have agreed with the Attorney-General that he will give a legal opinion. I do not believe that the VP is going to be considered just because he is VP. It is because of other credentials, not that he is VP. Is he in order to mislead this House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, you know, I do not understand the criteria for this issue of the Chancellor. Maybe Attorney-General, did you hear what hon. Banyenzaki was complaining about for which he wants an urgent answer?

11.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker and colleagues, first of all, I apologise for coming in late. In fact, I rang you, Madam Speaker but you were on another line. I first travelled to Munyonyo where there is a joint monitoring committee meeting about Northern Uganda. It regularly meets. I found that the business did not require my presence as such, so, I retreated and came to this meeting. My senior colleague is officiating at the graduation ceremony at the Law Development Centre. So, we apologise. 

The way I understand the issue is that the Vice President has been disqualified from the race for Chancellorship of the Makerere University on the grounds that the President being the Visitor of the institution, the same office cannot be the Visitor and Chancellor. 

This is an issue I can take up with the person who has raised it on the Floor of the House. I am not aware whether the office of the Attorney-General was consulted for interpretation of the law. I need to find out whether it was consulted and whether we actually gave a legal opinion on that. In the absence of that, we shall certainly come on the floor of the House as soon as possible and give what the view of our office is on the matter. Thank you.

MS MASIKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to comment on the issue that was raised in the State of the Nation Address on page 10. I thank the President for reminding us that we are in the African Peer Review Mechanism (APRM) under the New Partnership for African’s Development (NEPAD). I am sure we are all aware that this APRM is a mutually agreed upon instrument of self-monitoring by participating member governments of which Uganda is and has been actively involved.

Raising this in the State of the Nation Address was quite timely. However, I would have loved the measures to be clearly laid out especially showing us to what extent we have gone to meet the objectives that were stipulated in the NEPAD. 

If you look at page 10, on 19 February 2007, on the APRM, the national institutional framework for the Review was launched. It is clear in the statement that in February 2008 we are going to be peer reviewed as a country. So, I would have expected maybe in this State of the Nation Address to sort of give out clearly how much we have gone on each objective that is going to be looked at.

Allow me to dwell on objective No.7 of the NEPAD which is the promotion and protection of the rights of women. I think this State of Nation Address to a great extent does not clearly stipulate the steps that have been taken in regard to meeting this objective. February 2008 is just about six months away from now. So, I am wondering to what extent as a country we are ready for this reviewing. 

It is clear that one of the indicative criteria for this objective the promotion and protection of the rights of women is to find out to what extent the country has acceded and ratified the relevant United Nations and African Union instruments of protecting the rights of women.

Madam Speaker, you are aware that the Maputo Declaration has not been ratified. So I think this is a time we need to really work very hard if we are to pass the test that is about to come. And indeed, among the indicative criteria we also have to look at to what extent the Constitution and other relevant laws that emanate from the Constitution have protected the rights of women and to find out if these laws that have been put in place are consistent with the Constitution.

I am worried about this criterion because you realise that the Constitution protects the rights of women and also goes on to say that all cultures and practices that are against the dignity of women are prohibited. But you realise that presently in this country we have not put in place issues that comprehensively address those areas where women suffer most. These include gender-based violence and domestic violence that is common in this country. Even the Sexual Offences Bill has not come to the floor of Parliament. Yet these are the issues that we have been crying about day in and day out. 

I am glad that the government is here and we would like to know to what extent they have come to this because the President has said we are going to be reviewed in February next year. Are we going to be embarrassed as a country, as legislators of this nation, if these things are not in place? And also one of the criteria is to find out the improvement on the status of women in the country. 

Recently, we attended a meeting and the concern was that there is hardly any gender audit that has taken place in this country; something that should even be a requirement for us to approve or to disapprove of is the affirmative action. Therefore, if these issues are not in place and we have not got a report especially in this State of Nation Address to tell us to what extent we have gone to address this. I imagine that this objective of promotion and protection of the rights of women might not score the grade that we would have loved it to score.

The point I am emphasising is that we need to be ready for this APRM, and if you realise on that very page the President emphasised that he would appeal to everybody to support this arrangement. However, much as we might have to support this arrangement and the will is there, if the process of realising the results of these objectives and realising the indicative criteria is not in place and is not moving very fast, I am afraid that we will not be doing what the President has requested us to do, to support this system. I, therefore, call upon Government and all of us who are supposed to make this process happen and bring Uganda to a standard that we need to see ourselves come to really work hard and achieve this purpose. I thank you very much.

MS ANNE AURU (Independent, Woman Representative, Moyo):  Thank you, Madam speaker. I rise to second the motion moved by hon. Ssekikubo on the State of the Nation Address by the President on the 7 June 2007. Before I go into the issues of the address, permit me to convey the regards and appreciations of the people of Moyo district and Obongi County for the recent visit you made to the district.

 I would like to say we have started receiving positive responses following the formal letters you raised on the critical issues affecting the district and we are very grateful for that. In the same vein, I would like to thank all the MPs who joined you on that trip and those who made contributions towards the success of that event. I am very grateful. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, on the State of the Nation Address, I would like to thank the President for bringing out clearly the pertinent issues, which is relevant to the development of this country.

I also want to thank the government and the LRA for accepting to come for the peace talks to end the 20 years’ insurgency in the Northern region. We are really enjoying the peace and this is evident. When I travelled to Moyo on 9th July, I found a roadblock and the UPDF was able to come to my aid. Using their break-down, they removed the roadblock that was a result of the bad roads and although I was on that road up to 3.30 a.m. I did not hear even a single gun shot. I was able to arrive in Adjumani at 5.00 a.m. and everybody who was caught up on that roadblock was in peace. In the same vein I want to really thank the UPDF for the discipline and the readiness they expressed to save the people who were travelling on that road in the Northern region.  Thank you so much. 

On security, what I would like to talk about is the involvement of the people in the sub-regions of the North in the peace negotiations and the preparation for resettlement. I feel that the West Nile region has been denied the opportunity to effectively participate in the peace process and also in the preparation for resettlement. I am aware of workshops, which are organised by hon. Ruhakana Rugunda in Lira, Soroti and Gulu but the West Nile region was left out.   

Madam Speaker, you were in Moyo recently. Where you had breakfast on 23rd June was the Redeemer Children’s home that is a result of the LRA atrocities in Moyo and in Adjumani districts.  My own brother, the late Dr Kiiza was killed and burnt in the Acholi sub-region and he left widows and orphans. That did not only happen to him but to many other people. So, why is West Nile left out?  

Still on security, I want to appeal to the Ministry of Local Government to really speed up the resolution of the internal boarder issues. We have such problems in the whole country and so it would be good for them to develop a programme so that we are aware and inform our people as to when they will settle these internal boarder issues.

On the economy, the President talked about the construction of the Bujagali and Karuma dams. Here we should realise that, not all the districts can directly benefit from the national grid. So, I would like to request Government to support the rural electrification projects and construct many power stations in the districts so that the economic development of this country is not concentrated in certain areas, but it is spread to the whole nation.

On education, I would like to comment on the recruitment of teachers. I appreciate the commencement of the USE programme, but the recruitment of teachers left a lot to be desired. There are schools that were initiated by parents and run by teachers on a voluntary basis. However, when it came to recruitment, these teachers were left out. I would like to suggest that in future, priority be given to such teachers.  

On health, I want to say that I support the President on the spraying of DDT to control malaria. I also know that there are political organisations or parties that are against this. I want to say that should there be districts which have already been lined up to benefit in November but who are not ready to benefit from that exercise, Moyo District is ready. We need the DDT.

I want to thank the past and the present Parliament of Uganda for passing very good programmes to benefit the people of the Northern region like the NALP 1 and 2, NUSAF, NAADS and PMA because this shows the unity and the care that the people of Uganda have for the people of the Northern region.  

Madam Speaker, I would also like to say that I am sure you understand when my Brother Fungaroo spoke on the Floor of this House with venom. This is because there is no where in Uganda you will find a V-shaped bridge except in Moyo District and in Obongi County. That is dangerous.  They have been asking for a ferry to connect Adjumani and Obongi but nothing has been done. 

There is no resident doctor in the Health Centre IV. All the other districts in West Nile have benefited from the upland rice project by His Excellency the Vice President, except Moyo District. So, for a normal man and a determined person who wants development for his district that is how it is. However, I want to thank the Minister for Energy for directing the immediate purchase of a generator for Moyo, Adjumani and Moroto districts. I pray that when Government settles some of these issues, my Brother will speak with a bit of peace in this House. Thank you very much.

11.19
MS GRACE OBURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo District): Thank you Madam Speaker for the opportunity. I rise to support the Motion and to thank the President for the State of the Nation Address. I wish to point out a few issues, which are of concern to me. 

Madam Speaker, on the issue of education, I would like to thank the President for introducing Universal Secondary Education to enable every child to have access to secondary education.  However, at the beginning of this year, there were so many interviews carried out to recruit teachers. Teachers were posted to these schools, which are scattered in most of the sub counties, but these teachers have not reported and the year is coming to an end.  This is demoralising the children and they are wondering why they should have no teachers surely when USE has been introduced.  So, I implore the Minister of Education to devise some other means to ensure that teachers reach these schools because the year is coming to an end.  

Still on the issue of education, I would like to thank the government for promoting the education of sciences in schools. However, you find that these schools lack laboratory equipment and they do not even have enough funds to buy this equipment. Can the Ministry of Education help these schools to get laboratory equipment so that these children learn? Science is practical subject and they need the equipment.  

On the issue of change of curriculum, I would like to thank the government for changing this curriculum to enable children learn skills which will be for their benefit and which will enable them to create jobs.  However, when these graduates go out, they do not have tools to start their own work and they are busy moving on the streets looking for jobs, yet they are able to create jobs.  Can they be given start up kits to ensure that they can start their own business and create jobs for others?  That one I would request the Ministry of Education to ensure that the start up kits are given to these graduates who are getting skills from tertiary institutions scattered all over.

The other thing is about Public Service.  I am grateful that the government has allocated Shs51 billion to clear the arrears for pensioners.  However, you will appreciate, Madam Speaker, that every year people retire and the criteria used in the Ministry of Public Service to pay these people is not followed.  You find somebody who retired in 1990 has up to now not got his pension; he has not even accessed the payroll and he has not got his pension and gratuity. You then find that somebody who retires this year gets his pension and gratuity and is even accessed on the payroll.  

Can the criteria be corrected so that they start by paying the people who retired first? Otherwise, we shall continue carrying forward bills of arrears for the pensions every year, because people who retired earlier have been catered for in a budget but you find that when the budget comes they are not catered for. Instead the new people who have not even been catered for in the budget are paid. This keeps accruing. 

Can we have a proper way of having these people paid according to the order in which they retired? We do not want the same number of people having to be catered for in form of arrears of pensions each year. If we do this, we shall even clear the backlog of the people to be paid pensions in the Ministry of Public Service. 

I would like to thank you for the opportunity, and I would like to support the motion, support the President and thank him for the State of the Nation Address. Thank you.


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, please join me in welcoming the teachers and pupils of Tree Shed Mixed Day and Boarding Nursery and Primary School in Luzira. They are represented by hon. Ruhindi and hon. Nagayi. You are welcome. (Mr Ruhindi thereupon entered the Chamber) Hon. Ruhindi, I was introducing your potential voters. (Laughter)

11.26
MR ELIODA TUMWESIGYE (NRM, Sheema County North, Bushenyi): Madam Speaker, I also wish to join others to thank the President for the speech. On page 10 and 11 of the speech, the President talked about Africans and said that the first human being on this planet was in Africa. He also said that Africa was leading in civilisation and that our civilisation came down as a result of the Greeks and others invading Egypt. I want to say that he could have gone a step further to look critically at the future of Africans. 

Recently, I had an opportunity, as the President of the Inter-Parliamentary Union HIV/AIDS advisory group, to lead a delegation of members of Parliament from South Africa, Sweden and India. We visited Brazil and USA, among other countries. When we were in Brazil we visited Darwin’s Museum in Sao Palo and there we found the steps in evolution. When you consider the fact that when living things or creatures fail to adapt they perish, you possibly imagine that when you look at what is surrounding us, it appears as if Africans might perish if they are not careful. 

For example, when you look at the diseases that are killing the Africans in Sub-Saharan Africa, you find that most people are dying from Malaria and HIV/AIDS, and now there is TB which cannot respond to any drugs. Meanwhile, when we visited the US and met the with the Congress Sub-Committee on Africa and Global health, we found that they have reached a level where they even tailor medicine to somebody’s genetics. The medicine is made specifically for that person and the dose is specific to that person as well. 

My point is that later on in his speech, the President talks about the peer review mechanism and says that this is in a way an African solution to an African challenge. However, I would have wished to see this same vigour being integrated in areas of research in order to make Africans healthier and more resistant to challenges that are likely to wipe us out. That is my comment on the peer review mechanism. We need to do much more than just coming and holding workshops in districts in the name of having peer review mechanisms when our people are dying day and night and we cannot collaborate in that area.

Also in Brazil we found that Brazil is the only country, which has enshrined universal free access to medical care to all people. It is within their Constitution. According to the Constitution, whether you are a Prime Minister, a Member of Parliament or a sweeper, you are all entitled to the same health care. The same thing is also in Canada as well as in UK and in some parts of the developing world. When you look at Cuba, Costa Rica, and other countries, you find that they have much better health indicators. 

Still on the issue of health, the President only talked about Malaria but we need to review our strategy in the health sector in order to get better health outcomes. We should know that households are the primary producers of health and we therefore need to put most of our interventions and our focus on households rather than looking mainly at health centres.

The other comment that I have is on page 17. The President talks about the fact that we had saved about 100 million for the energy fund and that we had given this to people who are going to develop the dams. He also said that when the World Bank loan is acquired, this money will be reimbursed. I want to state that when it is reimbursed, it would have been good to say that some of this money will go to support our rural electrification projects. This is because right now when you go to the countryside, you will find many poles hanging with no wires while others have wires but no transformers. 

There are very many incomplete projects. Although we do not have enough power, let some of the money that becomes available be used to complete those projects. It is a national shame when nothing is being done to complete these projects.

Also, the President did not mention anything about water and the environment and yet I thought that it was important that as much as we are looking at our dams in the long term, there is already evidence that our the water levels underground are reducing. There is a report that Africa is now losing a lot of water to evaporation and that this water can support three huge cities, the equivalent of Los Angeles. Even in our villages, when it rains today, there is mud but within a few days there is no water in the ground. Therefore, we cannot rely on water in the long term. Even the output of the dams that we are talking about will reduce. 

I hail the President for talking about solar energy and the 50 MW that we shall get from petroleum, but I would have wanted to see what I saw in the papers, included in this speech, that is, the issue of uranium, preserving uranium, going nuclear and also exploring other avenues like windmills. In other countries, they use windmills to generate power. You see them talking about geo-thermal power but geo-thermal power might not produce as much power as the windmills. In future we shall have more sun and more wind because of global warming and we need to reorient our energy policy towards that. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

11.33
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): I thank you Madam Speaker for according me an opportunity to contribute to the State of the Nation Address. I will comment on just a few issues raised by H.E. the President and I will start with health.

On health, His Excellency emphasised the eradication of Malaria. On hearing this particular issue, I ran to the Ministry of Health and sought to know the controversy surrounding the use of DDT. They indeed agreed with the President and said that it is the only way to go. I also would like to record my support to his stand.

However, they advised that in case DDT continues to be controversial because in any case, only about Shs500 million has been put aside to start up the programme of DDT spraying during the current financial year, certainly about three districts or even two will be covered and not the whole country. That is also bad enough because if it is to be done, they advised that it should be done simultaneously throughout the whole country. It makes more sense that way.

Another strategy –(Interruption)

MS NAMPIJJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I get amazed when my colleague starts concocting results of experiments from the Ministry of Health. The Government is allocating forests and wetlands at a very alarming rate. Remember that forests are natural homes for these mosquitoes. We should strengthen the afforestation programme to enrich the ecological order - mosquitoes have their natural homes, which are forests, and if you go to these forests, you will find bats; just one bat can swallow 12,000 mosquitoes. (Laughter)

MR BYARUGABA: I thank the honourable member for that information. It goes to whoever is concerned; it does not help me at all. 

Another strategy is to have indoor spraying using Icon. It has been done and properly utilised in Kabale District. It is quite effective, less expensive and is affordable; about Shs10,000 is enough to spray a home. The problem with Icon is that you have to spray repeatedly so eventually it becomes expensive.

Another strategy is simultaneous mass treatment using cheap drugs. We have been quite successful in as far as eradication of polio is concerned and we can do this with Malaria too. We can eradicate Malaria through mass treatment using Coartem. It is largely available and cheap. Those are some of the alternatives we can employ as we wait to clear out these controversies.

The other option is to give mosquito nets. We have about 4.6million homes in this country. If you gave about three nets, each net, tax free, costs about Shs5,000. That would cost about Shs70 billion. Surely this is affordable. In my constituency, a programme under the UN, the Millennium Development Gaols project, initiated this project in about five parishes. Today, there are hardly any cases of Malaria simply because everybody was given a mosquito net. Of course mosquitoes still roam other villages where these nets were not distributed. Hence the need to eradicate this vector and that is all that we have to do, to use DDT, other than that these other three alternatives can be used.

Another issue I want to talk about is water. Unfortunately this one was not raised in the State of the Nation Address. I come from a district that has the least coverage of clean water, 13 percent. This is a fact - Isingiro district. Look it up. It is the worst affected. When they talk of Karamoja, there is a worse Karamoja in this country and this is Isingiro district. Yes, in as far as water is concerned, only 13 percent. Most of the water available is unusable. 

Over 95 percent of water available in this district, particularly Isingiro South, is very salty water; very unusable, not even for animals, not even pigs can use that water. I would, therefore, like to call upon the ministry to look with favour to this very unfortunate district and start thinking about rainwater harvesting. Apparently the ministry does not emphasise rainwater harvesting yet it is the only viable method you can use to assist these people to get clean water.

Finally, I wish I had more time; I will talk about education. I do support the President. There is USE, there is UPE, but I however, wish to urge Government to immediately embark on operationalisation of Universal Vocational Education. It is the way to go. In fact if I had a way, we should have started with Universal Vocational Education. 

Last time around I emphasised this but it was not immediately captured. It is the only way to go. All these developed countries you hear of do not rely necessarily on PhD holders, no! Not even masters degree holders, no! But on vocational institutions, which give the majority of people survival skills. That is the way to go and I urge and pray that Government immediately embarks on Universal Vocational Education.

Lastly on corruption, (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think we have given you enough time. 

MR BYARUGABA: I thank you so much for the opportunity and I will contribute a little more next time when we are debating the policy statements. 

11.41
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you very much. Like others, I would like to thank the President for the State of the Nation Address. Due to shortage of time I will just make a few comments on the address. One is on Bonna Bagaggawale programme. I would like to thank the President for this initiative meant to get people out of poverty. But, Madam Speaker, this programme has to be audited to see its performance. There is a lot of money spent on this programme and yet it is not evenly spread throughout the country. I think it is urgent that this programme is spread throughout the country so that all the districts can get the benefits of this important programme. 

It is also important to do an audit performance of what it has done because even in the sub-counties that are supposed to benefit from this programme, you find that less than 10 percent of the people are actually benefiting from it. So, it is important that an audit performance is done to assess how this programme is progressing. 

Whereas in the Bonna Bagaggawale programme there has been good and deserved emphasis on availability of money through SACCOS, it is important that we address the matter of production and marketing. It is important that we have institutions and cooperatives at parish level through which small farmers can mobilise to access inputs, which are supposed to be financed by SACCOS. 

There is also a problem of overemphasis on new crops to be financed by the programme. There seems to be lack of focus on old crops like coffee, cotton and tea yet some of those crops, like coffee, remain very important to many people especially in the area, which I represent. 

Madam Speaker, the situation is not helped by some of our institutions, for example the UCDA, which is supposed to provide coffee seeds so that farmers can make seedbeds and plant the coffee. While we are looking for markets for coffee in China and attracting investors to come and set up coffee industries in Uganda, I am worried that not sufficient preparation is being done to promote the production of coffee. 

In the same respect UCDA should come up and also look at the quality problem because Ugandan coffee was once known to be of very high quality but because of lack of supervision especially by the UCDA - you go upcountry and find people drying their coffee on tarmac roads or anywhere they can access. I am worried that this may also affect the future market of our coffee. 

On the question of micro finance, I would like to caution members of Parliament and the country that because of publicity and explanations around the SACCOS and the money that is going to come through the Bonna Bagaggawale programme, a number of conmen and quark institutions are coming up to exploit our people. They go upcountry and tell people that they can give them grants for school fees; that they can give them grants for houses – people then rush to these micro finance institutions to take benefit of these supposed benefits. 

In my constituency, an institution called African Christian In Development (ACID) has collected more than Shs415 million from the people of Kajara County. When we went to them, they had no money to pay these people, so we arrested them and took them to Ntungamo. They got bail and they have now launched an offensive to say that –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, maybe before you speak, we have children from Bulasiyo Konde Primary School, from Busiro North constituency Wakiso, and Ngora Girls Primary School, Ngora constituency, Kumi District. I do not know whether Dr Epetait is aware that they are here. They must be somewhere in the gallery. They are welcome. 

MS BAKO: Thank you for giving way. I would like to inform this House that this ACID organisation also operates in my district. I brought this matter to the attention of the District Police Commander and the Regional Police Commander, because one man called Odeke, who actually heads this NGO in Arua, is a criminal. The managing director of this organisation had written, I think in 2004, about him, saying that anybody who deals with him or any other person he defrauds should take him to police and have him arrested. 

When I reported the matter, I had with me more than five witnesses who had registered cases but the Police paid no attention to that case until now. When I talked to the District Police Commander, he told me that when he talked to our Resident State Attorney, he did nothing about it because there was no evidence to effect any legal proceedings on the organisation.

This has been ongoing and at a certain time, the people he had defrauded actually wanted to beat him, then burn his office and maybe end his activities there. So, I would rather call upon, and I want to inform my friend that if this organisation is operating in your area and the Police is not cooperating with you, one of this days, the people that that organisation defrauds may take the law into their hands and find a meaningful way of eliminating them because I have actually gone ahead to say that –(Interruption) 

MS AURU: Thank you. I am seeking clarification and also giving information on this same organisation, ACID. 

From what I know, this organisation has invited applicants from the various districts in Uganda who had earlier on filled forms to benefit from construction of houses and payment of school fees. What they are doing right now is taking photographs and filling more forms. I feel it would really be relevant for this Parliament to be informed by the relevant Government organisations on their activities because we are confused. On the other side, we are told that they are wrong people, that they are corrupt. However, here in Kampala, they continue with registration. What is happening, Madam Speaker? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I recollect that hon. Peter Ochieng and a number of members raised this matter about three months ago. I do not know whether the government is going to be able to do something, or we let our people continue suffering. 

MS KABAKUMBA: Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Internal Affairs is following up the case but the little information I have points to the fact that ACID is not an innocent organisation and their activities are not very transparent but investigations are going on. 

MS BAKO: Madam Speaker, what worries us is the extent to which police delays to effect its activities on the ground.  People have been defrauded. This case came in the last session in this House and up to now nothing has been done. So, how much trust should Ugandans put in the people they elected to represent them if such matters take this long.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up.

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Speaker, my time has been consumed by the points of order and information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are the one who allowed them. 

MR TASHOBYA: It is important that something is done because we are crying yet at the same time these people are allowed to continue opening branches and receiving deposits from other Ugandans. 

On the question of UPE, I thank Government for this policy and I also thank Government for implementing the wage increases for primary school teachers because right now primary school teachers are even earning more money than teachers in private secondary schools. However, I have reservations on the question of universities. I think we should stop having more universities so that we can concentrate on improving the standards of the present universities that we have. We lack qualified manpower to do the teaching. I would support hon. Byarugaba that we should rather look at technical institutions where people are getting skills so that they can employ themselves. 

Lastly, on the question of power, I would like to congratulate Government for starting up a fund to address our power needs but as we wait for the report from the Natural Resources committee, it is important for the relevant minister to sit down with Umeme and look at the problems that are affecting us: One, the power losses, which amount to 30 percent. This means that we have more power -not all of it is being used and the cost of that loss is borne by the consumers. 

11.54
MR WILLIAM OKECHO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I have been waiting for about four days but I am now happy that I am on the Floor. Now, I have to comment on the economy, labour, education, health and the rule of law.  I am particularly happy with the President’s address and I really support the motion.  It covered quite a lot of ground, and regarding the economy, a lot was said and the bottlenecks were adequately addressed.  Except we know very well that the issue of energy and high oil prices made it very difficult for this country to achieve the kind of targets that they had expected over time.  

Now, with regards to energy, I know there are some commendable efforts being made to provide or to generate more power and I would wish that it is expedited. I was, of course, concerned with the response from the Leader of the Opposition in that regard and I would appreciate if only some patience is exercised so that the government is given enough time to address that point very expressively. 

However, I have a problem with rural electrification and this programme seems to have been forgotten.  I know very well that way back in 2000 some poles were planted in many areas in this country as - could I say- a political gimmick and up to now they have not been connected. The people are wondering what is going on.  When we go to the Ministry they say, “There is no money; we are waiting for this, we are waiting for that.”  But, as the power generation is picking up it would be very appropriate for these schemes to be completed because people are beginning to think that they were being deceived. 

I would not like to face this - of course, this is more so in the rural areas where most of us come from and represent the people. It is important that these schemes are completed as soon as possible. (Interruption)

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker for allowing me to call my honourable colleague to order. The honourable colleague previously holding the Floor castigated the Leader of the Opposition for giving his opinion.  He goes right ahead to give his own opinion, which is not applauding what is happening but raises reservations.  Is he in order to call on the Leader of the Opposition to be patient when he himself is not patient? is the hon. Member in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not think I understood what he said.  Proceed.

MR OKECHO: Thank you for your ruling. It is important that the hon. Member should have listened to what I said. She was talking about generation which was a different thing from distribution. 

Regarding the economy still, Madam Speaker; I think a lot has been expressed about one aspect, which has been so much of a hope to many of us, that is, Bona Bagaggawale.  There is every need to bring in this House some framework within which this particular programme is going to be implemented.  Many of us are trying everything to ensure that we actually push ahead with this programme.  SACCOS are being recommended by us to be formulated all over the country but we do not know when the various aspects of this Bona Bagaggawale programme are going to be implemented.  

I wish to emphasise the discussion, which I had yesterday about petroleum discovery. It is important and it was I who actually raised this matter here, in the House earlier on, that we need a framework upon which the resource is being undertaken.  It was promised that there will be a policy coming into the House very soon but up to now we have not seen it. I hope that people will not be made to think that this resource is actually theirs and they are going to play about with it as it was being mentioned here yesterday by one Member from the district where this resource is located.

Regarding education; Madam Speaker, I definitely appreciate the commencement of the USE programme but the problem is that many of our rural schools do not have what it takes to implement the USE programme effectively.  Of course, my colleague from the district has elaborated on this very effectively as well and I would appreciate that the government takes into consideration all those issues raised more especially scholastic materials et cetera.  

But, I cannot stop my address by not mentioning something about university education.  We all appreciate that there is now a large number of universities in the country and my district and constituency in particular is benefiting from Busitema University, which is going to be in operational this year.  

My constituents have asked me to thank Government for locating one of the colleges at Nagongera, which is the headquarters of my constituency.  It is really important that this university starts quickly and takes on board the various students that have been missing university education in that area.

Regarding health, It is important that we go back to the construction of LC II Health centres because these are the first centres that most of our local people go to. It is there that we should be able to treat these people quickly before they are referred to other places since there is always a problem of distance between the villages and the national referral hospitals.  Thank you very much.

12.01
MR STEPHEN WASIKE (NRM, Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion and I wish to thank the President for the State of the Nation Address. The other weekend I was just in Busia and there is a big problem that is brewing up in as far as food security is concerned.  We have a lot of cassava there but some small flying insects have evaded it; they are doing a lot of havoc thereby creating food insecurity.  I wish to draw the attention of the Ministry of Agriculture to that problem in Busia.

Madam Speaker, on the economy I wish to commend the President’s stand especially on Bona Bagaggawale policy.  But, when you look at page 30 of the President’s speech as he is concluding on Bona Bagagawale, he is saying, “Speed, speed, is what we need.”  Now, Madam Speaker who is delaying this process because even the President is saying “speed,” we are all saying speed but we have already taken 20 percent of the time, we have used up one year out of five years.  The President in his State of the Nation Address is saying, “speed” that means there is somebody who is delaying. Who is delaying this process? [Hon. Members: “The Opposition”]- The Opposition? (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, on agriculture, we need a radical financing for agriculture. Every body has been talking about increasing Government expenditure. (Interruption)

MR PIRO: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank my colleague for giving way. I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that Bonna Bagaggawale programme is hidden in many programmes in different ministries. These include NAADS programme; PMA, that is to say, at such. So Bonna Bagaggawale has been going on and that is the Prosperity for All programmes like USE, UPE and others   Thank you very much.

MS BAKO:  I would really love to inform my hon. colleague that the Bonna Bagaggawale programme as a policy statement, came after the initiation of the PMA and NAADS; and NAADS is just a component of the PMA. 

MR WASIKE: Madam Speaker, my concern was on how much money we are putting in agriculture. When you look at our neighbours like Kenya and Tanzania- I looked at their budgets and comparing percentages spent on agriculture, we are far behind. In fact if we were to be reviewed by the African Peer Review Mechanism (APRM) in agriculture, we would perform very poorly.  And yet if we are going for regional integration and we carried something like food, we say,”We are joining the region; we are integrating but what we are coming with in addition to oil is food”.  We would do quite a great deal. 

I am proposing that just as the President has focused on agriculture,let us put the money there. This year we have put Ugshs 212 billion in energy because it is a pressing matter. I see no problem with putting Shs 214 billion in agriculture in the coming financial year. This would almost translate into 1 billion per physical constituency and that would make a difference, which is the radical financing that is required in the agricultural sector. 

On education, I wish to thank the government for Busitema University. The university derives its name from a sub-county called Busitema. But what is so hurting is that the university is in Busitema sub-county, a sub-county that has no secondary school at all. Now, we are hosting the university but we are technically and strategically excluded them from joining it. This is not fair, Madam Speaker.  So when we are planning, we should equally value - much as we are hosting, we should also put it into consideration. 

Indeed the President hinted on it when he mentioned on pages 36 and 38 about these schools. It is just important that we consider where the university is hosted to enable those people join that university. Otherwise, it is very unfair for that particular university and for that particular sub-county to be in place when the hosts are technically excluded from joining it. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to conclude on the subject of regional integration by commending the fast tracking of the East African Political Federation. I welcome Rwanda and Burundi for joining, however, I emphasise that we - like me who has been on the border and has seen how much we can put across in terms of food – should carry and be the food basket for this federation.  

Madam Speaker, on health, I just wish to draw the attention of Government- although it is mentioned on page 42- I wish to draw your attention towards the general trend of commercialisation of health service delivery. It is very important that we address the matter so that health service delivery is not entirely for profit motives as the case is when you go to the government hospitals and most of these missionary hospitals.  The trend is a bit alarming. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members I would like you to join me in welcoming Kansanga Junior School, that is, Makindye East Constituency represented by hon. Mabikke  and hon. Naggayi; and Ngora Girls School, that is, Ngora County, Kumi District represented by hon. Epetait. They are here with their teachers. Please stand up.  You are welcome. (Applause)

12.09
MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me take this opportunity to also comment on the State of the Nation Address. I will start with education; to some extent, we sincerely support the government’s effort in this field. (Applause)  But, Madam Speaker and honourable members, what is worrying some of us is that the education set up in this country, if you look at it, the national overall vision is completely lost. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, education is not for fun. There are two main reasons why a country decides to put a lot of money in educating its children: One is to develop the human resource; and two, is to cause a common citizenship or nationhood.  

When you look at schools under the private scheme or schools under the private sector and public schools, the difference is too big to cause a common citizenship in this country. Some of our children are studying in piwempe schools and others are going to the best schools like St. Lawrence. Some people are paying too little and others too much. What we are asking from Government is to really monitor public and private schools equally. We do not want as a country in the long run to lose the main national vision of education. We want to cause a common citizenship; a common nationhood 

Madam Speaker, I will go to corruption. Corruption is becoming a cancer in this country. My worry is not the Kampala corrupt people; they know how to handle their loot, but the problem is that corruption is penetrating the rural areas. When you scrutinise corruption, you realise that it has a result of too much hate for one’s country. The story of Queen Elizabeth National Park is a classic example of corruption in rural areas and corruption aiming at destroying a country.

Madam Speaker, when you look at what is going on in Queen Elizabeth National Park - here comes a group of people selling their land, going to Congo for a few years, coming back and claiming that they have no land and they occupy a national property. They occupy and destroy a national property under the watchful eye of the Police and the State. This is the most painful thing that a national property, which contributes to the national coffers Shs 2.2 billion per year without even Government investing in it, is destroyed by group interests. It is sad for Africa; it is sad for Uganda. I do not know what we must do about corruption in rural areas. 

I want to comment on the economy. As the President dwelt on the generation of electricity, can we be told the status of Kiira and Nalubale Owen Falls dams? Why are we playing games? Experts are telling us that those two dams are not maximally used. Why? Instead of this Parliament asking Government to account to what those two dams are not maximally used, we are also just dancing over Bujagali. Let me reveal this. 

As we move on, Africa is remaining with only four resources, and if you can utilise those four resources very well, then in the next 50 years, you will find your global position. The first is water, second is land, third is the development of human resource and fourth is your environment. But African leaders we are not bothered to an extent that even land we can give freely. Who told you? Those who are acquiring free land here have lost their land in their own areas. The best I would have expected from Government is to come up with a policy of renting land to investors.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, please, try to conclude.

MR KIBANZANGA: I have made my point; I wish to conclude it. African governments; Uganda Government, be serious. I thank you very much.

12.17
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity and I want to concentrate just on my area of specialty which is democracy and human rights. You cannot be everything.

Madam Speaker, on page 3, the President noted and it extends up to page 4 that there is need for a study on transition to multiparty democracy. I would welcome this idea and I applause the President and I would encourage the government Chief Whip as a matter of urgency to ensure that before it is too late, before some cats jump out of the basket, this Parliament sits to review the year’s operation of multiparty system. I want to thank the President for bringing up that idea.

The President noted that there is a new scenario, which the makers of the 1996 Constitution did not foresee - the scenario of independence. He stated in his speech that I quote, “As far as the NRM is concerned, we have developed a memorandum of understanding with the National Resistant Movement-inclined independents”. I think this is a very serious statement. My narrow understanding of independents refers to those who come to Parliament as individuals. They cannot even say since we are 37 independents, then we are 37 in number. No. They are each different and the total is 37 of them because if they were thinking the same way, they would have the necessary ingredients of forming a political party. (Interruption) 

MR OKECHO: Thank you very much hon. Otto for giving way and thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Now, an independent comes to this Parliament as a single person representing himself or herself and he is or she is what we could call a party onto himself or herself and has a right to associate with any other party in Government. So, I think he should understand that one. 

MR KIBANZANGA: Clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are clarifying to Mr Otto or to hon. Okecho? He was only giving information.

MR KIBANZANGA: To him, he is making a very dangerous allegation. As much as we have Independents in this House who do not belong to parties - out there, there are people who do not belong to parties. And by the fact that you were elected in your constituency, the majority of those who lined behind you are those who do not belong to parties. For you to come here and say you represent yourself –(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let us not take too much time on that one. The Independents are here by Constitution so as the parties. So, let us co-exist. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, with all due respect, as I was developing my point, I hold strong views and I would beg anyone who challenges it probably to join me over lunch that for Independents to sign a memorandum of understanding with a party tantamount to breach of the fact that they are Independents. I rest my case on that with due respect to the Speaker’s ruling. There are three kinds of independents, there are Movement Independents, multiparty Independents and there are Independent Independents who do not side with any party.

On page 4, which is my last comment, I want to quote the President. The President says, “Another apparently negative development is a situation where a legislator goes public to defy a position taken by the party to which he or she belongs. Our parties have their respective constitutions and other regulations for internal management and   democracy.” Madam Speaker, the President seems to be saying a party member must not go public to disagree with a party position. I think that is not right. Article 29(1)(d) of the Constitution gave every Ugandan freedom of expression. We did not state in that Article that, “Except when you are following party activities”. 

So, freedom of expression is enshrined in the Constitution. I would bet anyone to challenge me on whether I would be wrong to disagree with my party yet I am exercising my constitutional rights in Article 29. It is not right for the party to suppress an individual who holds opinions just because those powers and rights were not given by the party constitution but were given by the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. (Interruption)

MR LOKII: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to inform the honourable colleague that the freedom of association and expression of individuals is enshrined in the Constitution. However, when you choose to group up in a party, your individuality is compromised and you must meet the demands of a group. In this case, if you would like to defer from FDC positions, you first resign. Thank you.

MR OTTO: Honourable member for the African Parliament, you may want to read Article 71 (c) of the Constitution. It states: 

“The internal organisations of a political party shall conform to the democratic principles enshrined in this Constitution.” One of the democratic principles enshrined in this Constitution is freedom of expression in Article 29.

Lastly, the President said on page 6: “What is disturbing is that some leaders who claim to be better promoters and protectors of those rights and freedoms than some of us, who have for very many years fought the same, shy away from explaining to the people that these rights and freedoms are not absolute…” The President then quotes Article 43 of the Constitution. Article 43 states: “(1) In the enjoyment of the rights and freedoms prescribed in this Chapter, no person shall prejudice the fundamental or other human rights and freedoms of others or the public interest.” 

The President is trying to say that for those of us who want to hold rallies and demonstrations, our rights are not absolute because they should not infringe on the rights and freedoms of others. However, the President selectively quoted the Constitution for his own ends because the same Article 43 (2) says: 

“Public interest under this article shall not permit- (a)	political persecution…” 

Why is it that only FDC, UPC and DP are having problems with the police when they want to address rallies? We have not heard any single incident where NRM rallies have been blocked anywhere in Uganda. My interpretation of “public interest” under Article 43 by the Police is political persecution. If hon. Otto wants to have a rally, the Police will say “we have observed it may disturb public peace”. Why should those dictates only be given to Opposition Members of Parliament? I challenge all Ugandans that we should protect the rule of law because the day you are not in power, you will feel the pain of being in the Opposition. Do not think some of us enjoy being where we are.

Madam Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity and I challenge the Attorney-General to amend the laws on corruption so that we provide for death penalty probably by firing squad. Until we can kill those people who have stolen public funds every December - shooting them probably in the city square because they embezzled Government funds, the way they are doing in Japan and China - and not keep just romancing with words, people will still steal when they are given an opportunity. The moment hon. Ruhindi is shot dead for embezzling public funds, the Odonga Ottos of this world will be discouraged from ever thinking –(Interruption)       

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I really do not know whether my friend and colleague, hon. Odonga Otto, is insinuating that I am corrupt. I am not corrupt. Is he in order to allege on the Floor of the House that unless I am shot dead - and even glance at me as if he wants to shoot me dead? Is he in order to insinuate that I am corrupt? Maybe he wants to use me. My friend, what is the problem?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Otto, do you have a basis for wishing him to be shot at the end of the year? (Laughter)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I respect hon. Ruhindi because he is one of the public officers whom I know is very clean. I just used him as an example. I did not know he fears death that much. However, I thank you for giving me this opportunity and I thank you for listening to me. 

MS BETI KAMYA: I would like to seek your guidance, Madam Speaker. When we opened this debate we were informed to register with the Whips and some of us have sat quietly waiting for our names to come up. Has the procedure changed? Do we have to catch the Speaker’s eye?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, your name is on my list but it was indicated for yesterday. By the time we finished, you were not in the House. I think you left early yesterday. The list is there but even those who are listed are continuing to stand.  

12.29
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Independent, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to go through about four points very briefly. 

Yesterday I did not know that my constituents were watching the debates on the State of the Nation Address by the President very closely. One of the most striking comments that touched the attention of my constituents was the comment by hon. Mary Okurut Karoro who gave a proverb that the President said that running Uganda is like trying to catch the intestines of a sheep. She then implored Members of Parliament to help the President attain that goal. I have been asked and directed by my constituents to make a response as follows: 

It is true that it would be very difficult to catch the intestines of a sheep especially when you stay too long. When you look at page 2 of this address, the President writes about the political scene: “…I would like to reaffirm a statement I made last year…Uganda as a country does not belong to the Executive…” On page 3 he again says: “During my State of the Nation Address last year, I pointed out one development which would be of interest to study as we transited to a multiparty dispensation.” When you look at this, there is a very big concern that the President continuously repeats himself. The fact that he has stayed around for so long, some of the speeches tend to be monotonous. (Interruption) 

MR KUBEKETERYA: Hon. Mabikke has consistently said that the President has stayed too long. I would like to know how long “too long” is. 

MR MABIKKE: Twenty-one years as President of the Republic of Uganda is too long, and I am told that he needs a fourth term which will make him President for 30 years. I think that is too long for a republic where there are so many other competent persons. Even in the Movement itself we have had young faces coming up, like hon. Felix Ogong. We have heard that hon. Amama Mbabazi also wants to lead Uganda. (Interruption)

MS SAUDA MUGERWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you hon. Mabikke. I just want to find out from hon. Mabikke; if he had a child with jiggers and he asked the child ten to a hundred times to remove the jiggers but the child does not, even though he goes to the extent of punishing the child, would he not repeat that action or information to the child so that the jiggers can be removed? This is what is happening with the President. He has begged us to fight against poverty and corruption and these things have persisted; what can he do? This is why I am seeking some clarification from hon. Mabikke. What should you do to get your people on board?

MR MABIKKE: Thank you very much. The point has been made that the President must be assisted because he has stayed around for too long. He must be assisted by his speech writers to make sure that he does not repeat the statements he has made over the years because he risks becoming monotonous. [Mr Kibanzanga rose_] Hon. Kibanzanga, you are very informed and you can inform me. 

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much, hon. Mabikke, for giving way. I would like to inform this House that the answer to the question hon. James Kubeketerya asked is found in His Excellency President Museveni’s speech of 1986 where he said Africa’s problems are brought about by leaders who stay too long in power. He posed the question, “how can you be in power for 10 years for God’s sake?” He said it while he was standing outside this Parliament.

MR MABIKKE: Thank you very much for that information.  Madam Speaker, I will go on page 27 where there is the famous slogan of bonna bagagawale or prosperity for all. The President elucidated mildly on the programme to make every Ugandan rich. However, I would like to say that that programme is not tenable. One of the honourable members yesterday said that we begun with Kulembeka in 1987 and somewhere around 2001 there was Entandikwa, and today we have bonna bagagawale. I would like to affirm that there is no single country that creates wealth out of deficit. Uganda runs a budget deficit year in, year out. Countries that create wealth for all are countries with surplus. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to say that instead of sloganeering, instead of diverting the minds of Ugandans that Government can put money in their pockets, it would be much easier, tenable and better if Government invested that money in quality education. (Interruption)

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, I am rather surprised by my friend, hon. Mabikke. I want to inform him that we should not waste too much time discussing electoral slogans because they are taking us nowhere. I do not think that the government or anybody in Government intended to bring this bonna bagagawale thing. I do not think it is something to be taken seriously. 

MR MABIKKE: Thank you very much, honourable member. We need Government to focus on providing Ugandans with quality education. We need the government to focus on providing and creating jobs for Ugandans rather than diverting them to unworkable slogans like bonna bagagawale. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to very briefly tackle the section on page 36 where the President talks about achievements in the construction of polytechnics. I would like to laud this new direction. I think this is the correct direction that the country should take. The creation of more polytechnics could have even had more effects than starting the USE programme.  

Madam Speaker, when I look at page 37, I realise that the President’s position on a change in the curriculum must also be welcome and lauded because every nation adopts an education system that is relevant to its economy and social wellbeing. The current education system in Uganda was only tailored to serve the colonial machinery. Now that we are re-discovering ourselves, the direction Government is taking must be lauded.

Finally, Madam Speaker, let me comment on health. The country is in dire need of key medical equipment, especially in national referral hospitals. Time and again we see Members of Parliament, ministers and other big shots in Government being flown out for medical treatment. I want to say that it would have been cheaper for us to treat these people from here if we adopted a strategy of acquiring this significant medical equipment in our referral hospitals. The country should now focus on acquiring this medical equipment.  

Similarly, the country should pay attention to the ambulance services nationwide. Uganda is the only country that has got pick-up cars as ambulances. When the Ministry of Health was asked to purchase and address the need for ambulance services, they went and bought pick-up cars. I am saying this because I saw a whole Minister of Health on television commissioning pick-up cars for ambulance services. This is not a welcome development and Government must address this as quickly as possible.  I want to thank you very much.

12.42
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support the motion as presented by hon. Ssekikubo. Let me also take this opportunity to thank His Excellency the President for the State of the Nation Address. I was very happy because the President in his address tackled key issues like democracy, constitutionalism and the rule of law. Those are key elements for the development of any country. You cannot develop when there is no democracy, constitutionalism and rule of law, and that is where NRM excels. We are democratic and that is why we are not a party but an organisation. We are three-dimensional and accommodative because we value democracy - (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, in this Parliament there are some members who have specialised in organisational development. When hon. Byandala talks about a political party not being an organisation, I do not understand him. Can the honourable member holding the Floor give us that technical difference, if any, between a political party and an organisation? Is it a matter of semantics? It is important that he differentiates. What we know is that if it were something to do with road construction, he would probably have an upper hand over me. However, when it comes to matters of organisational development, he just cannot. So, can he please tell us the technical difference, if any, between a political party and an organisation?  Thank you.  

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, hon. Wadri. Knowing you, it will take me a long time to explain yet there is very little time left for me. So, Madam Speaker, allow me to go ahead and utilise the time I have.  

Constitutionalism and the rule of law are fundamental freedoms but when you are enjoying those freedoms you should do it in conformity with provisions of the Constitution. This is what the President talked about in his speech on page 6. I now appeal to all of you that before you participate and encourage members of the public to go for demonstrations, first check the provisions of the Constitution so that you do not - (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, when I sought a clarification I thought the honourable member would be courteous to me. I sat down and reflected on how he responded to me as the Opposition Chief Whip, a retired senior civil servant, a man who has gone through schools, a man who holds three degrees and a man who has got a postgraduate diploma in public administration, and I realised that he was not courteous at all. 

In future, various people will read these records and I do not want these people to keep wondering what kind of person Wadri is. I do not want them to keep wondering why I failed to understand an explanation from hon. Byandala. So, is the honourable member in order to put my reputation in ridicule and expose me to the future generation in that manner? Is he in order to portray me as an incompetent Member of Parliament representing the people of Terego in Arua District? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we agreed that we should address this with decorum. As far I am concerned, the members who are here are well qualified to be in this House and they understand everything perfectly. Hon. Byandala, you are out of order.

MR BYANDALA: I am sorry if hon. Wadri got offended, but I am not good at teaching people - (Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no! Please proceed.

MR BYANDALA: Let me now talk a little about security. Security is another very important item for the development of any country and I am very happy to hear that the UPDF is well built and effective. According to the President’s address, the men and officers of UPDF are well trained and equipped to them handle any situation that comes up.

Let me take this opportunity to thank the UPDF for the work they have done in defeating Kony decisively. I also thank the Uganda delegation to Juba in Southern Sudan led by hon. Ruhakana Rugunda, the Vice President of Southern Sudan and his deputy, the UN Special envoy to Northern Uganda and other governments and Kony himself for the efforts they have made to ensure that peace returns to the North. However, it seems the problem that is biting the Kony camp is the ICC indictment. In that regard, my appeal to the government of Uganda is that as they plan the Mato-Oput way of solving this conflict, they should educate all Ugandans about this system because it cuts across. The war affected all parts of the country.

Madam Speaker, let me now briefly talk about the economy. I thank the government for managing to handle the economy since 1987; it has performed very well. However, I want to inform Government that we have come out of rehabilitation to the stage of investment. So, we should change course and ensure things work very well. 

The issue of power has been very clear, and past mistakes of stopping energy projects should not be repeated. In that regard, I would like to thank Parliament for cooperating with the Executive by passing a motion allowing the government of Uganda to borrow money for the short and long-term investment in the Bujagali Power Project and other thermal stations in the country.

Madam Speaker, bonna bagagawale or prosperity for all should be looked at in a broader way. The UPE and USE programmes and other infrastructure programmes are all part of this bonna bagagawale project. I want to mention that by initiating bonna bagagawale, the government is saying it has done its part. Our duty as the people’s representatives is to ask the population to do its part. 

I thank the government for having done very well in the education sector. In the same vein, I also would like to thank the private people -(Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I heard the member who contributed before referring to bonna bagagawale as “conman-ship”. I think that we need to give serious attention and reception to the State of the Nation Address. It deserves serious comments from members on the Floor.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But was that captured in the Hansard? I did not hear it. Hon. Byandala, is it you who said it? 

MR BYANDALA: No, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, it is okay? 

MR SSEKIKUBO: It is okay, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Byandala, Please conclude.

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. Let me conclude. Before that interruption, I was thanking Government and the private people who have invested in the education sector for successfully handling the UPE and USE education programmes. However, I want to mention that there are still a few problems in the education sector, mainly concerning standards of our universities. We have a problem with our UPE pupils who get enrolled and drop out of school at an early stage. We also have had problems with the small number of vocational institutions to help our people who complete primary education from these UPE schools. The same applies to those who in future will complete secondary education from USE schools. 

I am happy to hear that the Ministry of Education is seriously handling these issues. I appeal to our people to stay assured because the NRM Government is aware of those problems and they will be effectively handled. Thank you very much.

12.50
MR JULIUS EMIGU (FDC, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to comment on the State of the Nation Address as delivered by His Excellency the President. As a professional teacher, allow me to start by saying something in relation to Universal Secondary Education (USE). 

The USE programme as started by the government is a good project, but I think that Government did not prepare for it. The first thing Government should have done was to establish a secondary school in each sub-county in the country. I think Government successfully failed in doing this. I am happy that Government was quite quick to cover its nakedness by signing memoranda of understanding with some private schools in various parts of the country to help it in the implementation of this programme. This was quite good. 

As a teacher, I want to point out one loophole. There is no doubt that learners and teachers are complementary. You can never gather learners in one place without teachers and you expect effective learning to take place. Neither can you pack teachers in one place without learners and expect effective learning to take place. Therefore, my appeal to Government is that as they covered the nakedness of failing to build a secondary school in every sub-county, they should go further to cover the loophole of lack of teachers. It is true some of those schools that Government signed memoranda with have teachers, but they are not enough to handle the huge USE classrooms. I would suggest that Government - (Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank hon. Emigu for giving way. Regarding the teachers in rural areas, I want to inform the House that the Parliamentary Committee on Social Services, which I chair, recommended to the Education Service Commission that the posts for the teachers who failed to take up jobs in April after passing interviews be declared vacant and that they should interview other people with the aim of filling those posts. I am sure they have started on that. So, I think that there is something positive in that direction.

The other thing that the honourable talked about is the failure by Government to have a secondary school in every sub-county. That is not true; in any case, Government is in the final stages of ensuring that at least there is one Government-aided secondary school in every sub-county in the country. So I request the honourable member not to be pessimistic by saying that Government has failed. Actually, the programme is in advanced stages of success. Thank you.

MR EMIGU: Thank you, honourable, although everything you have said is for the future. I am talking about the current situation. (Laughter)  We are about a year into the USE programme and nothing is taking place. What I am saying is that Government should post some teachers who are on Government payroll to the private schools to enable them run the USE programme; simple.

Two, I want to mention something on the economy. The President talked very well about the growing economy. On page 26, he mentioned, “As you can see the shilling is also appreciating, getting stronger.” -(Laughter) Part of the explanation, according to the President, is having more exports to Southern Sudan and Congo. It is true that part of the explanation is exports to Southern Sudan, but how shall we sustain this growth without roads. 

Kaberamaido, where the great north road passes, has roads in a very sorry state. I am sure that Parliament knows that the Soroti-Kaberamaido-Dokolo-Lira road is impassable. It is a shame to some of us because we do not know what to tell our people. At the beginning of this year, in the company of the Prime Minister, the Minister of State for Works and Transport stood on his two legs in Otuboi Township in Kaberamaido District and said that construction of that road would start in March this year. As I speak, nothing has taken place. I wish he was around to again stand on his two legs on the Floor of this House –(Interruption)

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleague. With regard to the road, I think all of us would like to have tarmac roads but it has been Government policy to prioritise, for example connecting districts to others, especially to their original districts. 

For Soroti-Lira road, there could be some few complications, but the money is available and the contractor is soon starting. The other thing I should say is that there are a number of areas, like Kapchorwa and Suam, which desperately need a road, but the moment you are on a road drawing map, I think we should be patient. We shall very soon have the Minister coming here to explain the state of the roads. We do not have Government money; we have been either borrowing or getting grants. I would like members to be a little more objective and patient with our tarmac roads. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I announced yesterday that the Minister would come here on Tuesday with a comprehensive statement on the issue of roads. He will talk about them and you can pick it up again when we are dealing with the roads.

MR EMIGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Because it was a lie in broad daylight, told by a state minister, I beg that he comes to the Floor of the House and either confirms his lie or clarifies more on it. That is all I am seeking. 

On the economy, the President talked about electricity. the case of Kaberamaido is slightly different from most of the other parts of this country. The power line reached Kaberamaido before I was born – way back in 1961 - and that power line stopped working in 1986. Honestly, the people of Kaberamaido see the NRM Government as the only Government that has succeeded in keeping them in darkness. No wonder they never voted for NRM there; they feared remaining in darkness. The more they keep NRM in power, the more the darkness will continue.

My prayer is that the government does something for Kaberamaido power lines. They have even used this to get our votes. In 1996, when they realised that we were not going to give them votes, they deceived us that they were going to work on that power line. When they were being caught up in 2001, they decided to ferry poles and started even fixing some of them. After we gave the government votes, they literally collected the poles and went with them somewhere else. No wonder people understood me well in 2006 when I came to politics. The NRM candidate could not explain anything. How could they explain that? People saw the loss. I pray that Government wakes up. We had power before I was born and the poles still stand there from 1986.

Finally, the President talked a lot about health. The major issue that he dwelt on – from page 38 to 42 - was DDT, and he merely mentioned the six killer diseases. I thought he was also going to say something about the members who work there. Right now, Kaberamaido has a problem. It is one of the hard-to-reach areas and medical personnel there are supposed to get 30 percent pay. However, Kaberamaido has been excluded from the list and then they put other districts like Amolatar and Dokolo. This is good, but I want to say that we are sister districts so what is given to the other districts would also be given to us. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

12.59
MR SAMUEL BYANAGWA (NRM, Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for recognising me and letting me put forward some of my views to my colleagues. I rise to support the motion. There has been a lot of debate on most of the things, so I will only highlight what I feel are pertinent points.

First, I will comment on the multiparty dispensation. A lot has been said about this. I believe the Opposition is welcome and it is here because of the multiparty dispensation, nevertheless its contributions must be relevant and constructive. Indeed, we have a lot of very constructive views, but some of them were mediocre and we shall identify with those views that are positive and shelve the mediocre –(Interruption)

MR KIBANZANGA: Madam Speaker, we are required to use language that befits this House and befits us, educated people. Is the member in order, at his age, to say that the views from our side are mediocre, meaning that we are also mediocre? Is that how we build a multiparty democracy? Is he in order to call us mediocre people with mediocre views?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I already said this morning that we should use decent language when working with one another. Hon. Byanagwa, that word is not palatable here.

MR BYANAGWA: Thank you for your ruling, but I did not say every view, I said some, and I had a lot of respect for others. (Interruption)

MR OTTO: Madam Speaker, is the honourable member in order to ignore your wise ruling and persistently market an idea that you have already ruled on? Is he in order to behave in such an unhonourable manner, and may he be requested to withdraw the statement he has just made after your ruling?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Byanagwa, there are no mediocres here, please just withdraw it.

MR BYANAGWA: So, the question of multi-partyism is here to stay. Those who were saying that it is not here for good will have to be dealt with by the Whips who will whip them to tow the party lines. Recently, some rebels could not believe that the party was supreme. I think as of now, the Whips are here to stay to whip us in line.

Secondly, on the issue of constitutionalism and the rule of law, Article 43 (1), which deals with the freedoms of individuals, and Article 17 of the Constitution settled this matter. We all know that man is born free but lives in chains. This is not starting today; it has been here for some time.

On security, I think there is need for northern and eastern Uganda to enjoy full security and development. Therefore, the effort of the UPDF and all the people of goodwill, including the Opposition, should be applauded. Those people deserve a better life than what they have. The UPDF is doing its best together with Government to ensure that IDPs are removed and that the disarmament in Karamoja also succeeds because it was also causing insecurity.

On energy, I applaud Government plans to use all possible ways to ensure that what happened to us when the hydro-electric power let us down will not happen again. Therefore, the renewable energies should be explored further.

Bonna bagagawale has been talked about a lot, but to me it means improved incomes, not Shs 20, 30 or 40 million. There is the concept of daily income, seasonal income and perennial income. For us in Rukiga, we welcomed the visit of His Excellency the Vice-President, who came there and toured. He gave us lessons and people are willing to embrace bonna bagagawale so that we can improve our incomes. It does not take a short time; it takes a long time.

Education has been liberalised; we have UPE, USE and others, but quality has been suffering. However, you know that for a child to walk or run, he must first crawl. Therefore, the question of quality will have to be addressed with time.

 On health, there was spraying of ICON in Kabale and it has done a good job. What is better - to bury 320 people everyday or to have this done? I think the government has done its best. It has consulted on the DDT spray and I think it should go ahead and then it will account to the people in 2011.

On corruption, a lot depends on the top leadership; if it is serious, corruption will be fought, but if it is reluctant then corruption will stay. I think the top has started biting, and I do not have to repeat this.

Madam Speaker, on the public service pensions, I think pensions for the retired staff is an entitlement. Government should fight to pay all the bills because people are dying of curable diseases just because they do not have the money that they should have been paid long ago.

On the matter of MPs, the President commended the work of the MPs because we passed 15 Bills in the whole year, but we are faced with 46 Bills. It means we will have to work a bit harder. I hope one of these Bills will be the Domestic Relations Bill. The public is asking what happened; is it because the MPs are beneficiaries or that they fear to be speared by that Bill? I hope that it will be among the 46 Bills so that we can give account to the public.

Finally, I think the hosting of CHOGM in Uganda is a vote of confidence in Uganda, that we are a country which is beginning to nurture democracy and constitutionalism, and the best party to do that is NRM. Thank you very much.

1.07
MS EUDIA KWIZERA (NRM, District Woman Representative, Kisoro): Madam Speaker, I take this opportunity to thank you for remembering me and allowing me to contribute to the State of the Nation Address, which was delivered to us on 7 June 2007. 

Madam Speaker, I also support the mover and seconder of the motion one hundred percent. Before I go any further, I want to take this opportunity on behalf of the people of Kisoro District to thank our Government, the President and the Ministry of Works, Housing and Transport for having considered  the north and west for money to work on Kabale-Kisoro-Kyanika-Bunagana road. The whole population of Kisoro is thankful to the nation and the government. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, I captured a few things as far as the State of the Nation Address is concerned. As the representative of the people who live at the border of Rwanda and Zaire, let me take this opportunity to thank the government and Ministry of Defence for shaping the army. As I talk, peace has improved in our country because Government has taken care. You will agree with me that without peace, no developmental activities can take place. Most of our sectors are improving because we have peace and security in our country. So we are grateful to the government.

I also want to thank Government for having introduced UPE and UPS programmes. These programmes are so effective especially to the rural people who have low income. Children can now go to school and –(Interruption)

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My honourable colleague has thanked Government for introducing UPE and UPS programmes. May I know what the UPS programme stands for? (Laughter)

MS KWIZERA: I think you were not listening attentively. I said UPE and USE. (Laughter) Be attentive, honourable Member of Parliament.

Madam Speaker, I would like to recommend that Government gets more teachers because the pupil to teacher ratio does not balance well. According to my research, it is very important that the Ministry of Education initiates some programmes to sensitise parents, teachers, students, school committees and local councils about UPE. 

When you go down to the grassroots, a number of people do not know what UPE is about. That is why some parents take it for granted; when Government takes on a child, they do not have to play their role. A big number of children go to school without meals. Children are also not given scholastic materials like exercise books, pens and pencils. We should encourage parents and guardians to play their role. The fact that Government came in does not mean that it has to carry the whole load alone. Therefore honourable members, when we go back we should encourage our parents and other stakeholders to do what they are supposed to do.

As I conclude, I would like to request you, honourable members, to support girl-child education. According to research, girl children are dropping out of school after S.4 and P.7. That is why we have not achieved much in terms of gender streamlining and gender sensitivity. A number of our girls do not go through the cycle of education. The percentage of females involved in different programmes is very low compared to that of men.

Lastly, I urge you Members of Parliament not to look only at the negative side or the things that are not yet achieved. We should learn to appreciate. Rome was not built in a day. Our Government is really performing well. I see our President as a Moses who led the children of Israel to Canaan, and one by one makes a bundle. Thank you Madam Speaker.

1.14
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, District Woman Representative, Arua): Madam Speaker, there is an unfortunate event that is unfolding in our country in regard to education. Since we are applauding the President for bringing - I insist - universal post primary education and training, we would wish to look at the student to teacher ratio. We are short of 9,000 teachers. We have money to recruit 7,550 teachers but this recruitment seems to have a bend. The headline of the Weekly Observer says, “Museveni Orders Schools to Recruit NRM Teachers.” According to our Constitution, Article 187 creates the Education Service Commission –(Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, is it really in order for hon. Christine Bako, whom I respect very much, to quote a newspaper yet when you look at the State of Nation Address, that issue of recruiting NRM teachers is not mentioned. Is she really in order to go by a press report in the Weekly Observer, which is a money-making paper?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Do you have the facts of that story? 

MS BAKO: Madam Speaker, unless this is refuted, it stands as it is. I think when I am trying to discuss the State of the Nation Address relating to the prevailing circumstances in this country, I am not necessarily out of order, in my view. (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What you could do is to ask the Minister of Education and Sports whether what has been reported there is true. Otherwise, we do not know.

MS BAKO: Thank you for your ruling. I do not know whether we must continue doubting or appreciating it.  

As regards employment, the Constitution creates the Education Service Commission. Article 168 (2) prescribes functions of the Education Service Commission: 

“In the exercise of its functions, the Commission shall be independent and shall not be subject to the direction or control of any person or authority; except that it shall take into account Government policy relating to education.” 

If these allegations are not disputed, we should then be wondering whether there is adherence to constitutionalism in this country or not. How sure are we that the kind of indoctrination that may come as a result of such kind of influence will not impact on the intuitive development of our children?
   
As regards health, there is consistent genocide being contained in this country. Children born prematurely do not have an opportunity to live. There are no incubators in the hospitals. Arua Regional Referral Hospital has no single incubator. I do not know what is happening in Mbarara Hospital or in Soroti. The mere fact that Arua Regional Referral Hospital lacks an incubator is just an indication of the fact that there is a deliberate genocide going on because we cannot afford as a nation to put interest in issues to do with humanity. Assuming every one of us was born prematurely today, would we have survived? Does it not require that killing the numbers in this House would really be a situation of genocide? This is horrific. 

If Mr Museveni was serious, in his State of Nation Address he should have told the mothers of this country that from this day forward he will ensure that at least each referral hospital has a number of incubators to make sure that children who are born prematurely have an opportunity to live. This is absolutely lacking -(Interjection)- I will not take it –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, he is the chairperson of the Social Services Committee; maybe he has some special knowledge.   

MR KUBEKETERYA: Thank you honourable colleague, Shadow Minister for Education in the FDC. The information I want to give the honourable member, who happens to be a Member of the Committee on Social Services, is that the other day Shs 8 billion was put aside for referral hospitals.  Yesterday when we were looking at the policy statement, I think this is something that we wanted the Minister of Health to come and confirm. The fact is that the Shadow Minister was not in that meeting. We were a bit optimistic that Shs 11 billion was budgeted for referral hospitals and it is going to address part of those issues. Thank you.

MS BAKO: More sincerely, to the best of my knowledge this money is for renovation. I do not know which renovation will go to incubators. The general state of decay of infrastructure in our country is pathetic and we must do something about it. I am about to take Government to court. Should I ever get a miscarriage because of the bad state of the roads, Government will either have to bring out an equivalent identical baby or then we must prescribe some medicine for this country and Government. 

I look at expectant mothers traveling on these very annoying roads all the time, for example from Kawempe up to Kafu. How many expectant mothers travel on these roads even within Kampala here with a heavy pregnancy? When you get a miscarriage, there is no way you are going to incubate your baby because the incubators are not there. 

MR BYANYIMA: I am happy, Madam Speaker, that some few years back it used to take 12 hours from Kampala to Arua but today, besides that section which the contractors have already started on from Karuma to Arua, it takes about one and half hours. So, I think we should really be able to credit Government for having considered that stretch from Karuma to Arua. A stretch of about 140 kilometres was done, so we have a lot of hope. The contractor has started and you will not have a miscarriage at all. I thank you.

MR KASAMBA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable colleague for giving way. Hon. Bako has said that she will take Government to court if she ever gets a miscarriage. If she could inform this House the duration she expects to have conceived so that we can know when Government would be able to be taken to court. 

MS BAKO: I think this is not a laughing matter because there are very many pregnant women travelling on that road. In any case, my face can tell you that I am still in the reproductive age and should I get one, more seriously I will take Government to court.

Hon. Nathan Byanyima, for your information, if my miscarriage is due to this stretch from here up to Kafu, that still stands. I can assure you from Kawempe up to Kafu is as pathetic as you can imagine. Therefore, there must be responsibility. These people who are working on the road are not actually pouring water. We are inhaling a lot lime and should my miscarriage be a result of that lime, I will still take Government to court.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please conclude.

MS BAKO: Madam Speaker, you know when you have one child and you lose another that you are carrying just because there are no incubators and the state of infrastructure, particularly the roads, is very appalling, then we must appreciate that as a country we are containing a genocide that we need not contain. Thank you very much.

1.25
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I am going to comment only on four issues. 

First, I would like to observe that the President expressed a lot of discomfort over the high number of independent Members of Parliament. I thought that was rather an overtone on his part. I see these independents and the current high wave of electoral petitions as a result of the poor management of the electoral process. You will all agree with me that the petitions have taken a very high toll especially on colleagues on the Movement side. I think the manner in which the primaries were conducted in all these parties, especially the Movement side, was a bit ad hoc. 

Madam Speaker, it is my considered view that in a multiparty political setting we need to have a politically independent electoral commission. As we speak now, the Electoral Commission in Uganda is appointed by the President and the commissioners are constituted by the President. I think there is need for us to accept that all of us have an interest in having a smooth and fairly organised election. (Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give my colleague is about the appointment process. I wish he describes the appointment process wholly because it involves Cabinet, the President and Parliament. Actually, it is Parliament at the end of the day which does the vetting and the approval. So, why are we leaving out the parliamentary process?

DR EPETAIT: Your information has not helped me at all. The fact of the matter is that Cabinet is constituted also by the President and he chooses from the ruling party. You are also aware about the process of vetting. Let us be factual; the mere fact that we have a small representation of the Opposition in this House will also determine the outcome. My proposal is that we have a body that has political representation from all the other registered parties so that the vetting process is fair. Let us have a fairly acceptable and independent Electoral Commission in order to avoid all these suspicions, that the Electoral Commission was slope-sided or something like that. 

This brings me to the issue of the parliamentary programme. The President in his speech did observe that there are a number of Articles that were deferred during the constitutional amendment process. Some Articles were deferred to be handled by this Parliament. I would like to beg that the programme of Parliament does not become congested at the time when Parliament is coming towards its end. I would rather that such constitutional amendments take place as early as possible rather than stampeding the Parliament towards elections and rushing up amendments. 

I think the experience that we had in the Seventh Parliament should not be repeated, so that we look at all these Articles and amend them without a hurry. I would expect therefore, that such amendments should be priority as soon as possible in this Eighth Parliament rather than defer them for towards the end and then stampede members with amendments.

I would like to thank Government for belatedly realising the plight of the pensioners whose arrears have for long not been paid promptly. However, this does not concern only pensioners; there is an element of compensation for property that was lost by a number of people in various parts of this country. These were even verified by the committees that were set up by Government. I am referring to issues that Government is actually aware of. 

It is common knowledge that in my constituency, at a railway station called Mukura, 69 people were herded into a train wagon and fire set beneath the wagon and all of them perished. Government realised its mistake and the President even said, “I am sorry and I am going to compensate”. What have they received? A monument! Government then said, “Okay we are going to give you Shs 1.5 million per person lost”. Even that has not been honoured. We have kept talking and talking about this but it is being swept under the carpets.

A number of people lost property in Luweero and even in Teso and they were verified. Reports were submitted for them to be compensated. What did we hear recently? Government has decided that any compensation claims that were received later than 31 December 2003 should not be considered, and yet they were sitting on those compensation claims as far back as 2000. We would like to know whether Cabinet should not consider reversing that decision and handle all those compensation claims that were submitted to the relevant authorities before 31 December 2003.

Madam Speaker, I would like to recognise and thank Government for the efforts they have put into the disarmament process in Karamoja. I want to observe, however, that the question of settling down in Karamoja leaves a lot to be desired on the side of Government. A number of alternative economic activities have been unattended to and yet every year Government makes promises.

For example, they promised that the road from Sironko to Kidepo is going to be turned into a tarmac road, or that power is going to be connected from Opuyo to Moroto or from another corner to Kotido. We thought that if Government took such initiatives to Karamoja, there would be alternatives. Industrialisation would also be possible and those people would get engaged in meaningful economic livelihoods. 

For as long as Government continues to drag its feet on taking such facilities to the area, I think the Karamoja region will continue being left behind. What is the point of bringing limestone from Karamoja to process it in Tororo? If they took such facilities to Karamoja, then the production would take place there and most of the people would also get alternative employment. So, I would like to urge Government to make it a priority to deliver what it promised to all those areas. I would like to thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like you to welcome the students and teachers of Karamba Modern School, Mubende, represented by hon. Nyombi Tembo and hon. Farida Kasasa -(Interruption)- They are not the ones. I am sorry, I have been confused by many people and they keep on bringing messages. These are young children and I do not think this is a secondary school. These are young people. Anyway, you are all welcome. I do not know who you are, but you are welcome.

1.35
MRS ROSE IRIAMA (Independent, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for granting me this opportunity. In the State of the Nation Address, the President mentioned many things including security in conflict areas, especially Karamoja. Disarmament is going on in Karamoja and it has been supported by many people. Disarmament in Karamoja has saved many lives, especially those of the young generation like the warriors, the women who would really be tortured and the young ones who would be killed during the raids. 

On page 15, the President mentioned that the Karimojong have been raiding cattle since the time of the British and that is their way of life. Yes, it is a part of life, but as the government of Uganda that is responsible for its people, how do we change the Karimojong? I am pleading with the government to create some special projects for these warriors. These warriors are hardworking and polite people. If you see them, you cannot suspect that they are the ones killing and doing many useless things in Karamoja. 

I plead for the government to come up with some projects like small enterprises, marketing their livestock and other things, and also to occupy them by involving them in the construction of their roads as well as the digging and building of dams. 

The UPDF has done commendable work in Karamoja in the disarmament exercise. Things like robbery on the roads and killing people are no longer happening. They have created peace and stability in the region. Our undisciplined brothers have improved their way of life. However, now that the UPDF has done some good work, what plans do other ministries have to help Karamoja? 

To create peace in Uganda we need to stabilise Karamoja. We need to come together as a family to help them. There is no way we can isolate Karamoja problems from other developmental programmes in the country. Isolating Karamoja means the country will continue with such undisciplined aspects of life. I am pleading to the government to guide and counsel Karamoja on development and help them. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

1.39
MR ISAAC SEJJOBA (Independent, Bukoto County Mid-west, Masaka): I also rise to join my colleagues in supporting this motion and to thank my brother, hon. Theodore Ssekikubo, for moving the motion. I will speak about a few things. 

In my constituency people are not aware of what is happening in Parliament because they do not get WBS. So, I have to go there very weekend to explain to them what is happening. I happened to be there last weekend and we discussed a few things about this speech by the President. They got concerned about the economy and particularly the energy sector. They thanked the President for the work well done so far. 

Madam Speaker, I was born in my constituency and there are some trading centres which have these high voltage lines passing over them, but they had never had an opportunity to have light in their towns. During this regime, in around 2001, we got some transformers and now we have power in around five trading centres in my constituency. That is a big achievement by this Government that we must register. The power is serving us and we have got a lot of development because of that. 

When the President said that these donors have delayed to give us the loan and they have thought of creating an energy fund for around US$ 100 million, the people said that this was a positive step. Now that this money is going to be reimbursed from the contractors when they get the World Bank money, they are saying that this money should be allocated to bonna bagagawale or to rural electrification.

Madam Speaker, one time I went to the office that deals with rural electrification and they gave me some information. They said that if we are to do that, it is some private company or an individual who comes out to inject some money for power to be taken to rural which do not have. In my opinion it looked impossible because, as I have said, we have got some areas which have got power but these cover about 15 percent of my constituency. This, I believe, is the case in many other constituencies -(Interruption)- It is sketchy information which I am giving according to what I see. 

What are we saying? As much as we are talking about this power and saying that there is about 100 or 90 percent coverage in the towns or in the capital city for example, in my area I think the energy saver scheme that was introduced has not served in any way. This is because there is nobody - for example in my village, Kiryankuyege - who we can give an energy saver bulb. What I am saying is that if we are to promote development in our rural areas, we should make rural electrification a priority this time.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to say something about the social sector, specifically the labour sector. As a trade unionist, I noticed that the President appreciated the efforts made to sign recognition agreements between the employers and the trade unions. It is very good and important that one registers credit to the government for allowing such an environment to prevail. 

On the other hand, we addressed the issue of employment and the problems associated with it but we did not look at unemployment as a problem. I think it is a problem that we must look at. There is the kyeyo thing which is so popular. I believe very many kyeyo people abroad bring in a lot of income. However, I think we have not taken the initiative as Government to legalise our hardworking labour that is desired in the developed countries. These people go abroad, work and bring money back home for development. There are very many energetic boys in my constituency who if given a chance can go to these developed countries and trap this income through kyeyo. This way, we can bring development to our rural areas. It is then that bonna bagagawale will come to our constituencies.

Madam Speaker, the other issue which caught my attention was the achievement in the construction of polytechnics. It is quite some achievement and we like that. I come from Masaka where there was a technical institute whose property was transferred to Busitema. It is very good that we got a university in Busitema but our property is in Busitema and it has not been returned to Masaka where it used to belong. Moreover, Masaka is not included on the list of the beneficiaries of the polytechnics which have been given here. 

In 2001, the President pledged a polytechnic in my constituency, in Lwengo Sub-county, in commemoration of the heroes who died during the liberation war. We have the land and a foundation stone was laid. Now my people are saying that they are giving this land for the property which is now in Busitema, and that this property should be brought back to Masaka so that we can have a polytechnic in Masaka District where we have already commissioned the land for that purpose.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I would like to comment on corruption. We have talked a lot about corruption and a lot of sensitisation has been done. Now everybody, down to the grassroots, knows what corruption is about. This time we need to act. We are all law abiding citizens and we believe in the rule of law in this land. However, we are saying that as Parliament we should come up with a law that deals with corrupt officers. Corrupt officers are being treated with kid gloves here in Uganda. When somebody is found to be corrupt, he or she will say “the law will prove” and yet the law is very sluggish and is moving mildly against these officers. 

As a member of PAC, I have seen cases where we feel that somewhere somehow things went wrong and corruption occurred. We are saying that we should come up with a short-cut. In my opinion, the IGG should take action and prosecute these members immediately without taking them to the Judiciary. This is my own opinion. I thank you, Madam Speaker and members.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have a correction. The children who are up there are in two groups. We have those from Kabowa Primary School and those from Karamba Modern School. Both of them are from Mubende District and they are represented by hon. Tembo and hon. Farida Kasasa. You are welcome. 

We shall now move on to hon. Ekemu who will be followed by hon. Kubeketerya and then hon. Alupo. All of you are going to speak so do not worry. 

1.49
MR CHARLES EKEMU (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to take this opportunity to inform you that for the last two months or so, I have not been in the House because I was indisposed after an accident in which I broke a femur bone and a clavicle bone. That is why I was not in the House with you most of the time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We hope you have a speedy recovery.

MR EKEMU: Thank you. That is what I was expecting to hear. (Laughter) 

I have perused through the State of the Nation Address and I have convinced myself that the President has made very clear statements on what we should interpret as his encapsulation or his understanding of what he has done and what he wants to do for this country. It is therefore a very important statement. However, I want to urge members to understand this statement together with the Leader of the Opposition’s response to the President’s statement, so that we can find a way forward and we can have constructive engagement with what has been proposed. 

I want to begin by giving a few remarks specifically on constitutionalism and the rule of law. The President has elaborately talked about that, and we want to applaud him for having taken us through the walk of constitutionalism in this country. I want to thank him a great deal. However, I attended some induction workshop just after we came to Parliament and a very learned professor, Prof. George Kanyeihamba, gave a very good paper and one of the things that I picked up from that presentation was his caution on what constitutionalism should be. 

The honourable minister and Attorney-General might agree with me, he said that constitutionalism is not just about having a Constitution, it is not just about interpreting the laws by the courts, it goes beyond that. He gave what he called attributes or other conditions that should go along with constitutionalism for us to actually observe it; and specifically he talked about equity, fairness, hearing and respecting the views of the minority. 

So, I am urging Members that much as the President has in his State of the Nation Address talked about having championed the process of constitutionalism, for us to have the experiences, the reality of it is that we must know that equity, fairness - though not clearly coming out of the Constitution, hearing and respect of minority views is very important. 

A very good example is how we are structured in this House. We know you are the ruling party; the opposition sits on this side and they are the minority but sometimes it is important to listen to their views, it is important to listen to their counsel because these views may be constructive and very helpful for all of us. 

The President also in his State of the Nation Address used carefully worded language which I would want to say may not be very good for our development partners. When, for instance, on page 10 of this statement he says, “Put this chair here, this chair there, I look at him and wonder. Now, what do I tell this man?” In other words, he is saying that some development partners are over meddling and interfering in our own affairs. 

I do know that it is our own mess and it is our own disorganisation. There is nothing that will stop them from telling us to put this chair there, put this table there because it is the mess that they have observed in our own house. So, probably the unwelcoming language, especially to our development partners, is something that he should be cautious of. 

We must also thank the President for the current achievements of the Juba peace talks. We are happy that what has happened there is already showing fruits. In Soroti, for instance, we have a number of people going to Juba and people have what to do. 

I do also want to cite here that this is not an opportunity for chest thumping. Personal glorification is not necessary because my fear is that the process could easily be derailed by giving out statements that could be misconstrued to be arrogance on one part, and I think it is a delicate moment for us to go in for chest thumping much as we appreciate that the peace talks are actually a good thing for the country.

Lastly, I would want to make a simple point on Bonna Bagaggawale. I know the programme is a good one and we welcome it. But the President says in his statement that 142 districts and sub-county officials were trained and prepared in Kyankwanzi. I am not saying that that is a bad thing but given the way it has been interpreted by the population, it looks like Bonna Bagaggawale is being linked to the militarisation of micro finance. This is wrong. In places where I represent, where we voted largely for the opposition, they are wondering whether they are actually included in this programme. Worse still  -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member.

1.58
MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I support the motion moved by hon. Ssekikubo, and I would like to thank the President for the State of the Nation Address. Beginning from page 5 and I think beginning from where hon. Ekemu ended, the President was telling the nation, and his argument is that the institution of Kyankwanzi should be made a national institution and should be preserved. I entirely agree with him.  

I would like to personally condemn the demeaning language that was used to Members of Parliament of the NRM who went to Kyankwanzi. They said that we went to be militarised. That is entirely very wrong. We discussed pertinent issues of economics, Bonna Bagaggawale, the interest rate, so many things were mentioned. In any case, military training was just a thousandth of what we covered. The opposition Members, since they have confessed that they were few in Parliament, maybe they were lonely and they were missing our presence. We went to do serious things and the message given to members from the rural areas is that, the institution is not for militarisation but it is meant for people to go and recap on what has taken place and maybe the way forward. 

Secondly, on security, I appreciate the efforts the President has taken right from the early 1990s of preserving security in Northern Uganda. The only observation I would like to make is that, it was a bit disappointing to me when the Leader of the Opposition said that the peace talks or the peace in Northern Uganda after all is “temporary” yet we are urging people to leave the camps to go home and resettle and we have a fully-fledged resettlement programme. I would like some clarification on what the Leader of Opposition meant when he said that the peace is temporary. As a Ugandan, I was gaining a lot of confidence that maybe we are likely to have lasting peace because the talks are in Juba and the people are slowly settling.  

The other issue is about disarmament in Karamoja. I would like to applaud Government for the efforts of disarming the Karimojong cattle rustlers, and it is also good news that I have heard that there is now a coalition between Teso leaders and the leaders from Karamoja to try to talk peace and try to settle border conflicts. The only appeal I would make is that, when some colleagues go there, do not flex muscles with local leaders. Let us try to preach peace amongst the rustlers and the Teso community after all they are cousins and brothers. Hon. Epetait is protesting –(Interruption)

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, hon. Kubeketerya, for giving way. I would like to inform my colleague that we leaders of Teso and Karamoja have always shared a number of issues in common. I would like you to leave with your mind clear that there has been nothing like flexing of muscles either from here, in Karamoja or Teso. 

MR KUBEKETERYA: Thank you very much honourable colleague. On a lighter note, we travelled with hon. Epetait; he is a very good bridge between the Karimojong and the people of Teso, and whatever he has told me I entirely take it. The argument I was raising is that, let us show the common man in Karamoja and Teso that we leaders are united; that we shall preach peace and we shall not have any conflict. 

The other matter is about hydroelectric power. The President mentioned this, and I think there are big plans on power. I would like to inform Ugandans that the issue of power is not only in Uganda. If you went to Ghana, Akosombo Dam has gone lower by 8meters. So, this is an international problem. 

However, of recent, I heard the Committee on Natural Resources complaining that as we look towards building Bujagali and maybe Nyagak, another group had again written a letter saying that the issue of power has a lot of loopholes, and the donors are also taking advantage of this. So, I appeal to Ugandans that the practice of us reporting that something is not going right is not good. Why do we not resolve this amongst ourselves because at the end of the day, we are either the beneficiaries or losers? 

On the other hand, I would like to appeal to the Ministry of Energy to be very consistent because when we talk about mega plans of having power and borrowing money and building dams, that is ok but for smaller rural electrification projects that money should be left intact and we have the lines made. For example, we have the Waka-Waka Mayuge line, it has been appearing in policy statements for the last six years. At the end of the day they say that the money has been lent to another group. So, let the Ministry of Energy be consistent and be very sympathetic to put up smaller projects and leave the bigger ones for the energy fund. 

On discovery of oil, somebody had doubts. The Leader of the Opposition was saying that it is not real. It is real. Let us not make it a dream, like it was in Zimbabwe where some old witchdoctor dreamt that there was oil somewhere and when they sent some people to find out where the oil was, the ministers did not find it, so she took off. 

The issue of oil in Bunyoro is real. I am sure that there are so many other ventures that Government is undertaking. For example, there have been discoveries of Gold in Busia, Bugiri and Mayuge area. So, I appeal to the Ministry of Energy to make all these discoveries public. And when it comes to our oil, it is supposed to be refined here unlike it is in Nigeria where oil is exported in crude form and they line up for refined oil. So, the oil discoveries are real. It is not a myth like somebody thought. 

On the African Peer Review Mechanism, the Leader of the Opposition said that African leaders should not use it to scare the opposition. The good news is that this is for us, Africans, to see where we have gone wrong and where we need improvement. We should have a lot of goodwill for this African Peer Review Mechanism.

If I may conclude, on UPE, a lot has been said but the good news is that we are moving forward and we already have a Bill looking at how UPE can be made compulsory because we have pupils enrolling and when they reach P7, you just end up having a population of 380,000 to 400,000. And according to Article 30 of our Constitution, all Ugandans have a right to education. So, you have no right to be ignorant. When we make it compulsory, I am sure UPE will have positive results.

On health, I am of the view and I strongly support indoor spraying using DDT because of all that has been scientifically said. We should stop politicising this issue. The issue of DDT is something that Ugandans should embrace so that we fight Malaria. I thank you very much.

2.06
MS JESSICA ALUPO (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Madam Speaker, on page 13 of the State of the Nation Address, the President alluded that the peace and security that we have in the country now is because of the near completion of the professionalisation of the UPDF. I want to agree with him entirely. The creation of peace and security has now enhanced the return and resettlement of people who had been traumatised over the years; these are the IDPs in the North and northeast. 

My concern is that, as individuals, as institutions and as Government, I really think that these people deserve the best service. I want to take this opportunity to thank Government on the NUSAF programme, which has delivered enormously for these IDPs. I want to urge Government that when it is serving these people who have been traumatised for a very long time, to give them everything wholeheartedly. If it is seeds, let us give these people genuine seeds, if it is farm implements, let us give them genuine farm implements because we are also in the process of preparing them to receive their brothers when the Juba peace talks are successfully expedited. 

On page 32, the President talked about the enormous achievements that we have had in the health sector. I want to agree with him that we have fought Malaria; we have fought the six killer diseases through immunisation. But I have a simple concern. In Katakwi District, we have a health centre IV, and I want to remind the Minister of Health that it is long overdue since he promised to upgrade it to a hospital status. We have a theatre in this health centre IV, which operates using a generator. Sometimes we have problems with fuel and we have had patients being transported from Katakwi to Soroti; and because of delays due to the bad roads, we have had patients dying, we have had women delivering on that very poor road. So, I want to take this opportunity to remind the Ministry of Works and Transport that it is long overdue since he promised to upgrade the Soroti-Katakwi-Moroto highway. 

The other day, I heard very clearly the Ministry of Health say that we have health centre IIs built by NUSAF and because of that it is not yet very clear whether they should staff or equip them. Katakwi District is one of the places where NUSAF built about nine health centre IIs. The other day when I read that the National Drug Stores is requesting for permission to destroy ARVs worth Shs1.2 billion, I was incensed and I thought about how Shs 1.2 billion was going to be destroyed when the health centre IIs in Katakwi District are not equipped. Why would they not have used that money for equipping those health centre IIs? And that would be in line with the NRM principle of delivering services to the people.

Madam Speaker, on page 38, the President talked about glory beginning, that is, in his USE programme. It is very good because when he begun UPE, we all know that it faced so many criticisms but we have made enormous achievements in UPE and I know that we are going to do the same with USE. But we have only one Government secondary school in Katakwi District. So, I am trying to see how the people of Katakwi can benefit from the USE.

Madam Speaker, on regional cooperation, I was very delighted that Rwanda and Burundi have joined the East African Community and as a landlocked country, I really look forward to Sudan and DRC joining because we shall benefit in terms of trade, education et cetera. 

Madam Speaker, I also want to take you back to the times of the East African Community when we had three centres of excellence: one in Kenya, one in Tanzania and another in Uganda. The one in Uganda is Soroti Flying Academy, which does not seem to synchronise very well with its sister centres of excellence. So, I thought that since we are now in a fully-fledged East African Federation, we would look into how we can support Soroti Flying Academy so that it synchronises with its sister centres in East African spirit.

Finally, it is very good that we are going to host CHOGM because it is going to boost our tourism industry, our infrastructure et cetera. But, Madam Speaker, it leads me to saying that there are so many factors that we have to fulfil before hosting it. One of them is democracy and good governance. I want to applaud Government because I am sure that it has been able to fulfil this and that is why I am sure that we are going to host CHOGM. Therefore, I want to assert that the NRM Government, under the leadership of President Museveni, is steering this country in the right direction.

2.13
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): It is a pity that hon. Byandala is walking out because I want to give him some information which I was not able to give before. But, Madam Speaker, I too rise to support the motion that Parliament registers thanks to be recorded in favour of the President for his clear and precise exposition of Government policy. 

Madam Speaker, the President’s clarity and precision made the opposition know what Government’s designs for the opposition are. And five minutes into reading this document made me get very worried because on page 5, while talking about constitutionalism and the rule of law, the President said: “I re-affirm the National Resistance Movement Government’s determination to continue….” Madam Speaker, I pause and double line “to continue” and bold it. “… to adhere to constitutionalism and the rule of law.” The words “to continue” sent shivers of worry to the opposition. Because if what the ruling party calls constitutionalism and the rule of law is what happened last year, the opposition has cause to be very worried. 

I note hon. Byandala’s misplaced advice to the opposition to check out regulations before they carry out any activity. It makes me sad that people, because they sit on the privileged side of the country, think that for even one person’s rights to be violated is okay. We sit on this side of the country not because my personal rights have ever been violated but because I want everybody’s rights to be respected. Not me but everybody’s. And for that matter, I call upon the ruling party to rally together with everybody so that we fight for every individual’s rights. 

Madam Speaker, what law did Dr Besigye violate when he was stopped from talking on a radio station in Kitgum or when he visited a hospital there? What laws have those ten people who were in Luzira who were granted amnesty but are still being held by Government violated? What law did the PRA, who applied for bail and it was granted and they were kept for 11/2 years, violate? What law did those people who were shot in Mengo violate? What law had the Chief Justice violated for his chambers to be raided the way they were? When we talk about constitutionalism and the rule of law, we want it to be a reality for every individual and not for the privileged.  We want it not to be a privilege but a right. In the opposition, we take the words “to continue to adhere to the rule of law” as a threat and intimidation.

At the bottom of page 6, Madam Speaker, the President beseeches leaders especially “qualified lawyers, to explain to the masses… what is required of them as citizens.” This is an abdication of responsibility and duty because under Article 4 of the Constitution, it is the state and not the qualified lawyers that is required to promote public awareness of the Constitution, civic education, the Constitution to be translated into the main languages of this country and to be deliberately promoted instead of Government plotting to force everybody to undergo military training. I suggest to the ruling party that Government should be plotting to spread civic awareness, people’s responsibilities, rights and powers. 

The point cannot be overemphasised because it is only a population that is empowered with information and knowledge of the rights and responsibilities that can effectively participate in policy formulation, implementation, monitoring and holding public servants and Government accountable. Military training is very important but it can also have a serious backlash if it is not backed up by civic education as we see in Somalia where everybody is a warlord with a territory. Military training needs to be backed up by civic education. 

As I wind up, Madam Speaker, I note the President’s comments on corruption. The President needs to broaden his understanding of corruption because the way he talks about it here is as if corruption is exchange of cash. Corruption is defined variously as impairment of integrity, virtue or moral principles. It is also defined as a departure from what is pure and correct. 

How do you send people to Kamuli and Bugisu to look for corruption when you are promoting a CID chief who stood up in court on oath and admitted having fidgeted with court documents to falsify information and influence court process? 

How do you talk about corruption when key witnesses in a case in which the President has shown personal interests can be traced to CID, to state house, and to CMI? If that is not corruption, then we need to re-define the term corruption when the President himself trades districts and favours for votes. 

We need the President to broaden the concept of corruption. It is not about money alone; it is about abuse of office. And never in the history of Uganda has the Office of the President of Uganda been abused as it has been abused in the era of the NRM Government.

2.21
MS BEATRICE MPAIRWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Buliisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues to thank His Excellency the President for the State of the Nation Address. And also thanking this august House for granting Buliisa a district and not forgetting the Seventh Parliament. 

On health, His Excellency talked about Malaria and HIV. But in Uganda, we have also other diseases which are also killing people like cancer is almost like AIDS in Uganda and in the area where I come from, that is Buliisa District, we have registered a number of people having Epilepsy. Even in Masindi District the disease is rampant and you find that at least in some parishes, every family has two people suffering from Epilepsy. When you go to the medical personnel to ask them what the cause could be, they always say there is no research which has ever been carried out to know the cause. 

My appeal to this Government and honourable members is to put some money aside so that we can know the cause of Epilepsy. These children who are suffering from Epilepsy live on drugs daily for survival and these drugs are very expensive for a poor woman or man in those villages. For example, in Buliisa, we had some donors that were carrying out an exercise and giving some drugs but recently, their contract expired. The Government hospitals we have, it seems there is no sign for them to help and they are saying they have not been given money for giving these people. So, some of them have to –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: I would like to thank the Member for giving way. I sat quietly in disbelief that in a modern Uganda of today, we can have a serious case covering a renown district and this is in form of Epilepsy and at no one time have we heard from Government that the case which the honourable member is bringing up is equitable to an epidemic. You cannot imagine that in every parish there must be two, three, or five children suffering and we are here as a Government! I am worried but even more perturbed! My colleague, Government Whip, Princess, comes from that region let alone the district. Is it possible for Government to interest itself in this?

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and hon. Wadri, for giving way. Dear colleagues, I would like to confirm. Buliisa happens to be a neighbour to my own constituency, Bujenje County. There are several cases of Epilepsy both in Buliisa and Bujenje. I have raised this issue with the line minister but the information my colleague is giving is correct. 

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I am very happy that hon. Princess has conceded. The point I want clarification on, which she has already said in her information to me, is the fact that there is a department in Ministry of Health specifically charged with responsibilities of epidemic nature of that sort. I consider this an epidemic. It is something, which is so hair rising for a person to hear that such a thing can still continue to exist in this country. I wish that the government Chief Whip would raise it with the Minister for Health and we as Parliament be informed officially and be put abreast. Now that we are in the budgeting process, this could be an area that Parliament interest itself in terms of resource allocation.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe we can direct our Committee on Social Services, which is in charge of that, to report on this matter. It is very serious for every household – I cannot believe this! So, clerk, please ask the Committee on Social Services to also examine this matter during this session.  

MS MPAIRWE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. The other point is still on health where you find that in the National Medical Stores, there is a lot of bureaucracy. When the districts make their requisitions for essential drugs, there is a lot of delay and there is a time when they sent empty boxes to Buliisa. Some boxes had drugs and others did not have drugs. And you find that in some other cases they tend to pack other drugs that were not requested for instead of those drugs that were requested for.

The other point is that, Buliisa is now a district and we have a health centre IV. The people of Buliisa are not saying that we want our hospital to be elevated to the district hospital but we want that hospital to be equipped. In fact, as MP, sometimes I feel embarrassed to tell my people to go and access services at the hospital. The theatre which was built when we were still in Masindi District cannot be utilised; it was substandard and even the doctor recommended that it cannot handle the issues. And the district hospital does not have the equipment, especially the beds and that is why I am saying that sometimes I feel embarrassed to tell my voters to go for treatment.

Then another point is on education. So many people have talked about education and I am also glad about the UPE programme and USE, which is good. But, the problem is that in the rural schools, we do not have enough teachers. For example, in one school called Bugungu Senior Secondary School, we have only four teachers on the payroll and we have also other teachers who are supporting them who depend purely on PTA. When the President says, “I am very sorry to say that they should desist from collecting money…” to some of us it becomes difficult because this small money, which is being collected from the parents, helps to pay those teachers to continue helping our students who are in these schools.  

2.32
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to join my colleagues to debate this motion moved by hon. Sekikubo Theodore. This address comes just one year into the multiparty dispensation as the system of governance now. But I just want to make a comment on our politics today in multi-partism. I heard one of our Members here sort of lament and he was trying to say that perhaps we have come into this thing prematurely and I also read in the papers of his comment. That was hon. Odonga Otto and he was saying that we should go back into the Movement system. 

But, this really highlights the problem we have that perhaps Government still has to do a lot of sensitisation to both the leadership and actually the population at large. Even when we went to the elections recently the basis for election was first and foremost your individual merit and then your party. So, there is still a lot to be done to sensitise people on what to do on our roles and what we are expected of as leaders in this multiparty dispensation. 

I would also like to join my colleagues in commenting on this address especially the issue of security. Many of my colleagues have alluded to quite a number of issues in regard to security but I would like to concentrate on Karamoja. I have been to Karamoja so far twice this year and I would like to confirm to this House that security is surely returning to Karamoja. We have not seen people moving with guns and even when you move along the roads and you meet these people, they wave at you and that is a sign that there is peace returning to Karamoja. 

On page 13, the President definitely said that and I would like to quote, “Who said that development can come without peace?” An honourable member from Ngora said that perhaps Government has taken time to look into the issue of development in Karamoja. But, I would say that that statement addresses that. You cannot start talking of development in Karamoja without first of all guaranteeing peace even for those who are going to carryout the development activities there. 

So, with the return of peace in Karamoja, definitely now we should begin thinking of the kind of industries that can benefit this part of the region. Karamoja is a very beautiful region; it is endowed with a lot of resources; they have large quantities of limestone there and that means that perhaps a cement manufacturing factory can actually be located in Karamoja and it will be able to satisfy the endless demand, especially by the building industry that has now extended further even to Southern Sudan. 

The neighbouring districts are also beginning to feel at peace now that there is peace in Karamoja.  But, this should not send a signal that there is total peace in Karamoja. There are still some pockets of those warriors who still try to attack people, especially now that there is disarmament, they have decided to disintegrate and move in small groups along the borders with the neighbouring districts. 

I can quote an incident in April when about six warriors attacked four of the constituents of Bukedea District, shooting them to death and after which they went ahead and burnt them. But I will say these are isolated incidences and the Minister of Defence should take note of this. As they further conclude the disarmament process in Karamoja, they should note that there are still these other thugs roaming around along the borders in smaller groups and they should find a strategy of completely wiping them out.  

I would also like to comment on education and especially the Universal Secondary Education. I commend Government definitely for all these programmes that are going on to help the local population in education. The Government policy that is coming up now is more in favour of sciences than arts. But what is perplexing is that, the number of teachers for science subjects is quite minimal and yet our Government is pushing forward a policy to entrench sciences further other than arts. 

So, in most of the schools, especially in my region, I find that we do not have science teachers. Government is in the process of just recruiting these teachers but the policy is already ahead of us and that is the emphasis. I only request Government to expedite the recruitment of teachers to facilitate this policy of sciences being the major emphasis by Government. Otherwise, for the time being, we do not have science teachers and the term is already moving ahead and some schools are going on without this. 

Finally, together with science teachers, what should also be expedited are the laboratories to be established in the schools. If this is the way forward for us, then before we make it a policy, there must be the labs, the science teachers in place and then the policy comes after. 

2.39
MR PETER OMOLO (FDC, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would equally wish to join other Members in thanking the President for making this address. I would wish to make a few comments on his speech and I will start from where my friend hon. Otto stopped that is, “Apparently another negative development is a situation where a legislator goes public to defy a position taken by the party to which he or she belongs. Our parties have their respective constitutions and regulations for internal management and democracy…” 

I would have wished to remind the President that we joined these parties as individuals and out of conviction by the ideas put in their policies. If I realise that the party is getting out of rails from the initial position, what business do I have to stay around working against my own conscience. It is my conscience that guided me to join the party and acting contrary to my conscience, what do I stay around doing? I should be able to be allowed to express myself and the fora are: one, the caucus and the other is Parliament. 

Parliament is more or less a forum for an appeal in case I fail in the caucus. In any case, we are not elected to come to the caucus; we are elected to come to Parliament. A caucus is merely an organ of working within an organisation. But otherwise, the Parliament is a constitutional forum and that is where we were sent. If you cannot get chance to express yourself in Parliament, then why are you here? I mean am talking about the statements indicated that we should not come to oppose the party position in Parliament. We have got to speak our mind and what our conscience guides us to say. If we go contrary to our own conscience, we shall become prisoners of ourselves and that is very dangerous.

I would like to remind Members and caution you that these parties we are in are not presided over by angels. These are human beings who have personal weaknesses and personal interests. Let us not accept to get coerced to promote people’s interests. The nation should prevail over these parties. If something is of national interest, there is no short cut; we just have to go by a national interest.

I will cite an example. We had the issue of Mabira hovering around the corridors. Supposing it was taken to one caucus of 200 people and then 101 supported the position of that particular party and 99 were against it, but they are told to keep quiet when they come to Parliament, don’t you think if they joined the opposition they would have defeated that motion? It did not happen but in case – because such cases are bound to arise.

On the issue of security, I have been reading the President’s document and this is what it says: “They could no longer stay in Northern Uganda and in Southern Sudan where we were allowed to operate. Since the Congo Government did not allow us to operate against Kony in Congo, I accepted Gen. Salvir Kiir’s proposal to initiate peace talks.” Which means in the President’s mind, he was out for war and not talks. Let us not equate lack of gunshots to peace. These things are different. 

Peace is original in one’s mind. So, when the peace talks are going on and he goes on to say, “What I want to assure Ugandans about is that Uganda will have peace with peace talks in Juba or no peace talks.”  That statement should not have come out of the President’s mouth because peace is not merely about silence of guns. We have to sit and talk so that we can harmonise and get to know our problems. Why have we been fighting and how do we sort ourselves out? How do we avoid further wars? We can end up that one and then another erupts because we have not addressed the root cause of our problems. That statement was uncalled for. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MR OMOLO: Since I am the last on this side, I thought you would have even given me more time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, there are also other Members on this side, please.

MR OMOLO: The other aspect is, “We are also strengthening the Police and the intelligence services so as to continue to fight against…” You know it is not just a matter of adding the number of policemen but we have got to give facilities to the police. In Soroti, for instance, the whole district police headquarters is given 30 litres of fuel for a whole month to be used in all vehicles. How do you expect the Police to effect their duty? 

One time I was travelling in my constituency and found people beating a thief. I tried to ring Police but they had no means and I had to drive to the Police station to collect policemen to save the situation. We really have to facilitate the Police not just to add to their number. 

In the course of being on recess, I got complaints from police officers that for one to go for some foreign service like going to Darfur, they have to part with Shs 2.0 million and I told that man to bring me documents to that effect. When he does so, I will bring them to this House. To some big shots in the Police –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: The information I want to give is that, in this latest drive for police recruitment, I had a constituent of mine who was dismissed from the training for indiscipline. He came to me requesting for Shs 50,000 that if their big bosses are paid Shs 50,000 then he can be re-instituted in the training. Even policemen who get traffic jobs have to take money weekly to their bosses so that they are retained on traffic duties other than guarding some monuments somewhere else where there is no money.  

MS KABAKUMBA: Madam Speaker, we are in this struggle of fighting corruption together, but the information Members are giving is really half way and there is no way we can follow up these cases. If somebody came asking you for Shs 50,000, he should have told you to whom he is going to give it. But what you have now said will stop here and we will continue saying there is corruption because we cannot follow-up that half information. I would like to request Members to give us enough information to follow up these cases.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think when you bring up matters here, you want to be assisted so, please, help the government also to understand and handle the problem. 

MR OMOLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am requesting the chief whip to give us some little time; we shall help her to fight the corruption by bringing out the data. 

On the issue of the economy, we have talked about hydro power stations, but we have to be mindful about the global warming that is bound to reduce water levels. It is bound to be detrimental in case we put up these plants and eventually water levels go low and they will be of no help to us. Other countries like Tanzania are even thinking of beginning to use coal. So, we should think of building bigger thermo plants other than focussing very much on hydro plants. 

Bonna bagaggawale – to me who does not know Luganda so well -(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Omolo, please allow your colleagues also to participate. Thank you.

MR OMOLO: Can I wind up, please?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you have finished.

MR OMORO: To me who does not know Luganda so well, when you talk about kugaggawala, I get so impressed and begin to imagine that Heaven is bound to drop onto us. Anyway, as a matter of fact what are we going to do rather than producing through agriculture? If we are to produce through agriculture, we must find markets where to sell our produce because they have to be consumed, and the three things must tally such that production continues. But of recent –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, hon. Sauda Mugerwa.

MR OMORO: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

2.50
MS SAUDA MUGERWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I too, would like to join colleagues to praise the President for the statement he gave to the nation on 7 June 2007. The statement was very good because it covered a lot of major aspects in political, economic, social and public service including regional co-operation. Unfortunately he sort of overlooked international relations which inter-play with domestic relations to set the ground for any nation. 

Nevertheless, allow me to stress the President’s acknowledgement of the shortage of power in Uganda. The President, on pages 17 to 22, talked about energy and highlighted the shortages and the efforts that have been put in place to improve the situation. The President talked about the short term, long term and medium term ways of correcting the situation though he warned that power shortage would not only affect Uganda, but the entire African Continent.  Why did he say so? According to him, a number of countries in Africa like Ethiopia, Congo, South Africa and Uganda itself that have got a potential to produce energy will still experience this shortage because of the growing population and industrialisation that are taking place in Africa. 

However, the President was conscious enough as usual and advised the country on the promotion of solar energy and biogas, and that is where I want to make a comment. Solar energy is very important. Solar energy is easily available in Uganda because we have the Equator crossing here. If developed, solar energy can help our children especially those who are in boarding schools to read adequately. It can also help institutions like hospitals, prisons, and those other residential institutions to work for more hours than the usual. So, solar energy should be developed and I encourage the President to ensure that actually it is properly developed. It is also pleasing to note that solar is easy to develop in terms of infrastructure because it can be decentralised. So, I think it should be promoted as faster as possible. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to also praise the President on talking about biogas. As a woman especially coming from Masaka, I find biogas as being very important because much as Masaka is densely populated, there are no enough forests where we can get firewood. So, if we develop biogas, it will help a lot in preserving the few forests that people would have cut down for firewood.

However, much as I encourage Government to promote biogas, this project may take time to succeed if we do not promote zero grazing. So, it is important that Government promotes zero grazing in every home to enable people ably produce biogas.

Madam Speaker, if there was more time, I would want to praise the President’s statement more but since it is not there, let me stop here. Thank you very much.

2.54
MRS FLORENCE SSEKABIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to comment and contribute to the motion on the Floor. As far as the President’s State of the Nation Address is concerned, I will only comment on the political scene and the economy.
 
Madam Speaker, on the political scene, I want to thank His Excellency the President for the concern on the development and progress, discipline, democracy and financing of political parties. This shows that His Excellency is committed to ensuring political stability in Uganda because as you know, political stability determines socio-economic development. He would have concentrated on developing and ensuring discipline and democracy in his party, but because the President loves this country, he is also concerned about developments in the other political parties too. 

I want to thank him for this and I call upon the Cabinet especially the Attorney General to very quickly come up with a Bill on financing all political parties in Uganda. This will help in ensuring the proper growth and development of multi-partism in Uganda. 

I remember during the last campaigns, some members of some political parties were threatening people in my district and this made many people not understand whether we were ready to go for multiparty political dispensation or not. It was a real challenge. However, with financing, I hope all parties will be able go to the grass root to sensitise the masses on the benefits of being governed under a multiparty dispensation.

Madam Speaker, it is also true that we really needed the Movement system to begin with because, for example, in Kayunga people from the same family would not eat together; they would not greet each other because of the divisions that had been brought about by the former political parties. That is why we needed the Movement system and I think we should not complain that we operated under it for all that long; it benefited all of us and that is why we are now able to greet each other back home, no matter whether you are FDC, NRM, DP or otherwise. 

I also notice that all political parties are working together even in this Parliament. So, we really needed that Movement system and that is why I would not support my brother hon. Otto who says that we should go back to it. We must try this multi-partism and see how it moves on. 

On the economy, I want to thank Government for coming up with the energy fund because we really need it in order to lessen up on donor funding for our programmes. That is the only way we can ensure sustainability in development given the fact that donor funds come with strings attached all the time. So, I commend Government for coming up with the energy fund project. 

I want to ask the Minister of Energy to remember that while campaigning in Busaana, His Excellency assured the people that they would get electricity as soon as he got into power. However, since then, nothing has happened and there is still no electricity in Busaana. This is an area of about 40.000 people who do a lot of work. They want to do agro-processing and develop but they are not able to do that because they do not have electricity. So, now that Bujagali Power Dam construction begun, the minister should come and address my people of Busaana in Kayunga District on how soon rural electrification will be effected in that area.

I want to thank His Excellency the President for being very clear on letting the country know that the energy sector has a master plan that is broken into short-term, mid-term and long-term periods. This gave us a lot of hope and I want to call upon Government to move as fast as possible in implementing this project.

Madam Speaker, allow me bring to your attention the issue of biogas, which I think is very important. There is no doubt that the rampant rural-urban migration has created the problem of solid waste. This has posed a great challenge because we do not have anywhere to dispose the solid waste to. So, if we take on biogas and utilise all the solid waste, we shall have made the best out of it as well as saving ourselves from the difficulties of finding where to dump it. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up, honourable.

MRS SSEKABIRA: Madam Speaker, allow me to thank Government for initiating the Prosperity for All programme and I also would like to thank the President for concentrating on enterprise selection. Many of our people in rural areas want to continue with what they have seen others do. So, I am hopeful that this enterprise selection, which is guidance to our people in the rural areas, will help a great deal in alleviating poverty. I, therefore, want to call upon my colleagues, Members of Parliament, to pick interest in such projects including NAADS because they are doing a lot of awareness raising and they will help us to fight poverty in our rural communities. 

I also would like to ask the Minister of Lands to take it upon himself to help our people to benefit from Prosperity for All by ensuring safety of the bibanja owners (Squatters) from the threats posed by rich men. In Kayunga District, this is a big hindrance and many of the bibanja owners are not able to invest confidently because of rich men who come and evict them after buying off parishes, villages and so forth. This is a big problem and I want the minister to brief this House on what he is doing to save these bibanja owners from those rich men. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.01
MR BRUNO PAJOBO (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this chance. I want to join my friends in thanking the President for his State of the Nation Address. For the first time, I want to thank the President for addressing the issue of labour and appreciating that there is exploitation of workers in this country. Indeed, the fate of workers in this country is worrying a lot. What we have is casualisation of labour freedoms with no employment security in all sectors including Government. So, I am happy that the President has realised that there is exploitation of workers in this country.

In that regard, allow me call upon the Ministry of Labour to come up with a law on minimum wage, which will be sufficient for us to weigh how far people are exploited. Otherwise, without such a law, how do we accuse employers of exploitation? The issue of minimum wage is a pertinent one because you find our people who have finished university getting employed by some employers on casual basis and being paid as little as Shs 80.000 per month; some of them even get as little as Shs 60.000. So, when are we going to end this kind of exploitation? 

The other thing is that the jobs in Uganda today are not for Ugandans. People come from outside this country and get jobs here. I am not against bringing foreigners into this country for jobs, but Ugandans should also be given opportunity to enjoy the fruits of their land. Foreigners are over taking the employment, which is said to have been created for Ugandans. In some companies, you find Ugandans employed as General Managers, but they work as casual labourers. They work through up to the sixth month but before they are confirmed to those jobs, they are laid off. This is serious exploitation!

My next comment is on trade unions. True, Government is always advising employees to form legalised trade unions. But I do not think this will work out because Government does not respect such freedoms; we cannot be told to negotiate on our own freedom of association. These people do not want freedom of association. Although Uganda ratified the ILO Convention in 1997, which guarantees freedom of association, we are not collectively bargaining for these employees. So, I think that it is time for Government to come up with a proper implementation —(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you my colleague for giving way. The information that I want to give to underscore the point on lack of acceptance by employers to allow workers to associate freely as demanded by the law happened not long ago; it happened recently and under the watchful eyes of the government. About two years ago, the then Minister for Gender, Labour and Social Development, hon. Bakoko, together with Dr Ogaram, the commissioner for labour and Mr Olweny, the Director for labour, were chased away from Tri-star factory by the owners! The minister and group had gone to attend to complaints from workers. 

So, if such a thing can happen under the watchful eye of the government of Uganda in the capital city of Uganda, how about in Arua; how about in Moroto; and how about in Kabale, which is far away. It is true there is a lot of denial of the right to associate and form, and build trade unions in this country. Thank you.

MR KIBANZANGA: Madam Speaker, there is not only exploitation of workers but there is also abuse of workers’ rights in this country. One day, I went to Kapchorwa. While there, I happened to visit some camping site called Lakam. But what I saw there is not just abuse of workers’ rights but slavery. In the private rooms are buckets in which guests go to ease themselves. The guest will then ring a bell for an African worker to pass behind the small door, carry the bucket away to go and pour the waste in a latrine somewhere. Ooh!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kibanzanga, what is that place called?

MR KIBANZANGA: Lakam Camp.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Location? 

MR KIBANZANGA: It is in Kapchorwa, just as you enter the town. It is a camping site but has some grass-thatched hats for guests. Madam Speaker and honourable members, I found this a total abuse of workers’ rights by the American and his African partner who own that camp. I have been just looking for an opportunity to let the world know about this slavery. Therefore, I call upon this House to instruct the Committee on Social Services and Workers’ MPs to go and visit this camp. This is watering down our independence. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, please conclude.

MR PAJOBO. Thank you very much for that information. In fact, these may be just a few examples. There are worse abuses of workers’ rights than that. I want to tell you there are employers who pay their employees Shs 11.000 per month, which is not even enough to mention. 

So, I think that this is very good evidence as far as workers’ exploitation is concerned and I hope that Government will take this matter seriously. I also hope that the Minister of Labour will take serious steps on this matter. If he does not we, as a group of MPs, will go and see what is happening there.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Pajobo, we are interested in hearing your report after returning; this is a very serious matter. Yes, it is very serious indeed.

MR PAJOBO: I promise that we shall report here.

The second problem, which I wanted to –(Interjection) - you see, some of us are given few minutes to talk. But let me use another minute to touch on others issues. There is also a problem concerning DDT. I am worried that if the monitoring of the DDT indoor spraying is not properly done, our agricultural produce is going to be rejected on the international market. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: The information I wanted to give you is that last week, I participated in the spray of DDT in Pader District, together with hon. Dr Malinga and Prof. Latigo. We actually involved ourselves in spraying a few huts, and I really want to assure you that the minister and the ministry are really taking enough precautions. The people of NEMA immediately remove the kaveera where they remove ICON from; it is not to be thrown in the compound. Immediately any kaveera is opened, and the Icon is poured in the can, the NEMA people remove it. The accountability is such that Government will pay RTI basing on the buveeras returned to the centre. So, there is nothing like spillage of DDT not even in front of the doorsteps. (Applause)

MR ARUMADRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is one lingering misgiving in the minds of many Ugandans, including me. Some scientific literature says that if DDT gets in contact with water where there is marine life, DDT would reside in that marine life  -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Arumadri, do fish live inside the houses? This is indoor spraying, and the marine life is in the lakes, rivers and swamps.

MR ARUMADRI: Madam Speaker, when it rains, the rain wash things down the streams. These things eventually –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: What is happening is that, once the ICON or DDT is poured in the can, those people pump the can up to a pressure of 55 degrees. So, what is in the can is now more of vapour than water or even DDT. Then when they are effecting the spraying, they do not spray the floor, they spray only on the walls and the gap between the individual spraying and the wall is 30 centimetres. They spray on the walls of the house and on the roofs of huts. 

So, it is very unlikely that those rains you are talking of can wash the floor and bring the DDT out. In spite of that, the moment it is sprayed, it dries on the wall. That is how the process of eliminating the mosquitoes begins. But it does not have any impact on a human being after two hours.  That is why they say that people should not enter the house for two hours after spraying. 

So, even if it rains on the wall after three hours, it would have no impact; it would have already served its purpose. I am not a scientist, but I was educated and I can educate others also.

MR PAJOBO: Thank you very much my friends for giving me this information. But still that protection was because of your presence, being Members of Parliament. But the time will come when these poorly paid workers will take things easy and DDT will get to our fish in the water. So, once it is detected that you have DDT in your food, then be prepared to face –(Interruptions)- my brother, I do not want to quarrel with you. Just allow me to finish, because I am going to be the last person.

Now, there is also the issue of security, which I want to bring to your attention. I am happy that peace is soon coming to Northern Uganda, and that some people are going to be compensated and others have been compensated already. I happen to come from Nyadi District of Arua. In 1988, Sudanese bombed the counties of Nyadi and Moyo. People died and properties were destroyed. 

Then in 1990, there was an understanding between the government of Uganda and the government of Sudan to compensate the losses that these people incurred. But up to now, nobody has been compensated in Nyadi and Moyo districts. So, I want to know what happened. Why is it that the people who died were not compensated? 

Secondly, some people lost their cows and property in that war and they have not yet been compensated. People in Arua were killed and others lost their property like vehicles. How are they going to be compensated? They are also people from the North. I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, now 72 Members from all the components of this House have contributed on this motion. So, I would like the chief whips to assist me to compile a list of those who have not yet spoken from their parties so that we give them the first opportunity in the general debate on the budget. So, the whips, please organize. But take into account those who have been with us and were not able to speak today. 

Honourable members, I want to thank you very much. We shall have the replies from the ministers on Tuesday then we shall finally close it. The ministers will all respond on Tuesday. The works issue will come first because it is very important; then we shall have the ministers responding and then we shall close that debate and proceed to other work.

MR KIBANZANGA: Madam Speaker, today I was reading the papers about the HIV/AIDS vaccine, and they said that four women are already infected with HIV/AIDS because the trials went wrong. I remember that this House allowed that vaccine to be tested on people. It was a heated debate in this House. Would it not be procedurally right to have the Minister of Health come here next week to brief this House on what really went wrong and what remedy we have for those women? Secondly  -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, we have finished. You are raising the matter very late; but the chief whip has heard. Let us finish the State of the Nation Address on Tuesday then we can proceed with other matters. I know she has heard. Thank you very much. The House is adjourned to 2.00 O’clock Tuesday.

(The House rose at 3.12 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 31 July at 2.00 p.m.)

  


