Thursday, 29th July, 1993

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice-Chairman, Al- Haji Moses Kigongo in the Chair).

The Council was called to order.

MOTION

“That the National Resistance Council do resolve itself into a Committee of Supply for the consideration and approval of:

(i) The Revised Revenue and Expenditure Estimates for the Fiscal Year 1992/93

(ii) The Budgetary Proposals for the Fiscal Year 1993/94 Estimates of Revenue 
      and Expenditure.

(Debate continues).

MR. RWABITA (Ibanda County, Mbarara):  Thank you very much Mr. Chairman.  I rise to support the Motion and the Budgetary Proposals on Revenue and Expenditure for 1993/94. But before I comment on the Budget, allow me to raise public concern about armed thuggery.  Most of the trunk roads in Uganda now are experiencing a lot of armed thuggery every other day.  Name them: Mbarara, Jinja, you go to Gulu and then Kampala itself.  Last week, three people were attached on Mbarara-Masaka road and people shot at and amount of Shs.20, 000,000/= was lost.  This disturbs the economy in one way; because it stops people from moving freely to do their business.  The hindrance to business of transactions will reduce the viability of the economy.  So, we call upon the Minister of Internal Affairs, especially when they are given support in this Budget - that they mobilise resources with the police and stop this growing cancer in our society.  

Turning to the Budget; I want to thank the Minister of Finance for considering some of the recommendations by this House and especially the Sectoral Committee.  This is a sign that we are working like one family, rather than having one person coming here and telling us what his technocrats think about the economy and then we either pass it or we amend.  But now the Sectoral Committees have done a lot to improve on the presentation of the Budget.  

To illustrate a few things in this Budget.  I think the recommendations given by these Committees have come out as result of reducing the interest rates in the banks, two - the widening of the tax base three, an effort to pay a living wage, although it is not yet enough.  For example, some of teachers are going to get 35,000/=.  This is not too much money but it is a sign that the government is trying its level best to improve the standards of our living.  The capitalization of Bank of Uganda and UCB and the control or supervising the Financial Institutions like building societies and insurances is also an improvement on financial control.  There is also an effort to establish a stock exchange and abolition too many tax exemptions that used to eat into our Revenue.  Those are some of the areas where this House has worked together with the Minister of Finance and I hope from the discussions this year, our next year’s Budget will even improve a great deal.

I want to talk on some of the loopholes I find in our Budgeting system.  One is that we lack to have an inventory; and inventory of our projects.  Every year we plan for certain projects, especially water, roads and industries; but at the end of the year, we do not get an accountability of what we achieved or where we failed and without that report we cannot improve our budgeting.  I want to give a few examples; this year in the Ministry of Works we have given 1.7 billion (this is on R.97, on the Ministry of Works and Communications account) for maintenance of roads in Mbarara to Ibanda up to Kamwenje.  This road every year they start on it.  They work about 30 km. and something wrong happens.  Either there is no fuel or the machinery has broken down and the next year they do the same.  Now, for the last five years that road has never been completed.  What sort of planning is that?  Why do you start on new projects when the old one is not even done halfway?

MR. A. ONGOM: Point of information.  Thank you hon. Member for giving me the Floor to give you information on a similar thing.  There is this section of the road to Gulu.  The repair work started from 10 miles from Luwero towards Kampala in 1990 and it is supposed to be done to Kafu. Up to now it is only up to Nakasongola and it has been stuck there for 5 months; and it is exactly the same kind of thing that you are talking about.

MR. RWABITA:  Thank you for the information.  That illustrates how we have a problem of not knowing how far we have gone with projects and yet every year we budget for new ones.  So, I think that should be a system in our Budget, in such a way that every Ministry should give an accountability at the end of each year; to know where our successes and failures have occurred and therefore put correcting measures.  

Another area where we have a problem is, some of these projects supported by Donor Agencies, again in the west, we have this project by IFAD on feeder roads.  Again I see in this Draft of Estimates, IFAD has been given 1.2 billion to work on the roads.  

The work of IFAD was supposed to promote agriculture and at the same time improve on the feeder roads so that the products produced can have way to markets but; I am telling for the last four years, although there might have been some good work in agriculture by producing, giving them seeds and tools; but one none of the roads in some areas in Mbarara has been worked on.  So, four years, I expected to have the produce being moved with what and through what roads and for that matter, people have been promised for the last four years and now they have taken it not as a promise but as a lie because; they do not see any substantial work being done on these feeder roads.  So, this is another way where we need to examine and supervise the work of these foreign agencies.  
	
Another area is on water.  Some years back we had Seven Town Water projects; Mbarara, Masaka, Entebbe, Kampala, Arua, now I do not know how many towns have had these projects completed.  In our case in Mbarara, one job was done, and two jobs are not yet done; yet it was supposed to be finished two years back.

MR. IMAGA ARUNA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the Member holding the Floor that Arua is not included among the seven towns, as he has mentioned.

MR. KAJURA:  Point of information.  Thank you Mr. Chairman.  The original projects as funded by EEC, IDA, were for the rehabilitation of those water systems.  First of all, to rehabilitate them.  Now, that work has been completed, we are moving on to expansion.  For example, Gulu was just rehabilitated.  On the other hand, Lira, because it had a bigger project, not only have we had the rehabilitation but we have also had expansion beyond the current requirements.  So, at times we are not very clear whether we are talking about rehabilitation or expansion. Indeed, what has happened in most of these towns is that we have just rehabilitated the water works and we are now working on expansion.  So, for the seven towns, it has been rehabilitation; with little elements of expansion in the sense that when we repair, at times we create little capacity - more than we had before.  So, that is the position Mr. Chairman.

MR. BARIGYE:  point of information.  Thank you Mr. Chairman, may I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor and through his the hon. Minister of transport who came in soon after the hon. Member talk about a certain road, which he missed hearing; that the road from Mbarara to Ibanda has indeed become a laughing stock because every rainy season it becomes almost impassable and then it is graded and the holes come back.  Right now as I speak, it was graded about a month ago but it is almost impassable again.  So, really until and unless this road is tarmacked, it is becoming a real problem for the people in the area. Thank you Mr. Chairman.

MR. RUGUNDA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, can take this opportunity to give information to hon. Barigye that the description he has given about Mbarara-Ibanda road is correct and very well known to us in government.  The problem really with that road is that the traffic is too heavy for the murrum road.  There are more than 200 vehicles passing over that road per day.  So, the road has recently been upraised and it has qualified for upgrading to Bitumen standards. (Applause) Government is now discussing with the donor Community the mobilisation of necessary funds to upgrade the road.  Thank you Mr. Chairman.

MR. RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, let me hope that we will not come back next year to tell the same story because; this has been a continuous story.  The danger with these projects, when they fail to complete, even start on one, then they start giving them new names.  It becomes Project I, and then next year they call it Project 11. This is the story and it comes to Project V but; as a matter of fact, it is the same project and these expatriates come under those loans; they get their salaries, they wait for the government to take action and we do not see the action.  I think, the Ministries concerned should make sure that we utilise these loans and we do not get them in name but we turn them in full economic activities.

On the same Budget, I want to talk on one point that is, Education. I want to thank government for increasing the salaries of our teachers, especially primary teachers; and we hope even the secondary teachers will get also some substantial increase.  When you see on A 99=59, that is on primary school by Local Government.  A 99 towards the end that is Part (a) RDC Project.  Whereas I can see that there is 2.1 billion and I think this is for the Northern Region (it is a Japanese grant.)  Now for the 19 districts, we have only 329 million.  Each should get about 17 million.  Now, what do you do with 17 million in the whole district?  How many schools do you build and how many do you construct? 

Today, the position is like this.  The schools in urban areas are doing very well both academically and infrastructure wise but the schools both primary and post-primary schools in rural areas are in appalling status. (Applause) Leave alone the infrastructure but the passing capacity of these schools is nowhere to be seen.  In my own county, I have got 56 primary schools and last year we could only get 38 first grades.  Can you imagine?  Where here in Kampala, a school with about 300 kids got about 290 first grades with 4,5,6.  Now the position is this, that what will happen is that the children of the peasants will never see Makerere University or even Mbarara University for that matter. Because they cannot get the marks needed for higher Institutions.  This means we shall have a two-sided Education system.  An Education system for the peasants who will remain low and go back to the village and, therefore, who will evolve there without improving their standards of living while in towns the children will have a higher standard of living and they will eventually get better education and get better employment.  

Now, here we have a problem.  We are supposed to serve the whole country but there is that dichotomy which must be reduced. Otherwise the peasants are getting it very rough and they feel it! Because even a school like Mary Hill in Mbarara which is in the rural area, is now feeding Kampala Parents here. Therefore, our locals (I am not trying to be sectarian), but children from Western Zone will not have a good school because they cannot come to Kampala and yet they cannot even go to their own schools that are inclusive.

MRS. K. KIRYAPAWO:  Point of information.  The information I want to give the Member holding the Floor and the House is that these schools in the rural areas - it is not only the building but it is worse to find that even grade one schools - primary schools - there are no desks for the pupils.  So, you can imagine those students just writing on their laps.  The 50 per cent which is being given to these schools, it would be better if, instead of buying chalks and exercise books, if they could use that money on such items like desks in the schools. 

DR. CHEBROT: Point of clarification.  Thank you very much. Mr. Chairman, let me just clarify two issues here - that is the question of 50 per cent contribution by government to primary schools. Last year, government spent about 9 billion shillings towards 50 per cent contribution to primary schools.  It was expected that the primary schools should also contribute 50 per cent.  Now, the 50 per cent, which is contributed by government, is meant for a Recurrent Budget to improve the quality of Education in the rural areas.  It was not mean’t for capital development.  However, if a particular school wishes to buy desks for its school or buy mabati for that matter, they still have the 50 per cent which the parents contribute for capital development but; the idea of releasing the 50 per cent to the primary schools was to improve the quality of Education by buying scholastic not for capital development.

MR. RWABITA: Thank you very much Mr. Chairman.  To finish on this point, I want also to point out that it is even getting worse in up-country schools because the good teachers who should be helping the rural areas, they flock to towns because there is better remuneration.  Therefore, we are left with grade 111, unlicensed teachers.  Those who have failed P.7 They go to teach in P1, and those who have failed Senior IV teach in P7.  Now, you can see the irony of the whole story.  So, we will never get the standard coming up.  

I am suggesting to the Minister of Education and Local Government that in order to improve on this vicious circle up country we have got Teachers Training Colleges, why not give funds, so that during the holidays some teacher can undertake up-grading courses. This will assists us, because this is a teacher who is up-country, who can improve his standards and, therefore, eventually improve the standards of our students. Otherwise, if this scenario continues, it will be a dichotomy that will never help the economy of this country, we shall have the rich getting richer, getting more educated and the poorer getting worse every year. (Interruption)

MR. MAYENGO: Point of information. Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that perhaps his mind could even go deeper into despair because, the Ministry is talking about, is a mess in itself, first, they have failed even to have a simple distinction of admission standards between the rural children and those in towns who have better facilities.  Secondly, they have exhibited a horrifying double standard on our citizens.  The children who were in Government schools as considered citizens by the Ministry and, therefore, eligible for assistance. The children who are in private schools are not considered citizens and they are not for eligible for any kind of assistance.  So, I do not know even how you can give this Ministry and kind of suggestion.  Mr. Chairman, I sympathise with the Member on the Floor.  

MR. RWABITA: Thank you for your sympathy, hon. Mayengo.  Mr. Chairman, my next point -(Interruption)

MR. WAGGWA WABI:  Point of information.  Thank you very much. Mr. Chairman, I want to thank the hon. Member for giving way.  Mr. Chairman, I was reading today’s New Vision. Tthe President was addressing students in Baale County, Mukono District.  He talked about a programme, national programme of training licensed teacher during the holidays.  Then there is a very unfortunate issue that has cropped up. The President in his tours of Eastern Uganda and even in Mukono, he repeated it, that the 50 per cent contributed by Government should go towards Capital Expenditure.  This is clearly but even in today’s New Vision, but then this afternoon, we have had the Deputy Minister of Local Government, I think contradicting what the President has said, and this I think was the point order raised by hon. Ndege because the Deputy Minister was contradicting the President’s statement and we hope that, that would not be proper except in circumstances of uncoordinated movement.

MR. CHABROT:  Point of information. Mr. Chairman, in making y statement, I did not contradict to what the President has said.  I was merely clarifying on a statement which was made by the hon. Member, that the 50 per cent contribution for primary aim.  Now, the other 50 per cent, which the parents contribute, can be used for capital development.  Now the problem here that we are facing is this, is that as soon as realised the 50 per cent, many institution, many districts people fail to pay school fees; that is the truth of the matter.  In fact, in some districts the school fees went down by as much as 80 per cent none payment of school fees.  

So, I think we should be talking about compliance of payment of school fees; what the President meant is actually some of this money, if it was assumed that all the money was paid by the parents and by government.  That would be a lot of money and it can be used for capital development purposes.  However, what the Government has now done, is that cheques have been written to each primary school, it is no longer going to the district, each primary school now will get its share directly.  It will not go to the school.  So, in that way the Management Committee will decide what exactly they want.  Thank you very much.  

MR. RWABITA: Thank you very much.  Mr. Chairman let me have a word on taxation.  I want to remind the Minister of Finance that the hon. Members here are not arguing to reduce tax.  Their argument is that, we should use the means that are best for everybody so that we collect maximum tax, because there is no question that Government in its tax and services are normally given through this money received from taxation.   But what is important is that we may be rigid on our rates. We have put in this Budget and yet at the end of the day we collect less money, than who will be the loser? We are saying that if we used some other methods from our own experience and observations, we should make more money rather than sticking to stiff tariffs.  

I am requesting that we follow the marketing principle of sales per turnover because; the more you can sell, if the product is reasonable cheap, you are likely to sell more especially, articles like beers and cigarettes, you can make more money by having a reasonable price rather than putting too much taxation.  As a matter of fact, I would request the Minister of Finance, when he is concluding to tell us what has happened in this July, what are the successes have we received from the taxation policy? So, I think from our own experience, we find that the cheaper the products are, the more people can have the capacity to buy them and, therefore, in the long run, you get more money, because you sell a lot and you get more, but if you put it high consumption will be less and the returns will be less.  So, I wanted to say that, we were not asking or charging the Ministry to reduce taxes, we are trying to see that we get maximum taxes, if you can use other methods rather than stocking to high rates of taxes.  

Now, with the taxation, what the people want, especially, the up-country people - the rural people, it is not as much as that they are not ready to pay tax, all along the problem has been two folds.  One; assessment is not properly done. The Minister must deploy means of helping the chiefs and RCs to assess people’s property properly because you find somebody has got 10 acres of coffee - I do not know what ratio they use to quantify those ten acres, then somebody has got a few animals and the same man has got 30 acres of coffee, you find that both are paying the same, or even the one who is supposed to be richer is paying less than that one who is poorer.  So, if we can improve on the assessment method, definitely people are ready and willing to pay their taxes.  

Another problem is on time given to the peasants to pay their taxes.  Especially Local Government; they have always been late to produce graduated tax tickets, they are always late to do assessment.  So, they give these things in January and they say closing date is March, I think, that is unfair.  The people should be given at least six months period, so that as we are giving the income tax payers grace of period for paying installments this peasant is given six month, he should be able to raise the money that is assessed properly for his graduated tax.  

Also, there is a misconception that cattle farmers are very rich and, therefore, they must be able to pay a lot of taxes.  I do not agree with this. For example, take a diary farmer who has got about 50 animals and producing 100 litres of milk, now, a litre of milk in the village is Shs.160.  It is in Kampala where you can get at Shs.500; now one needs 280 and 18 litres to buy one litre of sponer which is Shs.35, 000/= and if he has got a deep tank to put eight litres, he needs to sell 1,750 litres of milk in order to mix that deep. That means, he needs 18 days of sells of his milk, and when you add other expenses, labour and other drugs, you will find that profit margin is very, very small.  So, that is why we come in to say assessment must be done properly.  I do agree with economics that the price structure in urban areas can be determined and I think they have got statistics, but we must not fall in a danger or misusing statistics.  I beg to be explained or be corrected.  I do not think, the Ministry has today, the capacity to carry out statistics in the rural areas. 

Therefore, when you talk of reduced price of matooke in Mbale, Jinja, Kampala, Mbarara, fine, you can get that one, but what happens to the rural man in the village where does that inflation reduction affect him?  Whereas, he is producing the matooke very cheaply and he is selling it at Shs.300.  The costs of ntunda bikadde, soap, and of other needs, are very high and some of them are imported.  Therefore, in the long run, the urban person can feel the reduction of prices in town, but the rural person does not feel it because, we do not have the realistic figures of what returns you can get from the rural areas.  So, until, the Minister can give us statistics for somebody in Kisoro, for somebody in Kotido and somebody in Arua in the islands.  It will be very difficult to convince the public that the reduction of inflation to 7 per cent is realistic; it is okay, to a certain extent. In the urban area it is easy to manipulate these figures but in the rural areas, I think this inflation figures are not realistic and they need to be worked no more thoroughly when the Ministry can get the infrastructures and the capacity to do it. Otherwise, the common person will ask you, to say, okay, the economy is improving, a lot of things are being done, but I do not have it, I do not feel it.  Now, can the Minister convince this local person that by reducing the inflation these are the benefits you are getting, then we shall be at par but at the moment there are two categories, the urban life and the rural life.  (Interruption)

MR. OBWANGOR:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the Member holding the Floor of the House, that in the rural areas, this is how we feel it, though we intellectuals preach that the economy or the growth of the economy has gone to 7 per cent, but the common man in Nkonkonjeru, Kisoro, Andat feels that with Shs.200, he cannot buy a meal to fed a human being; why?  An egg in Amdat Kisoro is at Shs.100, can you get a few and be well fed on that?  It is a share for us intellectuals here.  Therefore, we do not feel that argument, the intellectuals advance that the economy has grown for people in Mbale, Masaka, Jinja, Kampala is nothing.  The masses are in the rural areas, we want to feed well, and the Minister of Agriculture is here and leaders in Government are here, and the Minister of Finance is here, please, give us money capable of buying a decent meal, to live well.

MR. RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, let me conclude by say something about decentralisation.  It is a good intention that the Riot project for 13 districts being decentralised.  I want to say this, in management delegation is not resignation; therefore, the Minister of Local Government must keep still strong control on the funds of the public because at the moment, while the districts are under the Ministry, 100 per cent, there is a lot of mischief at district level.  Now what will happen, when they are sort of independent? We must be careful here, because that independence can be misused and you will find that the people’s money is squandered. So the Ministry of Local Government must put supervision, must strengthen his auditing section, so that, with this independence, the districts are getting, the common person is not to derind and he should be realising better performance around himself rather than being a victim of corruption and misuse of this funds.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MRS. BAHEMUKA (Women Representative, Hoima): I stand to support the Motion, but I have the following to say. Now, as far as the 50 per cent Government contribution is concerned, this money is really very little, because most of the schools today need rehabilitation.  When we say that the parents are also contributing the 50 per cent, we must realise that cost of the parents are not well to do as the parents in Kampala.  You look at the up country parents are not well to do as the parents in Kampala.  If you look at the upcountry parents, their sources of income are limited and, therefore, you find everything that is done is not as we expect it.  So, here, I am asking the Ministry of Education to send out Inspectors to these up-country schools, gauge the state of things, and then be able to feed the Minister with correct information.  Most of the time we have been told that inspectors do not have any money to enable them to do the work, so you find that the inspectors are just circulating around Kampala. This work of inspecting the schools is left to the office of the DEO again these people are limited  -(Interruption) 

MRS. SEKITOLEKO: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I am holding the portfolio of Education.  Iit is not true that the inspectors are at Headquarters.  In every District Education Officer’s there is an inspector.  Secondly, most of these inspectors have, actually, been given motorcycles; in fact sometime back, I had a meeting with about two or three of the who were women and I told them, for as long as your job qualifies you for a motorbike, please, get on and do your work.  If you want a car, the thing to do is to go back to the University; hopefully you will come back and have a better job where you qualify for a car.  These women said, they had no problem with motorbikes and they are moving.  I have a request to make, Member can you, please, whenever you are going to your Constituencies go through these offices and find out exactly whether these people are there or they are not there and then you write to us, and two if there, most of you have got vehicles, please go with them.  Thank you very much.

MR. KABUGO: Point of information.  Thank you very much.  I want to dispute with the Minister’s information.  Luwero District has got one pick-up that is an Isuzu.  The District Education Officer uses it and his Inspector of Schools has nothing at all.  In fact, I have been going around and requesting these people to go with me but they do not have means of communication with me because Nakaseke is away from Luwero and you cannot believe that what the Minister is claiming here is the truth.  She is giving false information.

MR. KISAMBA MUGERWA: Point of information.  I thank the hon. Member to give way to enable me to give information.  I would not like to dispute my Colleague from Luwero but I think he should educate himself more with the circumstances in the office.  They have a motor cycle and I am even given - I have two but at least I am aware of at least of a motor cycle in the office of the District Education Officer being used by Kamulege and the Inspector even the lady does not know how to ride but at least they help her to ride how this motor cycle.  So, I think the information by the Minister holding the portfolio of Education is correct.  At least in Luwero there is a motorcycle.

MRS. BAHEMUKA:  Thank you very much for the information.  Now Mr. Chairman, while we say that up-country districts each has a vehicle - at least in my district there is a pick-up which keeps breaking, the two motor cycle again there is no fuel.  So when they have no fuel, there is no money in the office, then they cannot go out and when the vehicles break, of course, there is money for repair.  So, I am asking government here to avail enough money to these Inspectors so that they can do the work.

Now I am going to the idea of rehabilitating these schools.  Most of these schools, starting from primary schools to other institutions of learning, most of them were built quite long time ago.  They have gone through times of war, there has been looting and other damages.  When you look at most of these schools, every school, at least in my district needs rehabilitation.  Again, there are other schools that sprung up in the 70s and early 80s out of the parents’ work or the communities’ efforts.  Of course, they are limited by the money that they can put in.  Such structures are just half way and that is why you find most communities are organizing fund-raising but then when fund-raising are too many in one area, the people expected to contribute are the same and we end up feeling embarrassed.  There is no money.  A Member of NRC is expected to attend, a Minister is expected to attend and contribute generously and by standards we really cannot cope up with this.  

So, I am asking government to avail money to all these schools so that we do not suffer the problems of fund-raising.  But all in all, I am trying to say that we need money to repair our schools and to complete those schools that are half done. And again government policy is that we open up a secondary school in each sub-county.  Some of these sub-counties have opened up these schools but the buildings are not complete.  I am asking the Minister of Education to give us a bigger amount of capital development and to send it in time so that the teachers can do proper work.

Next, I am going to the retrenchment.  The Minister says, there is a further retrenchment of 69000 employees in the teaching service and civil service.  When you look at the teaching staff in the upcountry schools, the teachers are not there; overstaffing exists in Kampala schools and in schools in bigger towns.  But when you move away from these towns you find that schools do not have qualified teachers. While we say, government is retrenching teachers so as to give bigger salaries to these other teachers we may end up having no teachers in a good number of schools, although the money will be there but then why do we retrench when other schools do not have teachers?  That is why I am asking the Ministry to send Inspectors to schools to really, find out, are all the schools fully staffed, otherwise some good schools have stopped teaching some special subjects which require specialists and if such teachers are to be retrenched then there will be no hope of getting such special teachers to teach these special subjects in our schools.

At this time, government must think of the problems which these teachers are facing even the civil servants they also have children in schools.  People have been working in towns have their children in town schools.  You retrench them they are going back to the villages where they come from and in the villages there are no schools of the standards which they would like and again getting places for these children when the year have gone half way, becomes difficult for these parents.  Before you retrench them, you must give them their package so that they can fit in society.  Changing life because you are used to each bread and butter but then when you do not get your money, you are pushed back into the village, life becomes difficult.  So, here I am asking government to think of giving the packages to these people in time and maybe,, to leave them in their places of residence so that their children  can complete the academic year in December.

Next, I am going to the feeder roads.  According to the Budget, the feeder roads maintenance was one of the priority areas.  I am sorry to report here that while we were given a feeder road unit, which was supposed to work on our feeder roads, the grader was a broken machine.  It did not do any work.  Well, I am asking the Minister to give a new grader or at least a grader in working condition to my district so that we can work on those feeder roads.  Another problem was that the wage given to these workers was really too little.  So, it was discouraging for somebody to go on these roads. Most of them were discouraged and very little done.  However, with a bigger wage and a good grader we are going to work very hard.

Next, I am going to talk about the control of vermin.  Under Vote 28, money has been given on that Vote to control vermin.  Hoima District and mid Western Region as a whole has forests, very think equatorial forests.  We produce all the timber and it is transported to Kampala but then in these forests we have vermin.  While the Minister for Environment wants to protect the forests and the Minister Wildlife wants the animals alive, then the farmers in Hoima are the victims of circumstances.  We cannot control the vermin at district levels, we have tried very much to do that but we have failed. We are asking government to look into the problem to vermin, all the people there depend on agriculture but then the crops get spoiled.  So, please, help us.  

And another priority for 1993/94 Budget is the prisons.  Here I have been asked by some people who have been supplying food and other materials to the prisons, to be paid their money. Some of these people are demanding over 10 million.  They have been asking for this money for quite long and their work is at a stand still. Before they brought the food to the prisons, they were asked to do so because the prisoners were starving and indeed when you look at the life of a prisoner today, whoever is related to the prisoner must carry food to the prison and it is not a nice exercise because sometimes one is told to first eat the food or sometimes is asked to give some little tips before the food is given to prisoner.  In some cases where relatives live very far away, the Prisoners have gone without meals.  So, please, these suppliers are asking to be paid their money.

Last but not least, today we are talking of ebyaffe.  Ebyaffe could be different materials as early as 1985 before the NRM took position in this House two lorries were borrowed from Hoima District. One lorry belonged to the parents Registration No. UWP 678, an officer borrowed it and he promised to return the lorry to the parents after the war. The parents have written letters, they have seen different officers but to no avail, and they have asked me to present this case to you.  We are asking for ebyaffe. (Laughter and Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Repeat the number, please.

MRS. BAHEMUKA: UWP 678, it was borrowed on the 5th of November 1985, we have all the documents in the school.  And again another lorry that belonged to the Ministry of Education but given to Kitala Secondary School was also borrowed but abandoned somewhere and it was not in working condition.  So, please, we are asking for two lorries to be returned to Hoima District.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KANYOMOZI (Kajara County, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to make a very few observations on the Budget.  Fist I do agree there are some positive things in the Budget, especially those concerning the target set and what we are likely to achieve. There are somethings that are positive, like lowering the threshold for individual taxation, reducing corporation tax and taxing rentable incomes and all these things that are related to taxation.  These are good measures if they can only work.  I am looking at there with the background of what is actually happening in the ground.  We are told that the growth rate of our economy is that between 5 and 6 per cent, that the inflation has been reduced to a negative level, the population is now at 2.5 per cent.  All these sound very positive but those of us who are in the rural areas and who go there very often, whenever we go there we are presented these questions which are unable to answer. First, when inflation and growth rate of the economies at that level, definitely, the economy if it is growing at 5 per cent population at 2.5, inflation at negative, we would have expected more jobs to be made available but what do we have, people are being sent away and in thousands.  So, we have a bit of difficulty to explain to those people who we represent here as to what is actually happening.  Is it true that the economy is growing so well and yet people are loosing jobs, especially in the civil service and in the army?  Well, the rationalization might be need. We need it but then at the same time we should be having industries and other sectors of the economy that would be absorbing these people.  Most of them are going home, the packages are not ready, they will go home and they become a problem after the initial month and we faced with a problem as can be manifest in the increase now in robberies which, although I do not have empirical evidence, could be associated with the rate at which we are retrenching maybe, because they are lacking employment when fertile minds are ideal, they think of so many things and I would like to appeal to government to address that situation.  Because these questions are being posed to us.

We are also faced with a problem of a growing economy that we are told is growing and let me assure the Minister of Finance that some of us are not opposed to deficit financing.  We can borrow but what are we borrowing for?  If we are borrowing for consumption then we are going to face problems.  If however, we are borrowing for investments then there is something plus.  I want to look at the outstand, if you look at these figures and you look at the sections of our revenue outstand on page 4 of this big volume and go and look at on page - there is no page on this one at least - but one of the which gives the summary of approved Recurrent Expenditure for 1992/93 and then look at page 9 on Development; we have a problem.  The money is going where it should not go in terms of making the economy recover and these figures which people are giving us are getting us into more problems because we cannot get adequate explanation.  You can see, Mr. Chairman, we quarreled -some  of us quarreled and I think most of the Members of the House did raise points.  If you look at the Supplementary Estimates where the excessive expenditures were, they are within those sectors that do not produce anything and some of that money is borrowed money.  Now what shall we do to repay that money? Where shall we get the resources to do so?  So we need Mr. Chairman, to address ourselves to the issues of growth and development.  (Interruption)

MR. KASAJJA: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to appreciate the propositions being raised by hon. Kanyomozi as an economist, it is indeed true that under normal circumstances when an economy is registering negative inflation rate and the GDP ratio is rising, we should be experiencing a cripple trend of employment, that is, say, employment should be rising up.  But in a situation like this in Uganda, I foresee a situation of contradiction and some of these contradictions, I think, when we are contributing, we, as technical people in this field, we should be able also to explain them to our colleagues.  You see, the situation is like this in Uganda.  Uganda is faced with a situation of first of all, putting in a place what they call an infrastructure.  This infrastructure sometimes consumes more money and then when you look at the attempt the economy is trying to make of bringing what they call a living wage, you see, the living wage when you look at the rate at which it is rising, it is more than the rate at which the employment would be registered.  For example, if you look at the wage bill, this year, it has been 33 per cent but the inflation now actually, is negative.  So we should actually been having - negative should have been added to the positive of 5.3 then you subtract the 2.5, then what you get should be the positive rate of employment but, now the rate of a living wage erodes all this that the economy will be registering. Mr. Chairman, that is the technical situation, I think the economy is trying to experience.

MR. KANYOMOZI: Mr. Chairman, I do not know, I am a classical economist also and I know the real classical theory would refute that.  In actual fact, when you are doing infrastructure and you are doing public works, that is when the employment levels would be growing up.  I do not know where my Colleague read his economics but I am wondering whether the logic is shape because, immediately we an employment in all the other economy, the thing to cure employment was to go for public works! Now, Mr. Chairman -(Interruption) 

MR. MANZI: Point of information.  Thank you Mr. Chairman. After appreciating the argument hon. Kanyomozi is being laughed at, one; the rate of growth of an economy is a function of the base; if the base is a thousand and you add on a hundred, you have added on 10 per cent; if the base is 100,000 and you add on a 1,000, you have added on 0.1 per cent; meaning that the economy of Uganda, which was going down wards, if you make anything above the zero, it is a growth.  It does not therefore mean that automatically that growth is distributed through out the economy.  Two; when you are creating an infrastructural base, there is bound to be a time lag between the base and the time when employment picks up; therefore, you cannot at the same time create a base and simultaneously increase employment. Nevertheless, there is already employment in the system in the private sector, which was not there before the NRM started organising the economy. Therefore, whereas I appreciate his classical economy but, if we could go further and in the same direction approach, then you find that actually what he is saying is that in the long run we are going to have a higher employment level; but we cannot have it today.

Thirdly, development is taking place, because growth is a function of the addition of the assets of the nation.  Whereas development is the distribution of those assets to all the individuals.  You cannot distribute what you do not have, you must first grow and then distribute later and that is when you will take place to development. (Applause)

MR. KANYOMOZI: Mr. Chairman, I do not want to go in the details, but we have the data here, in the Background to the Budget. And growth rate of per capita in these documents do not seem to support what is being said.  But in these others it may, I am still of opinion, that when we have levels that we have been experiencing growth all throughout the period, seven years.  So, if that is the case, the impact would have been felt.  Let me go to another aspect, broadening the taxes.  I do appeal that we need to broaden the taxes.  We need to do it because we have been concentrating on different aspects of taxation and going to traditional sources of tax.  There is an element that worries me, concerning rates which are going to go up in the Budget.  The rates are okay if they go up for rentable structures.  But I imagine a situation, where a widow and we are getting many with all this scourge that we are having, widowers and widows who are occupying a house left over by his partner or spouse which does not generate any revenue and which is subjected to this taxation, the person will find himself or herself in a situation of where he is unable to pay the ground rates that are being charged.  We need to distinguish the debt, and tax those areas which are rentable and give a relief to those people who are occupying their own houses not for income because if we do not do, that is going to create a problem to those people who are actually occupying their houses, have no other source of income and are supposed to pay.  I am therefore, appealing to the Minister of Finance to re-examine that proposition and advise both Municipal and Urban areas to try and adjust at least to accommodate a situation of that nature.  

I want to go now to SGS. In the Budget there a proposal that every thing will be inspected if it is above $.2,500 and imports worth $.2,500 must be subjected to inspection.  Now that we are insisting on dressing like this, that is a cost of five suits.  I am looking at the problem, the problem is the cost of this exercise; that is one.  Two; who is getting this money SGS, on whom we have no control at all?  Three; what is the role of the department of Customs and Exercise?  Their duty is to inspect these things before they tax them.  Why do we have to pay a foreign company so much money even if it is one per cent to drain our resources on a work where we have already set up a Revenue Authority with a Department of Customs which should be doing this work?  The second one is  -(Interjection.)

CAPT. BABU (Kampala Central): Mr. Chairman, I just want to give information to the hon. Member on the Floor, that as a businessman in this term, the custom has been establishing the values of these commodities.  And we have complained bitterly that we do not agree with customs.  And the Ministry has now come out with and ’anti-dot’ to either use SGS. And others.  It is not only SGS.  If we have some local companies that can do the same job, I think the same companies should be given the license to do so.   I would like to inform the hon. Member that the businessmen in this term are not happy with the way customs values.  So, we would like an independent body.  It is the request from the business community.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KANYOMOZI: Mr. Chairman, I am just wondering.  When we established the Revenue Authority, we said that this was going to be an independent institution, which was going to operate outside the bureaucracy of the normal civil service.  And that was one of the reasons we set it as an independent body.  If we are not going to trust it, what are we going to trust? If we are setting up institutions that we cannot trust, then God bless us. Where are we going to end? Are we going to hire everybody to come here and supervise everything?  (Interruption)

MR. KAYONDE: Point of information. Mr. Chairman, the question of pre-shipment and related to Revenue Authority.  Presently, Revenue Authority does not have the capacity to carry out pre-shipment inspection and pre-shipment inspection is in the interest of the buyer, the importer.  It is in the interest of the country.  Those who have been associated with these matters will know how much money has been saved; and dumping rejected by SGS.  It is not correct, to say that this money which is being paid, it is one per cent of the value but it was worth the task; because SGS. Has got offices all over the world wherever one imports from.  One it is mentioned then reshipment inspection can be done to establish the quality and value.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Proceed, please.

MR. KINYOMOZI:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  While I do appreciate - we have institutions, we should use them to the maximum. Let us give these people confidence to work. That is the reason why we are establishing them. Let us give them the confidence to work and to deliver. Otherwise, they are not worth the money we are paying them.  Furthermore, there is a problem of delays.  You imagine five suits for every five suits imported you will have to get inspection certificate.  The problem of delays is going to be too much.  And I think the costs do not warrant it.  Let us use the department to establish these things.

I now want to turn to some taxation and smuggling.  I now want to turn to importation as smuggling in.  The Budget has proposed import duties, exercise duties, sales tax - some with modifications; some with additions. Mr. Chairman, some of our industries are complaining already; although we now have an explanation that has just been passed on to us. (Interruption)

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: Point of information.  I listed carefully to the hon. Kanyomozi’s contribution and I wonder whether we should take it seriously because in 1981, it was hon. Kanyomozi who insisted that SGS comes here to start inspection when he was Minister of Cooperatives.  I want to inform him that SGS is not synonymous with pre-shipping inspection.  There are many other companies that can do pre-shipment.

Secondly, Uganda Revenue Authority cannot be in each and every country from which we import to be able to take professional responsibility. (Interruption)

MR. WANENDEYA: Point of order.  Is it in order, Mr. Chairman for the hon. Deputy Minister of Finance to tell us that there are many, many companies in the world doing inspection? Yet for all I know, if he can mention more than four, I will be grateful because there are only two.  (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Proceed, please.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to disregard that with contempt to reserve.  I want to make sure that hon. Kanyomozi does not associated the efficiency of the Uganda Revenue Authority with ability to be able to determine quantity and value from Japan, from Hong Kong.  The Uganda Revenue Authority is an internal authority.  The pre-inspection was intended  - and hon. Babu has said, the importers in this country have said, instead of Revenue Authority using its own method to determine the value and quantity ship, they would prefer a professional intermediary.  And this is what government is responding to as a government that is sensitive to the needs of the people.  So, I do not see what things will drain us.

MR. KANYOMOZI: Mr. Chairman, I think my Colleague’s memory has fallen short because I was one of those people who actually in my own Ministry at the time, I did not allow inspection by SGS. Reason being that the thing they were inspecting, they would inspect and you ended up paying penalties at the end. It is a long time of course, I can excuse him for that. (Laughter) The hon. Member has forgotten.  But Mr. Chairman, let me touch the issue I was going to touch of import, exercise duty and the other related taxation.

I am definitely worried of agriculture and on inputs that are coming in for the manufacturing sectors. We have lifted the benefits that they had.  While I do not support over protection, but some of these industries are so young that they need to be helped to grow.  In agriculture already the inputs are so expensive; and since we have 90 per cent of our community in rural areas and on whom we depend; and since we do not have subsidy, I can a problem again.  Production is likely to be affected in agriculture because the agricultural inputs are going to be expensive.  Production is going to be affected in industry and already there is an outcry although for beer and cigarettes.  We need to look at these things more rationally.  I would support the idea proposed by hon. Rwabita, that we go more for sales maximisation which would also give us revenue maximisation for the Revenue Authority rather than trying to collect as much money as possible and killing the very industries which are going to absorbed the people we are retrenching at the moment.

We need to strike a happy medium, a mix, which allows growth in these industries, but in agriculture and in the traditional manufacturing industries.  While at the same time maximising our revenue collection from a sales maximisation.

We are already faced with smuggling. Others may argue you and say, smuggling is establishing a common market along our borders. Then we are also setting the people in the Revenue Authority to arrest everybody who is smuggling.  Now I do not know where to stand on these issues.  We need to either have a consistent policy and say, smuggling is part of developing a common market and supports it with all the consequences or we stop smuggling so as to protect our own industries locally.

Let me continue by saying that let us look for a taxation policy that allows us that happy medium that allows growth and revenue maximisation.

Let me touch on graduated tax.  Graduated tax the feeling has gone up.  We have been assured that the lower - the floor is not going to vote.  If we are assured that, I think it was mentioned in the course of the debate, then maybe that is well and good. But then if the aim, the analysis, was even based on those people who own cattle; we have been told that they will not be able to support it.  I do agree, the assessment is going to be difficult for people to analyze who should pay, what level.  And we need to be able to have an assurance from the Minister of Local Government and institutions under his administration that this thing will be fair and it will not bring complications.

I would like also to touch on the problem of revenue collection; and the thrust for revenue collection.  Indeed, we should collect as much revenue to support our own growth.  Indeed, we should collect as much revenue to support our own growth.  Indeed we need that money.  But the emphasis is on revenue collection.  The other side of the equation is not being looked at; where is this money going when we collect it?  Given the performance of PAC; given what the Economy Committee has been telling us; and given what we have looked at in the Supplementary Estimates; and given the expenditures which yesterday the hon. Maj. General looked at; where is the money going? I think this House and this nation should be as equally concerned, not about revenue collection alone, but the expenditure and the control of that expenditure, because that is where the problem is.  That is where the problem.  

As we stand, teachers, although they have now an increased salary, some of them have not received the salaries for February and March, some of them.  As we stand, people on road construction, with all due respect to the Local Government.  Some of the people have not received their own salaries from us. Even here, even us, little as we are, important as we are - even us getting our own pay is a bit difficult.  So where is this increased revenue collection going?  Where is it going? (Interruption)

MR. KAYONDE: Point of information. Those who have got the Minister’ Speech, on page 11, paragraph 30.  The government intends to spend 430 billion on Recurrent Expenditure.  This includes 89 billion of wages; 105 billion of interest payment.  So, much of this revenue collected is actually going in settlement of debts incurred by earlier and even current governments.

MR. KANYOMOZI: It is good that the hon. Member has qualified where the interest is going.  It is good, he has qualified it.  I have no quarrel with that.  Then I am saying, let us look at this - what are we borrowing for?  That is what I started with.  I said, we are anxious to borrow and we agree we should borrow but what are we borrowing for?  If we borrow for consumption, for the Recurrent Expenditure, for other things, then we have a problem; because soon or later we will be asked to pay back.  And when we want to pay back, it will be a problem. 

Mr. Chairman, -(Interjection)- let me continue because I am nearly time bad.  I am saying, let us look at how we are spending this money which we are collecting and which we are borrowing.  Let us see the direction of where we are putting our money.  Let us control those areas where we should control and let we reduce where we should reduce.  The President said in the last Budget, after the reading of the last Budget. He said those people who do not live within their means, those ministries that cannot live within their means, if it is necessary, they should close. The President said in the last Budget, after reading the last Budget, he said that those people who do not live within their means, those ministries that cannot live within their means if it is necessary they should close.  He even suggested that we should walk. I have not seen the example except him walking recently because of the -(Laughter)- that is the biggest example but then, I am saying, let us try and control -(Interjection)- I am trying to finish up.  I am trying to say if you examine very carefully the expenditure structure and profile in the estimates and see those items which are called “Other Expenditures” unexplained. We were told yesterday by the Minister of State that the explanation will come, we hope they will come.  The other aspect is technical assistance that is also so large.  

The other aspect is vehicles. There is no project in this country that does not have a fleet of vehicles.  These things do not produce.  Given what we have heard from the hon. Mrs. Bahemuka a few minutes ago some of these vehicles are not there or if they are there they not used to doing extension work as they are intended to.  I am saying that let us have some control.

There is also a problem that we are creating at the moment, is the dependence and borrowing syndrome.  We are told and if you again look in at the estimates, if you look at the estimates, the majority of our Development Expenditure is going to be dependent from outside.  Once you are dependent from outside and you look at the analysis of the outside the people outside when they decide not to let us have it then we have a problem.  We want to try and reduce that dependency, so as to be able to move -(Interjection)- by increasing production. 

Lastly, what are the solution to this; we need to look at our economy and change its structure (1) by changing the production pattern, (2) by encouraging those industries which can use our local raw materials (3) by import substitution where it is possible and where the market allows us to do and these ones we should go for religiously and start now.  Encourage those sectors first which will use our local raw materials, we protect those industries not over protection which can produce for our local markets, encourage the export industry on those few sectors where we can and then both those aspects will give us the base for our economic hope.

Before I sit down I would like to touch on individual taxation in respect of allowances.  Especially on housing, food, lunch allowance and other related aspects.  The allowances for food, for transport, for housing are going to be taxable.  Now, in taxing them one would say might be some of these people actually do not use those things for what they are intended to.  For example if you are having a lunch allowance and you decide not to eat lunch you would have the income to pay then the tax man comes but you will not take it.  You will have eaten the money, you have already consumed it and you are supposed to pay tax on it.  Okay, we are given a threshold of 30,000 per month.  Where in Kampala do you get lunch at Shs.1, 000?

HON. MEMBERS: In Kikuubo -(Laughter)

MR. KANYOMOZI: How many of us are going to go to Kikuubo?  First of all the transportation.  People are saying, “Kikuubo” Mr. Chairman, the transport to get to Kikuubo and be back in office on time is prohibitive -(Interjection)- Yes, and if you are going to walk you will not turn up in the office on time (Interruption)

MR. KANYOMOZI:  Mr. Chairman, hon. Members are raising a crucial issue here but I am thinking they are not being objective and serious.  You are getting Shs.1, 000 per day as a threshold under which you cannot pay tax, everything else is being taxed and it is a problem.  The other one is housing.  Most people have stayed on jobs because they were getting houses free or housing allowance to support them and it encouraged them to stay on believing that we have not reached what we call the living ways.  Now, what will happen? This is going to be subject also to taxation but we have not yet put in place and it is not proposed yet in the budget.  Now, we are going to encourage owner/occupier and put up a scheme so that people can build their own houses or the building industry can build their own houses so as to be able to enable these people to buy them on higher purchase. 

I would suggest that if we are going to do that believing we have not given a living wage yet, given that the scheme is not in place, let us also look at it because the majority of our people who are in the public sector especially in the civil service some of them do contribute the little they contribute although at times people question this because they have a fall back position of knowing that he is going to go in a bungalow in Kololo so he can afford to do it and yet the hon. Minister is here, he has already proposed to sell them even, who is going to buy them, Mr. Chairman?  Very few.  The Ministers are very few also; they cannot buy all these houses -(Interruption)

DR. ADRIKO:  Point of information. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I wish to clarify the situation regarding the Civil Service housing scheme.  About a week ago I made a Ministerial Statement here, I said that the housing scheme is designed for the Civil Servants but the implementation will be in phases.  In the first instance, because we have problems with the existing tenants who are public servants, in the first instance, the houses will be sold, the offer will be made to the sitting tenants. After the sitting tenants have failed to pay the houses in the time given thereafter the scheme will be for civil servants.  The emphasis is not on selling houses rather it is to create funds in order to develop more houses.  If we are able to sell the 5,000 units we have throughout the country at approximately Shs.20 million each, we would raise over 120 billion shillings that will serve as feed capital for the development of houses throughout the country but particularly for civil servants.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KANYOMOZI:  Mr. Chairman I am very please that a scheme is in place.  I hope it will be implemented before these civil servants are asked to move out.  And I also would like to suggest in fact which I have suggested to the Minister of Finance already, there is even idle money, most of the houses in Custodian Board although we have not debated the report were owned by the Housing Finance Company.  These houses were built on our money borrowed by the Asian community.  Some of us have suggested both in writing that since they are being given to them back they should at least repay us for what we put in.  That one, it would bring billions of shillings if they did pay back, since most of them are coming and repossessing and selling them and running away.  

There are other suggestions if the scheme as the Minister says, is in progress then I welcome that and I am sure the Civil Servants also welcomes it and I hope that none of then at the moment will be asked to raise money at 25 per cent interest or 30 per cent -(Interruption)

MRS. KALEMA: Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that the argument that the Indians should compensate or pay back the amount of cost Ugandans have put in the building does not hold water because one has to maintain the house by living in for twenty years or fifteen years, the house has to be maintained anyway so what are you compensating him for having been denied his property for so long. I think there is less argument. 

MR. KANYOMOZI:  The hon. Lady has missed the point completely.  The hon. Member did not hear what I said.  I said these people built these houses on borrowed money; on our own savings, and I am not even touching those who have improved on them; I did not. I think the hon. Lady, with all due respect, you did not listen very carefully before you made those conclusions.  I do forgive you for that. (Laughter)  I was mentioning that we can collect money from the mortgage which these people took on and we get funds to assist us to carry on with the hon. Minister’s scheme for housing the Civil Servants.

Where are the other sources of getting revenue?  I do believe there are other sources of revenue, there are people with properties, it is good that we starting to tax them, there are people with chunks of land, especially undeveloped land starting in urban areas where there is a lot of speculations.  Some of them have 350 acres and those are being given tax-free.  Let us start with those and tax them.  People who have land should be taxed so that they can free that land for production and at least they will give us that land to help us to develop.  Let us the property owners who are using them for a commercial purpose on rental, and that step is being taken but it can be improved on.  Let us tax also expensive tastes which most of us are.  Let us go for those.  I am sure we can raise revenue also out of them.  I am not freeing everybody from being taxed, I am saying let us look at areas where we can revenue maximise at the same time encouraging production and sales.

Lastly, and on dependence as I said, let us reduce the dependence syndrome, let us look at where the money we borrow is going; if it is going in production that is okay, let us change the structure of development and production so as to encourage the base to be bigger so that the taxes can be collected.  Mr. Chairman, with those few remarks I hope that the Minister will take not of these issues and give us a proper tax structure during the committee Stage.  I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now call upon the Mover to wind up, please.

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Mr. J.K. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Chairman, and hon. Members, I would like to thank hon. Members for the robust and candid way which they have discussed the budget proposals.  I shall, however, not attempt to answer every Member who has spoken; I should answer at this stage only generally.  What is the problem?  The problem we are facing is when the ability of a country to raise all the revenue we need for the country’s development.  Indeed to some extent not even for the country’s recurrent expenditure.  As I said, last year we had tagged to raise about 301 billion shillings for our recurrent expenditure and the total expenditure for that year was budgeted to be about Shs.700 billion.  That was less than 50 per cent of what we required and of course everybody knows, where are we to get the balance.  The balance we hope it would come from either borrowing or begging and neither of those options is very palatable to any serious Ugandan.  

Now, this is a national struggle. The question of raising revenue to fund its finance our development requirement, our recurrent requirement is a national struggle and since it is the national struggle, who is the enemy? it is everyone, the Government, Members of Parliament, agriculture, industry, it is a collective struggle and I am saying that we must continue to show the same seriousness regarding the issues of budgets as the Members have shown and I am very grateful to them.  There is something before I go any further of issues of inflation.  Some Members have argued that we are moving too fast to be simply, if we leave something there.  May be rising from 60 percent to about 30 per cent that would be nice. I am saying that would not be nice because when you deliberately maintain inflationary conditions you make industrial planning difficult, you allow for depreciation of the values of assets deliberately and you cannot have your wealth, the real wealth going up just because artificially to maintain a high monetary values.  I think the better thing is this, today like a lay in Kibuye market to spend Shs.1, 000 on one bunch of matooke, the next week she spends Shs.1, 000 on two bunches of matooke, the third week on Shs.1, 000 on three bunches of matooke.  That is real wealth not the other way round, not a Shs.1, 000 today for a bunch, Shs.2, 000 tomorrow for a bunch and Shs.3, 000 the next day for a much.  The real wealth is the reverse.  Incidentally, Sir, this I must also mention; when you talk about negative inflation you are including also agriculture and I thank the farmers must greatly here that they have been able to maintain the reduction of the inflation that we are in fact showing. (Applause) 

As you can see since 1986, Sir, agricultural output has increasing steadily between 7 and 8 per cent per annum and, therefore, if however we ignore agricultural produce we still have inflation as of now, I think of around 9.5 per cent.  Now, that is not a very comfortable rate of inflation because at that level it is going to be adverse to industrial development since if you want to maintain appropriate rate of interest in the bank you need around about 16 to 20 per cent rate of interest and this means for investment in manufacturing if you take about two or three or four years that rate will still be high.  This is why I am saying it is important for us to continue the efforts of reducing the rate of interest even for manufacturers.

Concerning corruption, I am greatly indebted to Members who talked about corruption.  I hope - hon. Nkalubo is not here - he said something about laying here on the Table the Report so that this House can debate issues of misuse of funds. I say, yes, it is necessary.  We have to get to the roots of optimal expenditures. If we tax every shilling spent must be shown to have been spent for good cause but I am ashamed to say time and again we hear about embezzlement of funds and you put the question, what happens? Oh! Well, something happened and then are these people prosecuted?  They try to prosecute them and then in the end they tell these judges or a magistrate, Your Honour or My Lord, the file is lost.  This is something which is, they make something which we really have to rise up and fight and I am glad to say that the hon. Attorney General will soon bring here a Bill and I think hon. Members have already seen it, a Bill concerning the issue of embezzlement and bail. That, as I said, I agree that we must get to the roots of corruption.

Now, the cry in the country, the cry I think has been high taxation.  This Budget’s high taxation, but where is the evidence for this?  Is it high when we raise the threshold of inflation of income tax from Shs.60, 000 not taxable to shs.140, 000 not taxable?  Is that an increase in taxation? Is it an increase in taxation if we lower the top income tax bracket to a sum, a rich one, allowable to tax from 40 per cent rate to 30 per cent?  Is that an increase?  It is not an increase.  This is true that when you lower the Sales Tax from a level of about 70 per cent generally, to 30 per cent overall on all commodities, is that increased taxation?  When we also lower corporation tax from 40 per cent or 35 per cent to 30 per cent, is this an increase?  You can go on and on, all these facts are found in the budget.  What then is the problem? We have also reduced stamp tax from 3 per cent to one per cent.  

Now, some hon. Members said about beer - I will come and talk about beer soon.  Now what I am going to advance is this that this budget, if properly read, if properly considered, the emphasis is on the reduction of taxes all round and therefore, the cry of taxation really is understandable.  But then of course, what is the alternative? What are the options to the Ministry of Finance? What are the options of hon. Members who are all responsible for passing the budget, their response for legislating for this country? For this budget for instance, let me show you one of the alternatives, if you want less taxation.  One let us probably reduce it to back as it was before from 140,000 to 600,000. Is that going to be welcome? I doubt it.  Some people were saying, why tax beer? Okay, should we tax sugar and salt instead of beer, on spirits and cigarettes?  

These are the problems the Ministry of Finance everyday compiles.  What can we do? What is the option? The options Sir are not very many and so I am begging ho. Members to take this into account that we have sleepless nights.  But we do not want tax for its own sake but because we do not have much chance for options.  Now against that, why I talk about taxation although as I say it is not justified by the budge, we talk about it.  What are the demands? You have only been able to budget for about 37 per cent increase in civil servants’ pay.  Is that enough? Even these hon. Members apart from those who are directors in companies, they feel the pinch when their allowances do not come in time. Where can we get the money? How about the hospitals? How about the schools? How much does it cost to tarmac one kilometre of a road?  These are the problems.  Hon. Kanyomozi has been saying that our development budget is financed from abroad.  He has been talking about dependence.  Of course, dependence is wrong, it is bad.  What can we do in the circumstance? Are we going to wait, not to borrow at all until our GDP grows at such a way that we can start producing on such development? These are the options, very hard options.  so I think really the answer is, let everybody go into this, with a mind to find an answer, a mind to find options which are practicable and which are viable.  

There is taxation on cigarettes, taxation on beer, taxation on spirits, and taxation on soft drinks. Now, Sir, what is our tax base really? I am asking the question.  What else can we tax instead of things that are semi-luxury?  I have just asked a question.  Should we go into taxing tea or salt on sugar and second hand clothes and Nytil instead of taxing cigarettes?  My answer is quite clear Sir.  I think the answer is, we should tax those things.  I do not think really I want to be - because I know the hon. Member is a director in Nile Breweries and I know this.  But I am saying if we are to choose between taxing salt and taxing beer, I think most citizens of this country will choose taxing beer before we tax salt. (Applause)  But then the question is just saying over-taxation.  

An argument has been put forward that why do we not go in for economies of scale? Why do we not go in for expanded sales?  I agree in theory; last year, the rates passed by this august House were not the rates which have been applied in December last year because he knows -(Interruptions)- they came, I used my legal powers Sir, to reduce the rates in favour of the beer companies and I was told at that time, Mr. Minister, we shall give you a performance bond, the money you want but just reduce the rates.  Through our sales, we shall give you the money.  As it is, it is a question of fact that was not to be.  They did well somewhat but not the money I wanted for the Budget.  

So, the question of reducing, I have done this before.  We are not inflexible, and we are not people without hearts.  But I am saying, if we want to tax somehow, we should know what to tax and what not to tax. Now, what have you done?  With regard to this, the citizens cry that the consumption has gone down.  It is almost just a month; even the budget has not been settled, and all the people are saying the sales have gone down.  Consumption - consumers’ response changes in income. It is too early to say it is going to be. So I am saying that I am watching just like a doctor watches a patient if it is necessary, maybe after too months to see if there is a genuine reason, then I can use my legal powers to do something about the rates but as of now, I am giving a history of last year.  I will urge hon. Members to say, let us wait and see the facts. 

Another thing, I have talked about increases in prices but I have said no one so far here or outside has urged from the income point of view but if consumers have been given more money by way of remission of taxes, how are they going to behave with that money? Of course we can argue that we all be saved.  I wonder!  I do not think that we be all saved until the chances are to be used.  They give him time to adjust their budget so that he can respond properly.  

Now, another thing, Sir, some people are saying, why beer comes in from Kenya?  I agree it does.  It is just like saying there are thieves in Kalongo.  Therefore, these are thieves everybody should run away and pass laws in such a way that you leave them to - the cry should be that we fight smuggling.  This should be the cry not to come and say, you know, because Kenyans - we cannot in this country budget and base our policies on foreign country.  How can we?  We must fight smuggling.  I am afraid to say that a number of people know who the smugglers are but they do not want to tell us about it and that is a pity!  I have heard the argument that Kenya is much better off in terms of tax rates.  Let me give you some indications.  For instance, corporate tax, rate; Uganda, this budget, 30 per cent, Kenya 35 per cent. Import tax rate; Uganda 0 - 30 per cent; four bands. Kenya 0 - 40 per cent; seven bands. VAT - value added tax which we call here sales tax; value added tax, every stage of production, we charge a tax, here we do not.  But you see, we have got sales tax 0 - 30 per cent.  Now listen to this, exercise tax; now cigarettes our budget proposal is 100 per cent exercise tax, Kenya, 120 - 140 per cent.  

I am not saying we should copy Kenya.  I am saying that if you are looking at the comparative tax rates, we are not too badly off. We compare well. The only problem is I think the lack of the ethic of paying taxes and much more patriotism.  Why do I say this? Someone, a trader, and industrialist would like to buy smuggled goods and yet the police services he uses or she uses are Ugandan not Kenyan and the roads they use to transport their riches are Ugandan and the hospitals in most cases, not Kenya where they go.  They go to Tororo Hospital.  How can we maintain the development in this country when we ourselves are prepared and be so patriotic? 

So, this budget is not a budget to be heard; the emphasis is on reduction of taxes except in those three years because we cannot tax the other areas, we say okay, in our circumstances, what can we do? Let us try.  Now, consumers - cigarettes, let us wait and see.  As I said, I promise that if there are facts to show that industries have been destroyed, I have got legal powers like I did last year but you should prove it; because the facts are that between 1991-1993, the total effective tax on these goods; these commodities especially beer and cigarettes has been going down from 172 per cent to about 160 now but then the output of these factories has not been the fact.  The question is, if production, if output is so responsive, it changes in prices, why has it been the case that taxes have been going down in 1991 and the production has been going down? So, I am saying that responses of taxes in production are not so easy to see.  There are many factors but let us see the consumers’ response and then we shall see what should be done. 

Now there is the question of agriculture, taxation of agricultural inputs and 10 per cent on manufacturing.  At page 32 of my budget speech, you find paragraph 99; ‘a customs import duty will be imposed on agricultural inputs including agricultural machinery and tools but excluding - mark, but excluding fertilizers, seeds’.  Most ordinary people in this country use fertilisers, pesticides, and seeds, and not so much agricultural machinery.  These are not imported; we have got these factories here.  We can buy them here. What I am saying is this, that we really not over tax agriculture as such because it catered for those areas which are sensitive to effective production.  Why do we impose this tax?  We want to encourage local production local import substitution because if we are to depend on imports every time, what if we cannot cater our merchandise through maybe Kenya?  God forbid! We cannot depend on an economy that depends on imports.  Incidentally on T.V. last night a member or director of MULCO Company in Jinja said that we are stopping MULCO from exporting.  We do not know why he said that because there is no tax on exports and even if MULCO is going to pay the 10 percent on imports. Because for the same reason, he cannot go on importing from China, from wherever, from Kenya.  Okay, they are our neighbours, they are our cousins.  So those are the reasons why we impose a small tax there.  

Now graduated tax.  Its assessment must go on.  If for instance, someone, Nakibule or Kintu-Musoke, not this hon. Member if last year for instance, he or she was charged graduated tax 6,000/- because he had a good crop of some maize, some mangoes, some beans and this year there is a drought, he will not be asked to pay 6,000/- because the assessment must be annual; tax must depend on the value of the annual output.  So, we are only saying 80,000/= for the top brass - because the law as it was, it was saying although you are rich - and have a friend of mine who about five years ago told me he had 6,000 head of cattle.  But for him still he would pay 40,000/= a year.  These are the people we are talking about.  Let us help them to help the country more by paying 80,000/= instead.  

Last time I was disappointed, the Press, not even Radio Uganda or Television at the Budget Speech. This concerns tax holidays for additional investment.  I made a statement when I made this budget speech that the tax holidays given to additional investment under the Investment Code for purposes of budget would be abolished.  And I said, Sir, and I want to repeat it again. Why did we do this? Because we had failed at that time to solve a technical problem that is, if an ongoing concern pushed up an additional plan, how are we going to identify profits which accrue to the concerns for purposes of corporation tax?  That was our problem; we have had some problems before, some companies not assisting us, tending to claim all the profits attributing it to the new investment and therefore, evade the tax due.  But after reading the budget, we want to consider it again and we came to a solution. Namely that the new investment additional profits and cost and operations should be costed and account be separate for purposes of taxation.  Where this is not possible however, then you have to pay the corporation tax in the ratio of the old to the new investment.  This I think is an important point I wanted to make.  

And almost lastly, Sir, something about pre-shipment inspection.  Something has been said about and I do not have much to add. We want ordinary people, importers to be sure that they are not being overcharged by the Uganda Revenue Authority maybe through the inability by the Uganda Revenue Authority to assess collection.  If we want some professional expertise to come in and say this is the correct valuation and therefore, this is why we wanted to have the inspection valuation and apart from that, a point has been made quite correctly, Sir that this sort of inspection helps against dumping.  

As I said, I wanted to reply generally, to comment on the general principles of the budget proposals to hon. Members and to urge them to approve them because we do not have much alternative.  In the sense that the only alternative would be to operate at a smaller scale of resources of services and this is not really good enough. I think we should try and push forward and tax as much as we can and of course if we have to borrow about a week from now Sir, I am going to seek from a conference; donors conference begging for money for CA Elections for instance.  It is terrible. Mr. Chairman, I beg to move. (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN:  With that we have come to the end of today’s Session.  We adjourn until Tuesday next week at 2.30 p.m.

ADJOURNMENT

(The Council rose at 5.30 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 3rd August, 1993 at 2.30 p.m.)









 


