Wednesday 25th July, 2001

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called to order
 
ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The Oaths were administered to:

Brig. Moses Ali
Mr. Bidandi Ssali Jaberi
Mrs. Mutagamba Mary
Dr. Kamugisha Alex
Mr. Kasenene Peter
Dr. Ruhakana Rugunda
Mr. Ssendaula Gerald

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, on your behalf, I want to express a message of congratulations to the Members of the new Cabinet. I expect maximum co-operation from both the Front Bench and the backbenchers.  Congratulations and best wishes!

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  On a very humble note, I would like to be advised whether this is the appropriate time to move an emergency motion as I had warned.


THE SPEAKER: No! Can we proceed with the Order Paper?  There is a Personal Statement to be made and then we shall come to any other business.

PERSONAL STATEMENT

THE 2ND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Brig. Moses Ali): Mr. Speaker, with your permission, I take this opportunity to pass a vote of “thanks” to His Excellency the President of Uganda and the entire government for creating an enabling atmosphere that allowed the successfully concluded Parliamentary election. On the same note, I thank the Electoral Commission for conducting elections satisfactorily in spite of the isolated discrepancies, which have been inevitable in all growing democracies. My sincere appreciation is extended to the entire electorate with particular emphasis to the electorate of Adjumani District for the wise choices they made - (Applause).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it is not usual to hear clapping in the House.   You may use your feet to appreciate the point made.  Actually, strangers are advised to desist from doing anything other than hearing what is proceeding.

BRIG. MOSES ALI: As a the former Chairman of the National Security Committee, I cannot fail to thank the Police and other security organs for keeping law and order that enabled us to have peaceful polls country-wide.

Let me also use this opportune moment to offer you and your deputy my belated but sincere appreciation on your election to the high offices of Speaker and Deputy Speaker respectively.
Despite of my absence from the House during your election, I hold you in high regard and you have my blessings.  In a likely manner, I congratulate all the Members of Parliament who were re-elected to this 7th Parliament and I warmly congratulate and welcome the new entrants.  I would like to convey my regrets to those Colleagues who were with me in 6th Parliament but were not able to make it.  Of course, I also congratulate all those who have been given ministerial posts.

However on a serious note, I wish to register my discontent with the 6th Parliament for our persistent lack of quorum, which hampered the progress of business in the House.  I strongly believe the 6th Parliament would have performed better than it actually did. To be fair to the Electoral Commission, the Legislature and the Executive, they all bear some responsibility for the problems the Commission faced as the enactment of some required laws were unnecessarily delayed. 

For example, the Presidential Elections Act was enacted on 12th December 2000 when the elections were to be held on 12th March 2001. Some of the requirements of this Act such as the gazetting of the polling stations 14 days before the nomination of candidates made it difficult for the Commission to make appropriate arrangements for the voters’ register up-date, an exercise which inevitably had to be conducted after the nomination of the candidates. Then there was the Parliamentary Elections Act to govern the Parliamentary elections which, according to the Constitution, were to be held by 2nd July 2001, giving the Commission about 80 days in which to organise the elections. 

As a matter of fact, there are many examples, which can be given. In that regard my humble plea is that the 7th Parliament should learn from the mistakes of the 6th Parliament, and improve on its performance by casting aside the contagious virus of lack of quorum.

You must all respect the wishes of the electorate. They sent us here to legislate but not to waste time and public resources. Let us all work together to consolidate the achievements that were collectively ushered in by the Movement Government.  

I believe the House is very much aware that I have been sworn in belatedly because I have been indisposed. In that respect, allow me to use this occasion to express my sincere gratitude to the Government, with particular emphasis to the Ministry of Health under the able leadership of my Colleague, hon. Dr. Crispus Kiyonga, and his medical team for the attention and care they accorded me wholeheartedly. In addition, my sincere thanks go to the staff and crew of United Airlines who flew me promptly and comfortably from Adjumani to Entebbe International Airport.  Special thanks are due to hon. Nusura Tiperu who greatly cared for me airborne up to Mulago hospital.  

At this juncture, I wish to thank all the Members of Parliament for praying for my speedy recovery. On the same note, I thank all my Colleagues, relatives, friends, well-wishers and all the members of my family for the material, moral and spiritual support they gave me in this time of need. 

Last but not least, my thanks are due to the Almighty Allah whose programme I could not change, but permitted me to be taken ill after the elections and not during the election period. (Laughter) In any case, I pray that we all strive to lead our beloved Uganda to further prosperity. For God and my Country, thank you Mr. Speaker.

CONSTITUTION OF SESSIONAL AND STANDING COMMITTEES OF PARLIAMENT

MR.LUKYAMUZI KEN (Lubaga South, Kampala): Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. With reference to rule 42(1) of our Rules of Procedure - I would like to read it; “Any Member may move the adjournment of the House for the purpose of discussing a definite matter of urgent public importance”. I wish to report that I have a matter of public importance necessitating the movement of a motion.

THE SPEAKER: But have you read the entire rule to make people understand how this operates?

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Yes, Mr. Speaker, I have.

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to proceed with (a) and (b)?
MR.LUKYAMUZI: (a) “Not less than five other Members rise in their places in support”, and I have the five Members.

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to read (b) and 3(a) and (b)?

MR.LUKYAMUZI: “The Speaker rules that the matter is a definite matter of urgent public importance; the Speaker shall appoint a time on the same day when the motion may be moved.”

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to read 3(a) and (b)?

MR.LUKYAMUZI: “In determining whether a matter should have urgent consideration, the Speaker shall have regard to the extent to which it concerns the administrative responsibilities of the Government or could come within the scope of the ministerial action”

THE SPEAEKR: Have you looked at the Order Paper?

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Yes Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Do you see Item six?

MR.LUKYAMUZI: With due respect to you Mr. Speaker, I have.  But the matter that I am raising is quite different from item six.

THE SPEAKER: I am saying so because there is a motion on notice which was put on the Order Paper and my understanding is that if this motion is dealt with, a solution will be found to what you want to present under rule 42. In the circumstances, let us proceed as per the Order Paper. But you may have to explain first. 

Hon. Members, the next item is constituting the Sessional Committees that will enable Parliament to function. Now we have got the Cabinet but we are lacking the Sessional Committees that should start operating, say, on the Budget. According to our rules, the maximum number of each of these Sessional Committee is 25; and you remember last time when we were here, we agreed that we should go by first come first served basis and we should draw a line when we reach the number of 25. But from a copy of the lists that I see here, there are committees, which have over 25 Members.  

I think I would advise those who are below the line to immediately think of the Sessional Committees where they should go because I have seen some Sessional Committees which are lacking the required numbers and according to our rules each Member must be a Member of a Sessional Committee. But since you decided that it should be on first come first served basis, I have no alternative other than asking those Members who are below the line to immediately identify the committees where they should go. Now, I think we start dealing with constituting of the committees. 

MR. APUUN: Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I stand here to be clarified on the list. You have just said that the number of hon. Members who have opted to be on certain committees is more than the accepted number. Now, if the Members who are above the line are from one region and then the rest –(Interjections)- yes, I am trying to put it across like that! If they are from one region, be it western region, eastern or northern region, what would be the rate for the- (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think what really determines where you go is the interest that you have in a subject being dealt with by that particular committee. It has nothing really to do with the region where you come from. When we disposed of this matter, I think Members must have had this in their mind in determining the basis of first come, first served.  But, in any case, if you are not a Member of a committee because you are below the line, you are free to go and participate in the business of that committee although you may not vote in that committee. So if you have an interest, you go to any committee. Any committee is open for any Member but we have to have the official Membership determined by the House. I hope it is clear hon. Member.

THE COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AND FOREIGN AFFAIRS

1.	Hon. Ogwel Sammy
2.	Hon. Alintuma Nsambu
3.	Hon. Tiperu Nusura
4.	Hon. Ekanya Geofrey
5.	Hon. Tuma Ruth
6.	Hon. Musumba Salaamu
7.	Hon. Banzaana Kabwegyere
8.	Hon. Chebrot Steven
9.	Hon. Mabikke Michael
10.	Hon. Namayanja Rose
11.	Hon. Okot Alex
12.	Hon. Awori Aggrey
13.	Hon. Sebalu Michael
14.	Hon. Bintu Jalia
15.	Hon. Amongi Betty
16.	Hon. Buturo Nsaba
17.	Hon. Okupa 
18.	Hon. Kazoora John
19.	Hon. Zziwa Margaret
20.	Hon. Okumu Reagan
21.	Hon. Opange Louis
22.	Hon. Sitenda Sebalu
23.	Hon. Byanyima Winnie
24.	Hon. Ogwal Cecilia 
25.	Hon. Eresu John. 

THE SPEAKER: Now these are the Members who want to be on this particular Sessional Committee. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: So these will form the committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs; and immediately we end this exercise, maybe when we adjourn, the Members will go to the Northern wing in their particular committee room to decide on who should be the chairperson and deputy chairperson. So, the hon. Member who was 26th should try to find another committee where he should go.

THE COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES

1.	Hon. Katuramu Hood 
2.	Hon. Tibarimbasa Avitus
3.	Hon. AAnimu Angupale
4.	Hon. Masiko Winfred
5.	Hon. Mehangye Idah
6.	Hon. Dhugira Opot
7.	Hon. Baba Diri Margaret
8.	Hon. Kabakumba Masiko
9.	Hon. Kasule Lumumba
10.	Hon. Kubeketerya James
11.	Hon. Alisemera Babiha
12.	Hon. Lyomoki Sam
13.	Hon. Bulamu Johny
14.	Hon. Malinga Johnson
15.	Hon. Yeri Ofwono
16.	Hon. Magoola Zirabamuzale
17.	Hon. Tumwesigye Elioda
18.	Hon. Lwanga Herbert
19.	Hon. Akwero Odwong Jane
20.	Hon. Gaboi Kibaale
21.	Hon. Hyuha Dorothy
22.	Hon. Kidega Daniel
23.	Hon. Nvumetta Kavuma
24.	Hon. Kassiano Wadiri  
25.	Hon. Basariza Henry.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: So these are the Members of that particular committee. Maybe the Clerk should read the names of those who were not able to make it. 

Those who had registered for the Social Services Commitee and could not make it were:

Hon. Byatike Matovu
Hon. Kagaba Hariet
Hon. Kaddubabbi Lubega 
Hon. Bwerere Kasole.

THE SPEAKER: How about Martin Wandera? Is he not there? Okay.

THE COMMITTEE ON WORKS, TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATION 

1.	Hon. Ark Lodou
2.	Hon. Arumadri John
3.	Hon. Byamukama Nulu
4.	Hon. Kizige Moses
5.	Hon. Twarebireho Tungwako
6.	Hon. Mukabera Annette
7.	Hon. Owori Amooti Otada
8.	Hon. Ssebagala Latif
9.	Hon. Mulengani Benard
10.	Hon. Kiwagama William
11.	Hon. Wambuzi Gagawala
12.	Hon. Bamwanga Steven
13.	Hon. Bilimumaso Mulindwa
14.	Hon. Arapkissa Yekko
15.	Hon. Amuriat Oboi Patrick
16.	Hon. Byanyima Nathan
17.	Hon. Lukanga Ndawula
18.	Hon. Okulo Epak
19.	Hon. Byabagambi John
20.	Hon. Musisi Patrick 
21.	Hon. Maate Rogers
22.	Hon. Lubyayi Kisiki
23.	Hon. Wakikona David
24.	Hon. Gole Davis
25.	Hon. Ogola Akisoferi

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to the Membership of this particular committee.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: They have been confirmed as Members of that committee.

THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES

1.	Hon. Bikwasizehi Deusdedit
2.	Hon. Mukama Francis
3.	Hon. Isanga Lukia
4.	Hon. Badda Fred
5.	Hon. Sebuliba Mutumba
6.	Hon. Balemezi Lydia
7.	Hon. Ogenga Morris
8.	Hon. Odit John
9.	Hon. Anag-Odur
10.	Hon. Nuwagaba Herbert
11.	Hon. Kasirivu Atwooki
12.	Hon. Munyira Rose
13.	Hon. Rainer Kafire
14.	Hon. Mbalibulha Christopher
15.	Hon. Sinabulya Sylvia
16.	Hon. Namuyangu Jenipher
17.	Hon. Esele John
18.	Hon. Woneka Oliver
19.	Hon. Ssempangi Kefa
20.	Hon. Mwaka Victoria
21.	Hon. Lokeris Aparite
22.	Hon. Kityo Mutebi
23.	Hon. Pajobo Joram
24.	Hon. Nkuuhe Johnson
25.	Hon. Kapkwomu Ndiwa (Dr.)

(Question put and agreed to)

COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT

1.	Hon. Aachilla Rex
2.	Hon. Kakooza James
3.	Hon. Okuti Nasur
4.	Hon. Lubowa Moses
5.	Hon. Mindra Joy
6.	Hon. Eriyo Jessica
7.	Hon. Nabwiso Wilberforce
8.	Hon. Rwakimari Beatrice
9.	Hon. Mukasa Anthony
10.	Hon. Omodi Okot
11.	Hon. Byaruhanga Charles
12.	Hon. Ndeezi Alex
13.	Hon. Byenkya Beatrice
14.	Hon. Wagonda Muguli
15.	Hon. Bogere Fred
16.	Hon. Yiga Anthony
17.	Hon. Komuhangi Margaret
18.	Hon. Alaso Alice
19.	Hon. Orech Martin
20.	Hon. Kayongo Tom
21.	Hon. Wananzofu Simon
22.	Hon. Besisira Ignatius
23.	Hon. Madada Sulaiman
24.	Hon. Okot Santa

THE SPEAKER: Before I put the question, may I ask any of the Members who were not able to make it to the other Committees already constituted, if any wants to join this particular Committee which requires one other Member?  (Mr. Kasole rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kasole Bwerere is listed on this Committee.  I now put the question?

(Question put and agreed to)

DR. CHEBROT: Mr. Speaker, we are unable to follow the proceedings of this House because a number of Members who are sitting in the lobby are making too much noise. Would you prevail on the Members to keep quiet?  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Members in the lobby, you are advised not to make noise that disturbs our proceedings.   Let a Member who is near there advise them not to.

COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

1.	Hon. Omach Fred
2.	Hon. Nsubuga William
3.	Hon. Mwandha James
4.	Hon. Tubbo Christine
5.	Hon. Basajjabalaba Nassar
6.	Hon. Kamuntu Ephraim
7.	Hon. Sabiiti Jack
8.	Hon, Rwamirama Bright
9.	Hon. Koluo Charles
10.	Hon. Kalule Ssengo
11.	Hon. Nansubuga Sarah
12.	Hon. Nandala Mafabi
13.	Hon. Mukula Richard
14.	Hon. Seninde Rosemary
15.	Hon. Ruzindana Augustine
16.	Hon. Bakkabulindi Charles
17.	Hon. Kiraso Beatrice
18.	Hon. Guma Gumisiriza
19.	Hon. Kithende K.
20.	Hon. Kiwanda Godfrey

THE SPEAKER: Is there any Member who has not made it to the other Committee?

Hon. Mathias Kasamba
Hon. Kawanga John
Hon. Kaddunabbi Lubega Ibrahim

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to include those three Members: hon. Mathias Kasamba, hon. John Kawanga and hon. Kaddunabbi Lubega.

(Question put and agreed to)

COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS

1.	Hon. Banyenzaki Henry
2.	Hon. Olega Ashraf
3.	Hon. Kasigwa Harry
4.	Hon. Imumet Isaiah
5.	Hon. Tumwine Elly (Maj. Gen.)
6.	Hon. Katongole Badru
7.	Hon. Kayanja Elly
8.	Hon. Tinyefuza David (Maj. Gen.)
9.	Hon. Etonu Benedict
10.	Hon. Kabareebe Muzoora
11.	Hon. Kule Muranga
12.	Hon. Onzima Alex
13.	Hon. Pataki Amasi
14.	Hon. Kayizzi Asanasio
15.	Hon. Apuun Patrick
16.	Hon. Akandwanaho Caleb (Maj. Gen.)
17.	Hon. Odongo Jeje (Maj. Gen.)
18.	Hon. Katirima M. (Lt. Col.)
19.	Hon. Mayende Simon
20.	Hon. Mumia Micheal

(Question put and agreed to)

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

1.	Hon. Rukundo Serapio
2.	Hon. D’Ujanga Simon
3.	Hon. Bagalana Tom
4.	Hon. Ochieng Peter
5.	Hon. Lukyamuzi Ken
6.	Hon. Mwondha Patrick
7.	Hon. Bigirwa Bernadette
8.	Hon. Biira Bwambale
9.	Hon. Bakaluba Mukasa
10.	Hon. Epetait Francis
11.	Hon. Kiwalabye Musoke
12.	Hon. Dombo Emmanuel
13.	Hon. Chelangat Kulany
14.	Hon. Onek Hilary
15.	Hon. Ojok B’leo
16.	Hon. Ndawula Kaweesi
17.	Hon. Nsubuga Nsambu
18.	Hon. Kawoya Anifa
19.	Hon. Nantume Janet
20.	Hon. Lule Mawiya

(Question put and agreed to)

COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY

1.	Hon. Nabeta Igime
2.	Hon. Ntacyotugira Philip
3.	Hon. Mbabazi Kabushenga
4.	Hon. Mugambe Joseph
5.	Hon. Mugerwa Sauda
6.	Hon. Anyolo Samuel
7.	Hon. Angiro Gutomoi
8.	Hon. Olum Zachary
9.	Hon. Ateng Otim
10.	Hon. Nacha Lorika
11.	Hon. Nyeko Ocula
12.	Hon. Nyendwoha Mutiti
13.	Hon. Tumukunde Henry (Brig.)
14.	Hon. Ssentongo Nabulya
15.	Hon. Mutuluza Peter
16.	Hon. Wandera Martin
17.	Hon. Sekitoleko Juliet
18.	Hon. Matovu David
19.	Hon. Sekikubo Theodore

DR. MALLINGA: Mr. Speaker, I would like to transfer from Agriculture to that Committee.

THE SPEAKER: You had been confirmed in Agriculture, now you want to transfer to this Committee? It is possible. So, hon. Mallinga is listed for Tourism, Trade and Industry.
DR. MALLINGA: Thank you.

MR. MATOVU D: Mr. Speaker, for the avoidance of doubt I would request that they add “Captain” before Matovu David.

MS. KAGABA: I would request to be attached on the Committee of Agriculture. I was floating but now that there is a vacant post I would like to take it up.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: The problem is that there are people who had listed for Agriculture but were left out. So in all fairness, these are the first people to be registered. 

MS. KAGABA: Mr. Speaker, I would request that I be included on the Committee of Trade and Tourism.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you are included. So, can you read the additional names on the committee of Trade and Tourism?

Hon. Malinga Stephen.
Hon. Kagaba Harriet

(Question put and agreed to)

COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to advise you that most of the laws handled by this particular Committee need lawyers but if you are not a lawyer, you may go there to acquire the experience. Thirteen is not a good number; it is almost half but anyway, read out the names.

1.	Hon. Kantutu Abdu
2.	Hon. Odongo Otto
3.	Hon. Mwesigye  Adolf 
4.	Hon. Nshimye Augustine
5.	Hon. Atubo Omara
6.	Hon. Ruhindi Fred
7.	Hon. Mao Nobert
8.	Hon. Mwesigye Hope
9.	Hon. Wacha Ben
10.	Hon. Byamukama Dora
11.	Hon. Kinobe William
12.	Hon. Mujuzi Pius
13.	Hon. Oulanya Jacob

THE SPEAKER: Anybody who would wish to volunteer on this Committee? Okay, I now put the question on these thirteen names to constitute the Committee.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: Now, this completes the Sessional Committees. Can we get to know the venue?

Committee on Agriculture: Room 503A, 5th Floor, North Wing
Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs: Room 201, Second Floor, North Wing.
Works, Housing and Communications: Room 013, Ground Floor, North wing.
Defence and Internal Affairs: Room 403, Fourth Floor, North Wing.
Social Services: Room 102B, First Floor, North Wing.
Tourism, Trade and Industry: Room 103, First Floor, North wing.
Legal and Parliamentary: Rooms 521 and 522 Fifth floor North wing
Public Service and Local Government: Room 108, Ground Floor North wing.
Natural Resources: Room 402B, Fourth Floor, North wing.
Finance, Planning and Economic Development: Room 220, Second Floor North wing.

THE SPEAKER: Now there is another type of Committees that is the Standing Committees. We cannot do that today because after getting the list of Members who want to be on these Committee, we have to have at least some hours to consider. And we shall do this by a secret ballot tomorrow. You will find the lists in your pigeonholes so that you consider your preferences, and then we shall vote by secret ballot tomorrow.  

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING THE GOVERNMENT TO RESERVE AT LEAST 51 PERCENT OF UGANDA COMMERCIAL BANK (UCB) SHARES FOR THE UGANDAN PUBLIC BY FLOATING THEM ON THE LOCAL STOCK EXCHANGE

MR. AGGREY AWORI(Samia-Bugwe North, Busia): Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate this opportunity of moving this motion at this juncture as per previous arrangement. But following the discussion between the Members of the Cabinet and the Legislature, you requested that this motion be postponed to a later date until the new Members of the Cabinet have understood the contents. I do consent that we postpone it to a later date. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can we get a statement from the Minister of Finance.

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr. Ssendawula): Mr. Speaker, as you may recall, in the company of the Prime Minister who is the Leader of Government business in Parliament, and together with my colleagues who have just been appointed and were only sworn in last night, we did explain to you that most of the Cabinet Members are relatively new and they would like to be properly informed so that we have and take collective responsibility in as far as debating this motion is concerned. As already mentioned by hon. Aggrey Awori, in the meeting we also agreed that I would collaborate with the Central Bank over the matters that relate to the institution we are talking about. 

I would like to inform the hon. Members that in principle, we appreciate the concern being expressed, and would like to have it properly and thoroughly -(Interruption)

DR. CHEBROT: Mr. Speaker, since the Mover of the motion has withdrawn it or stood it over, is it in order for the Minister of Finance to go ahead and talk as if the motion is still on the Floor?

THE SPEAKER: He is not talking on the substance of the motion, but many Members here are interested in this particular motion. As you recall, the hon. Member for Lubaga South wanted to move a similar motion and I drew his attention to Item No.6 on the Order Paper. 

Whereas hon. Aggrey Awori is aware of the circumstances in the undertaking because this was made in my office, I wanted the Minister to be on record as to the undertaking. What we are trying to find out from the Minister is whether we shelved this motion to pre-empt the intention of the motion. So the Minister can conclude, and we see how to proceed.

MR.SSENDAULA: Mr. Speaker, our intention is that within three weeks we will have concluded all our deliberations at Cabinet level, and be in a position to come to Parliament to debate the motion or an amended motion whatever the case will be at that material time. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The point is, if it is postponed, you do not debate this motion. What guarantee is there that it will not be pre-empted within the three weeks? That is what I want to hear from you.  

MR.SSENDAULA: Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned in my statement, members of Cabinet share the sentiments and concerns that are being expressed by Members of Parliament, and certainly Cabinet cannot go out to pre-empt the motion for the sake of it. All we are trying to do is to ascertain that before we come to debate, we have investigated, we have carried out proper research and we are in a position to inform you exactly how we intend to handle the institution concerned. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: So, may I take it that what you are saying -(Interruption)

MR.SSENDAULA: Meanwhile there is no sale.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. That is the point.

MRS.ZZIWA MARGARET (Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Since I had appended my signature to second the motion which hon. Aggrey Awori has postponed, I want to sound my concern after hearing what the hon. Minister of Finance has said. Knowing very well that in the 6th Parliament we had a very long struggle and debate over this issue; knowing that he has said he is collaborating with the Central Bank; and knowing very well that there are stringent conditions from some of our development partners, if not donors; I want to plead with him not to arm-twist us, and almost force us do what the whole House feels should be otherwise. 

I do not want to sound a caution, but I want to plead with him that in the event that he does not keep the guarantee put to this House, Section 118 of the Constitution will be applied. Thank you.

MR.AWORI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also like to reiterate the previous speaker’s sentiments. When I came for consultations in your Chambers with the Colleagues from the Front Bench, that was on the understanding that there would be no change at all. Nothing happens. In case of a sale behind our back, all the Ministers involved - article 118 (Laughter).
   
MR.MWANDHA: Mr. Speaker, I think the Minister needs to explain a bit more to this House. Selling a bank is not like an auction where the goods go at the fall of the hammer. Selling a bank involves a process that starts with advertising, due diligence, audit reports, consultancy reports and so on and so forth. When the Minister says there will be no sale, is he telling the House that he is going to put a stop to the process, which is already in place? What exactly is he meaning?  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: You see, the problem here is that the Governor of the bank cannot enter this Chamber to give an explanation. It is the Minister of Finance who is answerable for what the Governor does. So, I think we have given him the benefit of doubt that his undertaking is sincere.

MR.LUKYAMUZI:  Mr. Speaker, in order to ensure that what the Minister of Finance has said will stand, I would like to move the following motion by resolution.

THE SPEAKER: If you would assist me to know under what law you are doing that, then I will consider it. But you see, the owner of the motion has agreed to this arrangement, therefore we have no person to move that particular motion as of now. Why do we labour about this?  Why do we not believe the Minister will abide by his undertaking made before 300 Members of Parliament?

MR. LUKYAMUZI: You see, Mr. Speaker with due respect to you, the tone of hon. Aggrey Awori’s motion was quite different from the matter I was about to present. Mine was the concern that the 6th Parliament passed a resolution obliging Government to present a report on this bank before the sale would go ahead. Now we are hearing that the sale of the bank is in the final stages. I wanted the Government to explain to us in clear terms and to assure us that the bank will not simply go as so many other banks have gone in the past. I wanted to compliment that with a motion by resolution.

THE SPEAKER: You see, having been a Member of the 6th Parliament and now Member of the 7th Parliament to which many were not, my recollection is that hon. Manzi presented a Report which the Chair ordered the appropriate Committee to consider. But by the turn of events, the Committee expired, but I think the Report is available. And since we have constituted the Committee –(Interruption).

MS. KIRASO: Mr. Speaker, can I give some information?  I just wanted the House to allow me to cut the very long story short. Because much as the 6th Parliament expired and the Committees of the 6th Parliament expired together with that Parliament, this is not a new subject and the documents that are there are still the same documents.  

I wanted to inform the Mover of the motion, hon. Ken Lukyamuzi and the other Members who are concerned about the sale of UCB that, after hon. Manzi Tumubweinee had presented the Report to this House which we actually found unsatisfactory and inadequate, the House instructed the Ministry and the Bank of Uganda to avail some specific documents to the Committee on Finance which I was chairing at that time. The information I want to give is that, it is true that these documents were given to us but towards the end of the last Parliament. 


One of the very important documents that we have is the Auditors Report, the KPMG Report of the accounts of the last financial year or the last calendar year. So I think there was co-operation, should say, from the Bank of Uganda and the Ministry because we had got some documents but unfortunately, Parliament expired. 

So, is it possible Mr. Speaker, for us to start from where we stopped? What do I mean? Can I, as the former Chairperson of the Finance Committee, hand over all the documentation, all the correspondence and all the information that was availed to me when I held that capacity of the chair of the Finance Committee, to the new Chairperson whom we are going to elect in a few minutes’ time? I will go ahead to request for ease for us to scrutinise these documents. 

Hon. Aggrey Awori if you have no objection, can we work together? The mover of the motion and the Seconders together with the Committee on Finance, because we already have - some of us who survived, who are on the Committee again, we already have a lot of information. Mr. Speaker, this was information and my request.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MRS. ZZIWA:  I wanted to seek some clarification on procedure with regard to the information hon. Kiraso has presented. I had thought that when hon. Aggrey Awori tables this motion, this House would have received it and then sent it to the relevant Committee - I know it should have been the Committee on Finance and Planning. And after being sent to that relevant Committee, then the out-going chairperson should have made available this information to the in-coming chairperson. That would have enabled this House to receive this motion I think adequately or in a much more acceptable manner. I wanted to be clarified.

THE SPEAKER: But I thought really that the importance of this debate is to maintain the status quo as of now, when the motion was supposed to be Tabled. The motion has not been Tabled, there has been an undertaking by the Executive that the status quo will remain as it is until this motion, if necessary, is dealt with as stipulated in the Minister’s speech. Why do we not end this debate?
MR. DOMBO: Mr. Speaker, there is just a procedural question which I want to be clarified on for the benefit of this House and those Members to come after. 

The out-going chairperson of the Finance Committee has just mentioned to this House that she is still in possession of records of the 6th Parliament which she would like to hand over to the in-coming chairperson of the Committee. Mr. Speaker, I want to get clarification from you, when does Parliament and its Committees expire? I want that to be clarified, because I thought to every Committee of the House, there is a Secretary to the Committee who must be in possession of all the official records of the Committee?  Because in the event that the chairperson did not come back, how else would this House have got that information?   I just want to be clarified Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: No, my understanding of hon. Kiraso’s contribution was to the effect that she was a Member of the Finance Committee and she was keeping her personal file where she kept certain documents -(Laughter). So, her contribution was in addition to the official record, which would be with the Clerk. She will assist the Committee. But, why do we not really end, so that we go and get our chairpersons?

MR. AWORI: Once again Mr. Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity. I do agree with hon. Kiraso’s comments however, I have done some research on this motion. I brought this motion as a result of His Excellency the President’s speech during the Budget Speech.  He made a statement that disturbed me and I immediately reacted to it. I said, you cannot sell our bank without selling shares on a stock exchange and I have since followed up that matter Mr. Speaker. 

I have talked to a number of players in this game and the information I have is very disturbing; that is why I brought that motion. But should we have that understanding that I will give the Government opportunity of following up some of the leads I have given them, then we can come to this House and debate this matter in a transparent manner and in a much more conclusive fashion. Actually, this is only the first phase of this matter. The bigger chunk is coming after the Resolution and it is very disturbing.
THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR. MAO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am the seconder of this motion. When matters are serious they should be handled seriously and when they are urgent, they should be handled urgently. I am proposing that the Minister of Finance comes back to debate this motion within a fortnight - two weeks.  We have done things very quickly here, and while we have the patience to wait, for instance, waiting for a long time for the Ministers to be appointed, when the names came we approved in record time. So we are very fast in Parliament. We also hope that the Executive can be fast.  So, will the Minister concede to two weeks? Certainly two weeks is a long enough time. Three weeks is too long for us.

THE SPEAKER: I think this matter is ended. There is no motion. 

MR. LUKYAMUZI: With due respect to you, I was moving a motion for a resolution and you stopped me. Can I move it now?

THE SPEAKER: I asked you to assist me so that I know under what rule you are moving that motion.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: I wanted to justify that by saying that the Awori motion was still partially on the Floor, and that is why you let the Minister of Finance give an explanation.  Following that, I wanted to move a motion for a resolution.  Can I move it?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have ended this matter in the way it was agreed. There is an undertaking that nothing will be done. There is a caveat on the sale and this matter will come again. The motion is still on the Table, so the matter will come again.   

This concludes our proceedings for today. You are advised to go to your respective venues to elect the chairpersons of the Sessional Committees so that these Committees can start working with the new Ministers. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.

(The House rose at 3.56 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 26th July 2001 at 2.30 p.m.)


