Tuesday, 24 July 2007

Parliament met at 2.52 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to welcome you to this session and to inform you that starting from today, all the afternoons inclusive up to the 27th July, we shall debate the State of the Nation Address. From the 31st July to 13th August, we shall consider policy statements and compile the reports, that is, several committees will be busy compiling these reports. 

After that, from 14th to 17th August, we shall have general debate on the Budget and from 21st to 30th August, we shall have the Committee of Supply. On 31st August, we shall handle the Appropriation Bill and from the 4th to 5th September 2007, we shall deal with the Finance Bill. 

I am aware that in the Business Committee there was some argument as to the sequence, but I hope that by the time we get there, we shall have agreed on which Bill should come first. We hope that this will enable us to conclude these constitutional duties. 

I also want to reassure the Members that the weather conditions around Parliament are steadily improving and that by Thursday, there should be showers and thunderstorms. (Laughter)

I would like you to join me in welcoming the pupils and teachers from Little Angels Infants and Primary School, Luweero Town Council, Katikamu North. You are most welcome. (Applause) They are represented by Eng. Byandala and hon. Rebecca Lukwago. Thank you for bringing the children here.

Further, the Institute of Security Studies, Defence Sector Programme based in South Africa in Pretoria has organised a workshop on the theme “Role of Parliament in Enhancing Peace and Security” for the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, taking place at the Imperial Resort Hotel, Entebbe. Members of that committee are expected to check in tomorrow after Parliament. They have brought in a high-powered group of resource persons from South Africa to conduct the workshop. So, all members of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs are urged to attend without fail. 

I would also want to alter the Order Paper and delete the presentation of the paper on Ms Phoenix Logistics until a later date. We shall not handle it today. [Mr Pereza Ahabwe rose_] But hon. Ahabwe, you did not tell me that there was something you wanted to raise. Okay.

MR AHABWE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. At one time the Forum for chairpersons and deputies met with the Ministry of Finance and we agreed that before we appropriate we should first handle the Finance Bill because it has been nomalised and I think in the last budget, we also – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ahabwe, in my communication, when I reached that point, I said that in the Business Committee, we had some disagreements as to the sequence and we agreed that we shall have consultations between the chairpersons and Ministry of Finance and this is in September. I mentioned it here that we have not yet agreed on the sequence.

MR AHABWE: Thank you, I just wanted to remove the doubt. 

BILLS FIRST READING

THE FINANCE BILL, 2007

2.58
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Finance Act, 2007” be read for the first time. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have the Certificate of Financial Implications, Minister?

DR SURUMA: Madam Speaker, we do have the certificate.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, we are here legislating on behalf of 31 million Ugandans and whatever we do here will remain on our records for quite a long time. I thought procedurally it would be right for the honourable minister to correct the records of the Hansard. What he is tendering right now is the Finance Bill and not Finance Act. I wish that could be corrected. Otherwise in future everybody will take the Eighth Parliament as a sleeping parliament.  

DR SURUMA: Madam Speaker, I thought I said Finance Bill, 2007 and I repeat the same.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, does it have any financial implications.

DR SURUMA: Madam Speaker, the Certificate of Financial Implications has been presented.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister has complied with Section 10 of the Budget Act. We assign that Bill to the relevant committee for perusal and report back at the earliest opportunity. 

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007

3.01
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2007” be read for the first time. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have the certificates for this?

DR SURUMA: It has been presented, Madam Speaker, and it is here. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, if you have satisfied Section 10 of the Budget Act, the Bill will be committed to the relevant committee for perusal and report back. 

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007

3.01
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2007” be read for the first time. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has been seconded. If it also has a Certificate of Financial Implications, it will be committed to the relevant committee.

THE EXCISE TARIFF (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007
3.02
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to move that the Bill entitled “The Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2007” be read for the first time. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has also been seconded and complied with the Budget Act. Please commit it to the relevant committee for perusal and report back.

LAYING OF PAPERS 

A BRIEF TO PARLIAMENT ON THE PROPOSAL TO BORROW 15 MILLION EUROS FROM THE KINGDOM OF SPAIN FOR ACQUISITION OF THE NATIONAL RADAR SYSTEM

3.03
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Madam Speaker, I wish to present papers for a proposal to borrow 15 million Euros from the Kingdom of Spain for the acquisition of a national radar system. This is a very urgent matter to protect the skies of the country and I hope that it can be dealt with as quickly as possible. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, In the Business Committee we had agreed to work with the sessional committees first but the Committee on National Economy can find a way of accommodating this request if it is urgent because the standing committees are off duty for the time being. The request has been made to the Committee on National Economy that the matter is urgent; perhaps they will find a way of doing it at the shortest opportunity. I want to amend the Order Paper very slightly to permit hon. Nsubuga to make a personal statement. 

PERSONAL STATEMENT
3.04
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I am making a personal explanation on the allegations of murder and kidnap under our Rules of Procedure, No.42.

I, hon. William Nsubuga, am the biological brother of the late Charles Mubiru who died on Thursday, 26 August 2004 and was later put to rest at his ancestral grounds at Gamba Kiyindi. It has happened in several print media and radios that the death of my brother was unclear and it is against this background that I want to make this personal explanation. 

I want to make it clear that at the moment, there is no case of murder in any court in Uganda in respect of my late brother. On Tuesday, 24 August 2004 at around 10.00 a.m., I called the deceased while at Parliament. The phone kept ringing but there was no reply. There after, I tried again and received no reply. When I went home, I again called him and the deceased replied and told me that he had been admitted at Mengo Hospital. I requested my cousin to drive me to the hospital. On arrival, we met our mother and the wife of the deceased. We discussed the issues regarding the sickness and we resolved that we should wait for the results of the various tests carried out to determine the next course of action.

The following day, on Wednesday, 25 August 2004 at around 11.00 a.m., I again visited the deceased; there was no improvement. Some results were ready and others still pending. On Thursday, the following morning, my brother Anthony Gong called me and informed me that the deceased’s health condition had worsened and there after I went and requested the deceased to be transferred to Mulago Hospital. 

At around 1 .00 p.m. we were at Mulago Hospital and the deceased was received by Dr Kayima. He was examined by Dr Kayima and Dr Kezaara in my presence and later Dr Kayima held me by the hand and took me outside the room and told me that, “Hon. Nsubuga, it is unfortunate your brother is dead.” Dr Kayima realised that I was in shock and advised me to leave the body in the medical school mortuary. He advised me that in such a case, where the patient dies before being admitted, the death certificate has to be issued by the hospital which was treating the deceased, which indeed we obtained.

We went to Seeta on Saturday morning with the deceased and I briefed the mourners about the death of our beloved brother and agreed that the body of the deceased be brought the following day and burial takes place on 29 August 2004 at his father’s ancestral grounds at Gamba Kiyindi. 

Since the demise of my brother, my name has been on radios and print media alleging that I murdered my late brother. The above allegation is baseless, frivolous, factious and intended to defame my person with purpose of lowering my status in the eyes of the right thinking members of society. 

In short, my brother died a natural death and to prove the same, the treating doctor of Mengo Hospital on 26 August 2004, before the deceased was transferred to Mulago Hospital, had noted that the late had developed difficulty in breathing and had general body pain. 

In view of the above, the doctor himself acknowledged the fact that before transferring the late, he was in critical condition and as a family we have nobody complaining. But since we all belong to the state, it is free to carry out investigation. 

On the issue of kidnapping and hiding Charles Mubiru Junior, I am very innocent having known him before the death of his father who during his lifetime told me and all his entire family members that he is a father of the child having produced him with Aisha Muteesi. The said child was staying with his mother. After the death of Charles Mubiru, the said Aisha Muteesi, the mother of the child in dispute brought the child to our family headed by Mzee Charles Kikwanguyila. We sat as family members and resolved that Charles Mubiru Junior becomes the heir and Mzee Charles Kikwanguyila installed him as the heir of his late father.  

The issue of kidnapping and hiding the said child with intention and purpose of acquiring the estate of the deceased is mystery, unfounded, malicious, and false allegation.  Further, I even admitted before the High Court of Uganda at Kampala – there is a civil case there – that the child is with our family and even the deceased’s partner, Marion Mukuye, in her own handwriting admitted that the said child belongs to the deceased. This issue is in the High Court of Uganda at Kampala and is still pending court determination.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, all these allegations have been in the press and on radio but I have been keeping a low profile till the 22 May 2007 when I wrote a letter to Mr Richard Buteera, Director of Public Prosecution, explaining my position on the above scandalous allegations labeled against me.     

Madam Speaker and honourable members, that is my personal statement concerning that issue and I stand on the Floor of this august House, to pronounce that I am very innocent. For God and my country. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Nsubuga.

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNEMNT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS DELIVERED TO PARLIAMENT ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY H.E THE PRESIDENT ON THE 7 JUNE 2007

3.12
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM. Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I move that thanks of Parliament be recorded for the clear and precise exposition of government policy contained in the Address on the State of the Nation by H.E the President, to this Parliament on Wednesday 13 June 2007. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Usuk. He has seconded it.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, being barely one year under a challenging multiparty political dispensation—

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo, the State of the Nation Address was delivered on 7th June and not 13th June. It is the Budget Speech, which was read on 14th June. (Laughter) Please correct that.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, being barely one year under a challenging multiparty political dispensation with ever persisting challenges of building, sustaining and consolidating democracy, there have been tremendous and pleasant achievements to be recorded. In his address, H.E the President clearly highlighted these achievements as well as the challenges faced by the nation. 

Not to be lost out, the President categorically stated in his preamble that building democracy is not a one-time event or an assignment to which one would assign a life-span of a couple of years. He said that it is a dynamic process to which a very generation has to contribute to, for the good and survival of the people, with the present generation laying a firm foundation for the future generations to build on.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, on the front and back benches, I take with extreme delight and I would like at this point to recommend to this House, H.E the President’s defining statement in he which he said and I quote, “Uganda as a country does not belong to the Executive, the Judiciary, Parliament or any other small group. It belongs to all Ugandans irrespective of their political or religious inclinations.” 

By this statement, the President sought to reassure Ugandans of all walks of life that the destiny of this country is in our collective hands. He, therefore, noted that our present actions and activities have a profound bearing on what and where we want to take this country. Do we want to have it as a success or failed state?

Still on the political question, the President precisely highlights the ubiquitous phenomenon of a sizable number of independent members of Parliament and whether they create a balancing factor on critical issues. The independents under the Movement ticket, the President candidly pointed this out, “This was as a result of the hurried manner in which the primary elections were conducted”. The President noted that this brought discontent among some movement supporters that resorted to the National constitutional refugee of independents as prescribed under Article 80 of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. The President revealed that there is an on going debate regarding the role of the electoral colleges vis-a-vis the general membership of the party. 

What probably needs to be added is the bitter fact that the phenomenon of independents right from the presidential candidates through Parliament to the LC V and lower local councils was largely not optional. It was and shall still continue be due to a manifestation of the lack of sufficient internal democratic hygiene across the broad political spectrum. This takes the form of powerful personalities who promote personal ego and parochial interests couched in party or institutional interests. This is why H.E the President’s defining statement that Uganda belongs to all of us becomes indeed pertinent and timely. (Applause)

With clear focus on constitutionalism and the rule of law, the President re-affirmed the National Resistance Movement Government’s determination to continue to adhere to this principle in the management of all public affairs. He emphasized that every Ugandan, starting with the leadership, has a contribution to make, adding that adherence to constitutionalism and the rule of law is a cornerstone for democratic society, which Uganda is trying to build.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the President acknowledged and clearly emphasised the rule of law and independence of the Judiciary as a twin principle that should be nurtured and guarded with extreme jealousy and vigilance by all Ugandans. It is being acknowledged that short of this, instability, turbulence and anarchy can take over the country.

Regarding security, it is gratifying not only to the people of Northern and Western Uganda, but to the entire country to hear that the security of the country is finally getting consolidated. This is exemplified by the crashing defeat of the terrorist groups by the UPDF. He informed Ugandans that the UPDF meted out the terrorist groups namely, the ADF and LRA of Joseph Kony with their backers. 

The President noted that our armed forces have evolved and now have the capacity to guarantee peace and constitutionalism in the country. This has gone hand in hand with both forceful and voluntary disarmament of the Karimojong cattle rustlers, an exercise that has yielded impressive results.

The President is further hailed for his decision to accept Gen. Salvar Kiir’s proposal to initiate peace talks in Juba. This was meant to be a soft of landing for Kony and his gang to spare both lives and resources that would otherwise be put to development efforts. 

There is, however, a lingering challenge to put in place, an enabling legislation duly passed by Parliament to legitimise the Juba Peace Talks. This ought to spell out issues like the double justice system, the traditional Justice System, in other words known as Mato-Oput and the Penal Code Act, accountability, reconciliation and relationship with the International Criminal Court, among others. Government is, therefore, to move in tandem and have this requisite law in place and in time.

Regarding the economy, the President is applauded for clearly presenting an impressive performance of the economy. He said that the economy of Uganda achieved a respectable GDP rate of growth. According to the 2007/2008 Budget Speech, this year the economy scored 6.5 percent point this year up from 1 percent in the last financial year. This remarkable growth was achieved in spite of the power and fuel shortage encountered in the course of the year. 

Although this was lower than the targeted rate of 7 percent per annum, it still represents a remarkable performance of our economy, because it is higher than the average growth achieved by the non-oil producing countries in Africa that is estimated to be at an average of 5.2 percent in 2006. We indeed must salute the prudent economic policies of the President and the NRM government that have enabled the country attain this respectable economic growth rate. 

However, the challenge that remains is the attainment of the medium term objective of 7 percent GDP growth rate per annum, though even with this, it will take us much longer to attain sustainable growth rate to overcome the explosive population growth rate of about 7.1 births per woman, which is the highest fertility rate and the second highest growth rate of above 3.7 in the world; it is only second to Burundi.

More challenging in these circumstances is the attainment of a double-digit economic growth rate for a sustainable number of years to hit the takeoff stage as clinched by the Asian tigers. This would therefore be the set prize for all Ugandans.

On Prosperity for all (Bonnabagawale), the President is appreciated for setting in motion mechanisms that saw Cabinet and the Movement Caucus agree on changing the lifestyle of 68 percent of the households that were depending on subsistence agriculture during the 2002 census. 

The emphasis here was that everybody who is producing food should also engage in cash generating activities. That those with less than 5 acres of land should engage in high- value activities that can assist large scale farmers and manufacturers to lower costs of production and accessing wider markets. To that extent, and in the next 2 to 3 years, it is hoped that much of the rural economy will be monetised with more factories built to process what is produced. Speed is indeed clearly all what we need. 

However, the remaining challenge is the formulation of a clear policy framework for Bonnabagagawale, with its performance and evaluation checked. Therefore, there is now need for a uniform understanding of the concept, substance and form of Bonnabagagawale. That means that all stakeholders from cabinet, to Parliament, and technocrats to the last person, should be put on board and on the same wavelength. Short of this, Bonnabagagawale may or less remains the biblical tower of Babel. 

In more substantial terms, the community should be put on board and same wavelength given the fact that government is already building an effective supportive community infrastructure in form of roads, water, and education and health facilities. This will be complemented by community information systems to enable the communities themselves generate information for use in planning and service delivery. In practical and feasible terms, this is the real rural development hence Bonnabagagawale for which we must commend the President.

Regarding health, it is gratifying that the President reiterated continued focus on primary health care and the fight against malaria. The President stated that given the high figures of deaths from malaria or malaria-related elements, we could not oppose the battle or stand aloof to watch malaria afflicting the communities hence putting an enormous pressure on the resources for the curative treatment.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, it is because of the above undertakings, coupled with other efforts like immunization against the six killer diseases, sustained campaign against HIV/AIDS, among others, that the life expectance of Ugandans shifted from 48.4 years in 2004 to 51.5 years today. 

In comparative terms, the life expectance in the great lakes region stands at 49.6 years for Tanzania, 46.3 years for Kenya, 44.7 years for Rwanda and 45.5 years for Burundi. Even in the much fancy South Africa, the life expectancy only stands at 44.5 years. Ugandans, therefore, should comfortably take a back seat assured that the stewardship of the bus is in responsible hands. (Applause)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. With all due respect to the good presents that hon. Ssekikubo is pilling on the President’s State of Nation Address, I am wondering if it is procedurally possible for us to obtain copies of his written speech, which is almost a mini pamphlet- (Laughter)- and to be precise, which is about 20 pages. I do not know if we could be aided to obtain copies in line with our Rules of Procedure. Otherwise, I am worried because the speech is actually longer than the President’s State of Nation Address. (Laughter). I beg your guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo, I understand you distributed the copies. Not so? Did you?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Yes.

MEMBERS: No.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I had distributed the copies because this motion was meant to be presented last week and I think the Leader of Opposition must be having a copy amongst others.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Anyway, honourable members, let us listen. You will respond to areas, which are not satisfactory. Let us do it by ear. How long is your text?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I hope to do justice to my honourable colleagues because I intend to summarise my presentation in a few minutes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, he is playing an important function. So, please allow him to make his presentation.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker and honourable members, the President postulated a firm and clear resolve to fight corruption in Uganda. The campaign for “zero tolerance to corruption” as spelt out in the NRM Party Manifesto 2006 for both Presidential and Parliamentary elections. All Ugandans irrespective of party affiliations must applaud the President because the corruption scourge is so devastating. For insistence, corruption is ranked as one of the greatest constraints to investments and economic development and public service delivery, among others.

According to the Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC0, a USA Government body set up to aid the poorest countries in the world, the Government of Uganda loses more than Shs 150 billion to corruption in its procurement system per year. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the heads of the Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets Authority recently, revealed that out of the 60 procurement transactions made in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 52 had no supporting documents. While all the remaining eight fell into the high-risk category, meaning they lacked records, were irregular or had no corresponding value to the taxpayers. The said Shs 150 billion lost through corruption, for insistence, is enough to run Mulago National Referral Hospital for at least 12 years. It is because of the excessive appetite on the part of responsible leaders and technocrats that Uganda has for the last 4 years failed to qualify to the Millennium Challenge Corporation aid because of its poor performance in the control of corruption indicators.  That is one of the 16 benchmarks used by the Millennium Challenge Cooperation in selecting countries to benefit from the Millennium Challenge Account. 

In the struggle against corruption, therefore, there are on-going court battles between the IGG and the former ministers in relation to the global fund – there is a Judicial Commission of Inquiry into the mismanagement of the 2004 Global Funds to Fight AIDs, Tuberculosis and Malaria. 

The other one is the land registration, a court dual between the IGG and the Solicitor General of alleged fraudulent court settlements to the tune of Shs 102 billion. There is also the alleged procurement of bogus firm implements supplied to the IDPs in the North, worth Shs 18.6 billion, among other cases. These deserve to be handled with steadfastness. This is the time for all Ugandans to join hands with the President in this noble crusade against the corruption scourge. 

The Whistle Blower’s Bill for the protection of those who give accurate information to assist in the fight against corruption, which is to be presented to Cabinet in early July; this is most welcome, together with the proposed Bill for the strengthening of the Office of the Auditor General and we must all commend the President for this. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the appeal of His Excellency the President to honourable members and all other leaders is to mobilise the population to join the war against corruption whenever it maybe existing. Every leader should ask himself or herself what contribution he or she has made towards the fight against corruption.  And the press and the FM radios should be positive and sensitise the people so that there is no relaxation in the fight against corruption. To this, I humbly commit myself and urge honourable members to be energised crusaders in this noble war. 

Madam Speaker, and honourable members, regarding the work of Parliament, the President highly appreciated the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker, honourable members of Parliament and the support staff for the business transacted during the last session. 

He upheld the cordial relationship between the Executive and the Legislature. He outlined the government legislative programmes for 2007/2008, to consist of 46 Bills, out of which five are already with Parliament. The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs has 10 Bills to be considered. It is sincerely hoped that one of them is to restructure and reform the Electoral Commission to make it move in tandem with the multi-party political and democratic dispensation. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to end with a prominent statesman’s statement, with which the President concluded his address. He considered and acknowledged that this address was made one year since the country moved into a multi-party dispensation. And that there have been lessons and there will be lessons to learn as we move on. So, let us not ignore those lessons because they will enable us to perform better and to consolidate our democracy. That we should all contribute to the building of institutions, which out-live us, and I believe the President was sincere on that.  As we move on, let us all work together for a better Uganda, today and tomorrow, knowing that our motherland is the treasure for the present and the generations to come. This captures the entire mood and aspirations of our mother country Uganda.  

On that glorious note, Madam Speaker, and honourable members, I would like to confidently move that this House record its appreciation for the precise and clear position of Government policy contained in the State of the Nation Address by His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda. Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move. (Applause)

3.35
MR CHRIS OLENY (Independent, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First and foremost, I would like to second this motion, and to acknowledge the tremendous contribution that has been made by my colleague, the mover of the motion. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, since the coverage by the mover of the motion has been very extensive, I will restrict myself to the areas that may not have been touched by my colleague. Therefore, I hope to spend as little time as possible so that the rest of us can join the debate that is before us. 

In my own view, the President’s speech is indeed a true reflection of his vision and his desire to transform this country Uganda. In his State of the Nation Address, the President did very well to give us some background on how we ended up where we are today; we are now enjoying multi-party democracy in this country. 

The President indeed underscored the importance of how it was important for all Ugandans to come together and heal the wounds that had been orchestrated by multi-partism in the previous regimes so that we are able to put our hands together as we rebuild our country Uganda. 

It is, therefore, important that the honourable members of this House get a flush back into the 20 years of NRM leadership in this country. Therefore, I wish, to note that the 20 years the NRM Government has lead this country were very critical in creating conditions that are conducive for a multi-party democracy to thrive. This means that the minimum conditions were possible given the achievements of NRM government, which are there for all of us to see. I will state a few of this: the most notable is the fact that during these 20 years, the NRM Government introduced popular democracy by empowering the people of Uganda and the essence of which was the restoration of the vote in regular, free and fair elections. 

The other achievement that I deem very important is the one of political empowerment of the previously marginalised sections of our society that is the women, the youth, persons with disabilities and the workers. But most important of all is the issue of how this country has been able to record one of the most commendable post-war recoveries. This has been commended by very many economies in the world.

These achievements were further consolidated by the establishment of participatory democracy as enshrined in the Decentralisation Policy and Self-Governance through the local councils. The NRM system was only to be changed after an elaborate consultative process with the people of Uganda, which culminated into a referendum, which ushered in the return of the multi-party democracy in which we are now one and a half year old.

Madam Speaker, I further wish to state here that in the State of the Nation Address, His Excellency the President dedicated a lot of objectivity in consideration and assessment of the country’s performance under a multi-party dispensation in the one-year so far completed. The facts that he has stated are well illustrated in this book and I will recommend to Members that do not let this State of the Nation Address form part of what you have on your desks and libraries, but take it as a very important piece that we all need to read and internalise. I will not be able to quote individual cases but all are well illustrated in this booklet. 

He mentioned the challenges that have arisen, one of them being the emergence of a number of independents. It is common knowledge that I am an Independent Member of Parliament and therefore I will spend some time to explain to this august House the President’s worry able independents.

In developed democracies, independents have significantly come up as a result of issue debated. But unfortunately, in our country today, the many independents we have are a result of internal weaknesses that characterised that organisation of the primary election in the various parties; that includes the ruling party, FDC and all other parties. 

It is true that in this House, we do not only have independents who are as a result of those weaknesses from the NRM Party, but I am glad to inform you that I participated in the primaries under the NRM.

Honourable colleagues, what is important to note is that the very fact that we had a number of independents is a challenge to all the parties of this country. Unless the issue of internal democracy are addressed, then we have a risk of having many more independent which undermines the very spirit of multi-partism. So, it is a challenge that I put to all of you, particularly the parties; let us have our internal democracies and regulations transparent so that there may be fewer independents in the future 

In developed democracies, independents would indeed play a significant role if the numbers were more or less balancing. But in the case of Uganda, the President does not need to worry because if independents are added together with the opposition parties, they do not form a significant challenge.

There has also been notice of the contradictions that have arisen between the individual members of Parliament’s positions vis-à-vis the corrective line of parties. It is my view that as we continue to learn from the so far one-year experience in multi-party democracy, the individual members of Parliament, and the parties themselves will be able to harmonise their positions; not only in theory but also in practice.

On constitutionalism, every Uganda, as indeed underscored by the President in his address has a role to play in up-holding constitutionalism and the rule of law. And it is important that we note and appreciate the President’s statement on the issue of the fundamental freedoms, humanitarian rights and other freedoms for which there has appeared to be a contest of views in this country on who these should be enjoyed.

Madam Speaker, if you permit me, I would like to inform the House that the President was spot-on in observing that whatever rights, whatever freedoms we can think of can never be enjoyed in absolute. And since it is readily accessible to me here, permit me to read a statement on that, Members can refer to Page 6: “In the enjoyment of the rights and freedoms prescribed in this Chapter, no person shall prejudice the fundamental or other human rights and freedoms of others or the public interest”.

This is important and all of us should take some lessons on this. I am aware that some Members of this august House have found themselves in conflict on how they enjoy some of the freedoms that they sought to enjoy in absolute. The inadequacies in appreciating that fact and the practice is important for the Members of this House and the entire nation if we are to have harmony.

In the observance of the rule of law, allow me raise an issue that is of serious concern to many of us. This is the manner in which the arresting authorities have carried out some of their arrests in the recent times. The issue to note here is not the act of the arrest, but we as Members of this august House have a duty to protect every Ugandan and indeed suspects. We do that by emphasising the fact that the arresting authorities should carry out their arrests as per the law. There is a prescription as to how an arrest should be effected, however, it is dissatisfying to note that some people, including some Members of this august House have had their freedoms unfairly curtailed without following the right procedure. I think it is important that this House pronounces itself on this issue. It is well known that in our laws, one is held innocent until proven guilty. So, I think that the cardinal principle must be upheld by the arresting authorities. 

The other point that I would wish to commend the President for in his State of the Nation Address is his reaffirmation of government’s commitment to upholding constitutionalism and the rule of law. The President has made his case clear that he is committed. Permit me to further espouse his acknowledgement that the three arms of government will need to continuously work in harmony and I think to me that was a very important point to note.

The other one as a country which we must commend the President for was the recent entry of Uganda into the African Peer Review Mechanism. This goes as yet another indicator of the willingness of the leadership of this country to render itself to upholding constitutionalism, transparency and openness, peer criticism if you may call it, and we as a House need to join and support the President in that endeavour. 

I would like to say something on security. The President has comprehensively addressed the subject of how we as a country are working towards having peace return to North and North Eastern Uganda.

For the case of Karamoja, I want to uphold the President’s approach. There have been many mixed feelings regarding forceful disarmament. The international community, the diplomats and Non Governmental Organisations have always fought to push for an approach that says, “Let us develop Karamoja first before we carry out disarmament.” I want to fundamentally agree with the President that it is important that forceful disarmament should come first so as to create an enabling environment for development to take place in Karamoja. And indeed as a country, forceful disarmament of Karamoja is the most immediate way in which we shall intervene to save life and property both in Karamoja and in the neighbourhood. 

On the economy, I have already made mention of how happy I am to note the impressive recovery that our economy has made. However, permit me to highlight the President’s concern on the issue of energy crisis that is now a stifling factor to our economic growth. Honourable members, there is no doubt that all of us in this House are agreed on the way to move forward and how to sustain our economic growth. Government has put in place short, medium and long-term measures. I would like to point out one issue that is of great concern. Recently this House approved a Partial Risk Guarantee to facilitate the quick construction of Bujagali Hydro Power Project. But I will inform Members that many of you must have received some write-ups by the NAPE group. 

Madam Speaker, just permit me to highlight some of the issues that they pointed out. These two books give very disappointing reading, I know you have them but for purposes of making my point, this one is entitled “The Unresolved Issues in the Bujagali Dam Project in Uganda.” This is on page 8 of this book, which I know all of us have, “On the realisation that government and the banks were poised to proceed with the Bujagali Project before resolving the outstanding and new concerns on the project, civil society spearheaded by NAPE petitioned the banks against financing the project before the investigations into the Bujagali Project.” 

Now, honourable members, this is a very serious matter that should not be left in the hands of just NAPE. Remember Uganda belongs to all of us. The question I want to pose to this august House is, isn’t this House mandated by the people of Uganda to plan for the development of this country? And if we are, we need to make this very clear so that we do not have further delays on how we respond to the energy crisis that we have at hand now. 

Now NAPE with their group have gone ahead as I have said to petition the financiers of this project, and indeed a couple of days ago we had a meeting with a group from African Development Bank. This poses a very serious challenge to this House. Are we as the Parliament of Uganda going to listen to arguments which in my view have been resolved through the public dialogue that we have had in conceiving and finally agreeing to construct this project; and well knowing how much we need this power. I will leave that to the House to pronounce itself on. 

The other issue that I would want to conclude with is the subject of regional cooperation. His Excellency the President in his State of the Nation Address was again spot-on in as far as regional cooperation is concerned. I wish to commend the President’s commitment to the formation of the East African Community and also thank the leadership of the three initial member countries for recently enlarging the community to bring on board Burundi and Rwanda. I further want to agree with the President that although there is a lot of work yet to be done, we should not be discouraged at all. The region has great potential for the prosperity of its people. 

In the debate on integration, many have expressed fears and reservations and talked in terms of “we”, “us” or “they” - “They will dominate us, so we do not need to move into the Community; we shall lose out, so we do not need to move into the Community”. These “we”, “they” or “us” are not important in my view. What is important is that as we go into this community, we will be seeking to find common solutions to common problems that face us as a region. We shall be partners; we will be co-operating and we shall be trying to find common solutions to common problems. We have confidence that we can benefit as well as contribute to our own interests and the interests of the community at the same time. 

Honourable colleagues, as I wind up I wish to commend the President’s State of the Nation Address. I invite you to support the motion and adopt this State of the Nation Address. I thank you.

STATEMENT IN REPLY BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN PARLIAMENT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now invite the Leader of the Opposition to invoke his right of reply.

4.03
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to make a statement in reply to the State of the Nation Address made by his Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, President of the Republic of Uganda, at the opening of the Second Session of the Eighth Parliament of Uganda on 7 June 2007.

Madam Speaker, honourable Leader of Government Business and honourable members, on the 7th day of June 2007, H.E the President delivered the annual State of the Nation Address that marked the commencement of the Second Session of the Eighth Parliament. I am once again most privileged and honoured to formally respond to the President’s address on behalf of the Opposition. Before I do so however, allow me to briefly address myself to three matters that we, the Opposition, consider important as we attempt to develop a viable multiparty parliamentary tradition for our country.

Looking around the Eighth Parliament - and I beg to make adjustments after some information - besides the Clerk to Parliament who is a technical person, I see only four colleagues who were definitely in the last multiparty Parliament under the Uganda Peoples Congress Obote II regime from 1980 to 1985. Two were members of the opposition party, the Democratic Party. These are hon. John Baptist Kawanga, then from Masaka and now still in the Opposition, and hon. Sam Kutesa who roundly defeated Yoweri Museveni in Mbarara North Constituency in 1980 but is now President Museveni’s Foreign Minister. The other two were members of the governing party, UPC: hon. Moses Apiliga, then the Minister of Supplies and now in the Opposition, and hon. Ephraim Kamuntu, Minister of Industry now on the government side. (Laughter)

The above five are too few for us to rely upon to build the new multiparty culture in our Parliament. It is therefore what we do, how we do it and what we agree to adopt that will define the practice and build a viable tradition of our multiparty Parliament for the foreseeable future, hence the need for us to address these three issues:

First is the matter of the annual State of the Nation Address. Madam Speaker, Article 101 (1) of our Constitution provides: “The President shall, at the beginning of each session of Parliament, deliver to Parliament an address on the state of the nation.” What concerns honourable members is that in all Commonwealth countries where this tradition is practised, the State of the Nation Address is a highly formal affair. The address, like the Budget Speech, is delivered as prepared and immediately published to enable the Opposition respond authoritatively. 

In our case where the prepared address is replaced with extensive off-the-cuff remarks and only part of the prepared text is actually read, immediately after delivery of the statement we are left at a complete loss as to what to do next. Consequently, this year we wasted enormous time waiting for the official address to be published. In our view therefore, the delivery of the address should be made more formal and predictable and should conform to the practice in other Commonwealth parliaments, which Rule 7 of our Rules of Procedure enjoins us to emulate. 

The second matter is the protocol that forms part of the State of the Nation Address and the delivery of the Budget Speech. On both occasions, Parliament sits formally. The presence of the President in the Chamber and his delivery of an address are in accordance with Rule 9 of our Rules of Procedure. The presence of his Lordship the Chief Justice in the Chamber representing the third arm of the state, the Judiciary, is also an established tradition of our Parliament. These two have been appropriately recognised by the Speaker. Beyond them, however, in spite of the fact that we operate in a bi-cameral multiparty parliament, with one side of the House led by the Leader of Government Business and the other side of the House led by the Leader of the Opposition, the Chair seems to follow no fixed rules or order of precedence. 

Last year at the opening of the Eighth Parliament, the Speaker did not even recognise the Leader of the Opposition at the start of his Communication from the Chair, although the Hansard reported differently. We all put it down to a new beginning. Unfortunately, this year again, after recognising the Leader of Government Business the Chair proceeded to recognise the NRM Vice-Chair - a stranger in the Gallery - and honourable ministers who are members of the House under the Leader of Government Business before recognising the Leader of the Opposition representing the other side of the House.

The situation has even been worse in the official receptions that followed these nationally important events. Last year it took the intervention of H.E. the President, who we greatly applaud for consistently following the right protocol, to get the Leader of the Opposition to the presidential table. The Deputy Chief Justice and I had to sit as if we were outcasts at the sides of the table. Her Lordship the Deputy Chief Justice has since abandoned the official reception to avoid the indignity and humiliation. After the Budget Speech this year, it was again arranged for me to sit as an outcast at the side of the table. Since the arrangement this time was deliberate, I politely declined to do so. That is why, members, you did not see me at the reception.

Honourable members, what concerns us in the Opposition is that it is us, together with our leaders in Parliament, who must uphold the dignity of this august House and of all its members regardless of which side of the House we sit. However, since these unfortunate events, I have received no formal apologies or expressions of concern from the Office of the Speaker or the relevant parliamentary department. If we cannot find support and protection in this august House, where do we turn to, honourable members? 

The third issue, Madam Speaker, is the reactions of our colleagues on the government side following statements such as this that we make on the Floor of Parliament. Instead of formally rebutting our contributions with facts and counter arguments, quite often we hear some of our colleagues castigating us for always criticising government without appreciating the good that it has done. 

It is true that sometimes we very strongly criticise government, but then that is the nature of the Opposition. If we do not see things differently from our colleagues, even those things that to them are achievements or positives, we would certainly be redundant sitting on the opposition side. In the same vein, when government adopts our policies, such as compulsory UPE, it never heaps praises on the Opposition. We therefore urge our colleagues that instead of sentiments, let us battle each other with facts and sound arguments as the best practice in our Parliament. 

Turning now to the President’s address to Parliament, allow me to congratulate H.E. the President for his State of the Nation Address. As always, we in the Opposition applaud and appreciate the relaxed and friendly manner in which the President delivers his address. Although it seemed to us that he was dealing with the handiwork of a new speechwriter, he still did quite well. (Laughter) 

Honourable members, we also thank the President for his formal expression of condolences and sympathies to Parliament over the death of the late hon. Dr Yefusa Okulo Epak and the late Brig. Noble Mayombo. Let me take this opportunity to express the Opposition’s appreciation to the entire House and the country at large for the bi-partisan manner in which Parliament and the people handled the funerals of these two distinguished Ugandans. 

Madam Speaker, last year we the Opposition assured Ugandans that: “In Parliament we shall play our roles, carry out our duties, exercise our responsibilities and make our contributions without fear or favour”. In the last session, we lived by those commitments and sometimes we even bent over backwards to ensure harmony in our Parliament and country. We therefore totally agree with, and warmly welcome, the President’s opening remarks on one year under multiparty dispensation when he said: “As it may be appreciated, building democracy is not a one time event or an assignment to which one would assign a lifespan of a couple of years”.

Accordingly, we the Opposition once again assure the whole country that we are committed to the growth of democracy in our country, and that we will do whatever it takes and make whatever sacrifice is required of us to ensure that we lay a firm foundation for the future generations to build on. To be able to do so however, we must urgently harmonise the contradictions in our understanding of what this process entails as illustrated by the President’s comments on politics, constitutionalism and the rule of law.

The Political Scene

On the political scene, the last year was marred by various unexpected brutal and shocking responses of the state to legitimate Opposition activities. The most important of these were the continued harassment of members of the Opposition, including Members of Parliament of this august House, using trumped-up charges; the seizure of the High Court by state security agents; unleashing of the illegal stick-wielding “Kiboko Squad” on innocent Ugandans and the disruption of legitimate opposition rallies and demonstrations by the Police and other state agents. These events generated grave concerns among Ugandans of goodwill and all our international friends, and they have greatly undermined the good name of our country internationally. 

We the Opposition are deeply disappointed that the President chose to downplay these concerns, erroneously assuring us that the worries were misplaced and arguing instead that: “The only thing required of each category of actors is to be law abiding and be guided by the Constitution because the political questions of Uganda were resolved in 1995 in the Constituent Assembly.”

Madam Speaker and honourable members, we beg to humbly disagree with the President on that assertion. To use his analogy of the driver from Kampala to Soroti, the roadmap to sound democratic practice was largely agreed upon and has been enshrined in our 1995 Constitution. However, how we travel the journey - the political questions of acceptable democratic practices - has not yet been resolved. Instead the NRM, now in the driving seat, is telling us Ugandans, like in Franz Fennon’s book, The Wretched of the Earth, that we have no right to demand that they do not drive recklessly or to request that they stop on the way for a break to buy some muchomo or gonja. (Laughter) They have even removed an earlier agreement on regular change of drivers, that is, the presidential term limits, -(Laughter)- that was our only guarantee that a tired and expired driver will not one day once again involve us in some major accident before the end of our journey. (Laughter)

We would like to assert that since our destiny is one in this journey of democracy and national development, dialogue and mutual respect are most critical. It is for this reason that the Opposition holds the deep conviction that having different views must never be taken as dissent under the constitution of any party that claims to be democratic. 

Similarly, while funding parties is important, and we will certainly support a Bill to fund parties objectively and fairly, we strongly believe that genuine dialogue amongst parties will only be possible when the inter-party forum provided for in our law is fully operationalised. We therefore urge the Government and the Electoral Commission to bring into full operation this important forum. 

The other matter in this regard is the urgent need for the NRM to break out of its pseudo-revolutionary and militarist time capsule so as to fully fit into the new multiparty dispensation. Last year, we strongly objected to the continued operations of the Kyankwanzi NRM political school in its old form. We also later strongly objected to dressing district and sub-county officials in military uniform in the name of preparing them to fight poverty under the NRM’s Bonna Bagaggawale scheme. Surely, honourable members, poverty cannot be scared away by military fatigue -(Laughter)- nor can we shoot it away with AK 47s!

This time round, maybe the folly of dressing up decent honourable Members of Parliament in military uniform and making them fumble with AK 47s, a manifest of the expired communist military mindset, including our grandmothers such as the much loved and highly respected hon. Namirembe Bitamazire -(Laughter)- will awaken us all. The Opposition of course welcomes consultations on restructuring the institute to make it relevant to the new reality of our country. 

Constitutionalism and the Rule of Law 

On constitutionalism and the rule of law, we also beg to humbly disagree with the President when he asserts that some leaders (read the Opposition) are deliberately misleading ignorant Ugandans that the rights and freedoms enshrined in Chapter Four of our Constitution are absolute. We have never done so and we are very clear on what the Constitution provides. 

We also know that under Article 17, co-operation with lawful agencies does not mean submission to irregular and arbitrary actions by state security agencies, lawful of otherwise. What we do not accept is that like our driver to Soroti, the Executive, including its agents such as the Inspector General of Police, interprets the law to suit its interest and to undermine ours. Where we differ we must learn to respect each other, dialogue to find common ground or turn fairly to the Judiciary for arbitration. The might and violence that government wields against the Opposition is unjustifiable, unsustainable and only takes us back to the dark past. 

Honourable members, two statements on the above matter must also be brought to your attention. In the first, the President said, “The few who know cannot be forgiven for misleading the innocent majority who may not be all that knowledgeable and who need to be assisted to enjoy the freedoms enshrined in the Constitution maximally.” In the second he said, “While government undertakes to continue protecting the freedom of the press, the law will take its course in all cases of inexcusable false reporting.” 

Madam Speaker, knowing this government, we are certain of what the President means but we submit that this threat is totally uncalled for. Our assurance to all is that in the pursuit of justice for all and real freedom in our country, the Opposition will not be intimidated, and we believe nor will the press and ordinary Ugandans.

On the African Peer Review Mechanism (APRM) under the New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD), we support and fully endorse government’s submission to the review process. As a matter of fact, the Opposition is formally represented in the process. Picking from the President’s statement, however, we feel constrained to caution that the peer review process must not be used to stifle honest criticism and advice from Ugandans and our friends in the international community. 

We are further constrained to advise that we must never bury our heads in our sand and find comfort and diversion in the history of the black people. Instead, we must squarely confront the reality that our democracy and governance systems remain wanting in structure and practice, and that acting objectively and in the spirit of mutual accommodation we can truly move our county forward. 

Security

On security, we agree with government that there has been marked improvement in security since 2005, especially in Northern Uganda and Karamoja. We applaud and thank the Government and particularly its mediation team in Juba led by Ndugu Ruhakana Rugunda who is the chief mediator, Dr Riek Machar, the President and the Government of Southern Sudan, the Special United Nations Envoy, retired President Joachim Chissano of Mozambique, the leaders and delegates of the Lord’s Resistance Army, the international community and all Ugandans who dedicated their energies to the peace process for the great progress in the Juba peace talks  between the Government of Uganda and the LRA.  

Honourable members, the peace dividends that we the Opposition advocated for, for so long as we argued for dialogue, have finally materialised even when the peace is yet temporary. Therefore, as before, we appeal to all stakeholders to end posturing and to continue to give all in their power and remain in the process in order to bring about permanent peace in our beloved country.

We also thank the people of Karamoja for cooperating with the UPDF in the disarmament process. While some remnants of the cattle rustlers still raid neighbouring districts, we agree that the situation has also much improved. We, however, urge government to urgently follow this success with medium and long-term measures to consolidate the peace and bring further progress to the sub-region. Again on this, we see no need for posturing or chest-thumping. 

Economy

In spite of the apparent high GDP growth, the economy remains this country’s greatest challenge, particularly in the areas of availability of adequate power, development of the transport infrastructure and overcoming mass poverty, yet it seems to us that this enormous challenge is lost on the NRM Government. Honourable members were most surprised that in spite of the scandalous delays in construction of the Busunju-Hoima road, Bugiri-Jinja road, the Kampala Northern By-pass and many others when funds have been available, the President chose to say nothing about them. Maybe this is an admission of defeat after so many years of false promises. 

On the power supply, particularly availability of electricity, the President is once again drawing Ugandans into false comfort when the situation is really bad and will definitely deteriorate over the short-term. On the hydropower dam, for example, the President said, “Construction of Bujagali and Karuma power stations has been pursued relentlessly and consistently. For Bujagali, all negotiations are almost completed and construction has started.” While we definitely contest the above assertion, we are at least glad that the untenable pledge to build the two dams in 44 months has ended. Even with availability of funds, we presently have no capacity or capability whatsoever to meet such a target. 

Last year, we specifically stated the following: “Even when government talks about building Karuma and Bujagali, serious consideration must be given to the availability and transportation of cement and steel. Do we have adequate cement in the country to supply both the building industry and the dams? Surely, is 44 months a practical and honest target?” Even before we start building Bujagali, the challenge of availability of cement has caught up with us. As we speak, traders now line up for cement and its price has rocketed from Shs 18,500 to Shs 25,000 per bag and is still climbing -(Interruption)- It is now Shs 30,000 I hear. Cement being the main ingredient in dam construction, Ugandans must brace themselves for up to a 50 percent increase in the cost of constructing the Bujagali Dam. 

The other aspect of the dam construction is false optimism based on the availability of money of our own. As the road works we refer to above have demonstrated, over and above money, with corruption, lack of physical infrastructure, weak logistical capabilities and hurried executions of projects to address reckless political promises, we have never prepared ourselves as a country for such huge projects. So, for the Bujagali Dam, rather than ride on false optimism Ugandans must brace themselves for a long and costly delay in its construction. As if already anticipating this delay, newspapers recently reported about the Industrial Promotions Service (IPS), the lead developer of the dam, warning its contractor, Salini Construction Company, that it will suffer a monthly or annual fine of US$ 5 million for any delay in the dam construction. 

As we freely advised last year, instead of rushing to build two costly low capacity dams, government should consider first building a single large dam even at Murchison Falls with its 650 MW potential or Ayago North with its 450 MW potential. This will buy us time to better prepare to build the smaller dams in a more cost effective manner. 

On petroleum, which the President referred to as “our petroleum”, we are certainly happy and we also thank God that we have at last discovered commercially viable oil deposits in our country. We also thank government for the concerted efforts made to realise this. We fully lend our support to all measures intended to generate maximum benefits to our people from this petroleum. 

We nevertheless have very strong reservations and concerns on how oil issues have been handled so far. Firstly, we the Opposition do not mind the President claiming credit for the success in the oil discovery for he truly deserves the credit. However, because the Opposition have only remained watching as outsiders when visits are made to the oil sites or thanksgiving dinners are hosted for the oil discovery, and since nobody has even bothered to formally brief us on the oil, we get the impression that the expression “our oil” used by the President is of a very narrow sense. We get the impression that it is limited to the President and elements in his government and did not encompass us all Ugandans. 

Second is our alarm at the euphoria and excessive optimism generated by a very rosy picture painted by the President on prospects that the oil discovery holds for our country. Oil has never been a magic bullet for development and instead when not properly handled, it has turned out to be a real curse. Have we not seen long queues for fuel, electricity shortages and dependence on foreign food imports in oil rich Nigeria and more recently even in Iran? What could become of us with our weak institutions, cronyism, high-level corruption and grave neglect of agriculture? 

Considering the above, we the Opposition would like to counsel that rather than rush to exploit the oil for short-term expedience, the decision on the way forward must be long-term, open, well debated, national and not just the preserve of a few.  We advocate for a national petroleum development and use plan that will guarantee transparent and fair sharing of profits with the oil companies and establish a broad balance in use, both short and long-term, and in benefit to all. (Applause)

On the growth of the economy, we took key note of the excitement shown by the President that a respectable GDP growth rate was registered last financial year in spite of the past mistakes of delaying Bujagali and the high oil prices that were global. This excitement was shared by the Minister of Finance, Dr Ezra Suruma, in his budget speech and by our colleagues on the government side who gave the Minister a standing ovation after his speech. To us, the excitement was merely relief that the worst never happened. 

The good performance could not have been because of some correct policies, no; rather, it happened in spite of numerous failed policies of this government. (Laughter) The fact is that over the last one year, the country was greatly cushioned by the peace dividends which led to higher internal production, reduced wasteful expenditure, larger regional trade and renewed investor confidence in our country’s future. How much would we have achieved by now if only government had listened to the Opposition’s voice of reason on peaceful resolution of the conflicts in our country?

Looking at the energy situation, the economic infrastructure, the plight of the peasants in the country and what is in store for them under this government, any excitement and wild optimism about the future of our economy such as we recently witnessed can only be described in the words of Alan Greenspan, the former head of the USA Federal Reserve Bank, as “irrational exuberance”.

Contrary to what the President suggested, we, the doubting Thomases, can never waver in our certainty about this government’s inability to deliver to the poor. Just consider the following exposition by the President on bonna bagaggawale: “…The Cabinet and the Movement caucus have agreed on how we are going to change the lifestyle of the 68 percent of the households that were identified as still being in the subsistence agriculture sector. In the new budget, we shall start with 30 families per sub-county as models. In the next two years, much of the rural economy will be monetised and more factories will be built to process what is produced. Speed, speed is what we need.” 

Without further bothering to argue the merits of what the Government is recklessly promising, we can only advise the country, and particularly our peasants who are the targets here, not to place any more faith about their future in the hands of the NRM - (Interjections) - While they argue for speed, realism, realism is what they truly lack. (Laughter)

The Social Sector

On the social sector, the Opposition would like to register their appreciation for all the progress so far made in the labour, education and health sub-sectors. We, however, hold genuine concerns that we believe the country must address to ensure greater progress.

On the labour front, we once again reiterate our support for the legal reforms that have been undertaken to protect our workers. We, however, urge the Government to put in place more concrete policies and programmes to support the Ugandan workers in the diaspora. We are particularly concerned about reports that some companies that are exporting guards to Iraq have been fleecing these Ugandans. We urge for urgent action and stern measures to be taken against the culprits. 

On education, Madam Speaker, last year we clearly stated that our education system must be designed and invested in, in an appropriately sequenced order that ensures effective human resource development. We also clearly outlined what we wish to see done for all levels of education in our country. Clearly, criticisms by us are genuine and we make them in the best interest of the country. Take UPE for example; we are happy that government is considering implementing compulsory UPE and holding parents responsible for ensuring school attendance by their children, which we advocated for. 

We are, however, greatly concerned about the data presented to justify the success of UPE, particularly on it means and on the failure to accurately portray progress, or lack of it, in quality improvement. For instance, if by June 2006 the total pupil population in primary schools was over seven million and the average number of pupils per year-class was over one million, why must only 435,000 pupils register for the Primary Leaving Examinations in 2007? If at the inception of UPE in 1997, the teacher to pupil ratio was 1:85 when the total pupil population in primary schools was 2.7 million, how come that in 2006, with a pupil population of 7.225 million, the teacher to pupil ratio is down to 1:48, a ratio that required a four-fold increase in the number of teachers since 1997 and yet such increments never took place?

On the construction of polytechnics in every sub-county, which the President committed himself to during the 2001 election, the President insists that the policy has not been abandoned and he castigates the Opposition for false criticism. However, from 2001 to 2003 only 16 of the over 900 sub-counties got their polytechnics. If since 2003 nothing has been done at all, why must the Opposition not say that nothing has been done at all? With this mindset, why then must Ugandans complain when Kenyans, with their country’s 900 plus polytechnics and extensive investment in technical training, take up all technical jobs in our factories, banks, hotels, construction and floriculture industries at our expense? 

Our other great concern is on how our government has handled university education in spite of it being the most important phase in human resource development. The President’s statement on Busitema University is most telling on the matter when he said, “The creation of Busitema University was recently approved by Parliament, thereby putting to rest the cry for a public university in the eastern region of the country.”  This is nothing much else; just political expedience. 

Honourable members, we urge you to critically compare our education policies and strategies with those of our neighbour, Rwanda, a country that also suffered years of national instability like us. It is instructive to note that in the June 25th to July 1st 2007 issue of the East African newspaper, Rwanda advertised for international consultants to help them establish their Human Resources and Institutional Capacity Development Agency. When will our country formulate a systematic response to our human resources development needs? 

In the area of health, the controversy over the use of DDT and other measures to eradicate mosquitoes and to control malaria have largely been settled and we need to labour no more over it. The Opposition understands the imperative of using DDT in the fight against malaria. However, we shall strongly defend the rights of those who, out of conviction, are opposed to the use of DDT. We also urge government to address the question of losses, shortages and expiry of drugs in the National Medical Stores.

Corruption

Corruption remains one of the greatest challenges facing our country. Although we have witnessed a number of arrests on the allegation of corruption, we in the Opposition remain unconvinced that government is ready to act decisively on corruption. Our experiences so far, and the long winding explanations given by the President, have not helped matters. We even worry more when the President attempts to redefine corruption in the context of elections. While we support legitimate arrests made in the fight against corruption, the disjointed and bungled-up arrest of the former ministers of health suggested to Ugandans that government was not one on the decision to carry out the arrests. In the end, the impression created was more of political persecution rather than a decisive fight against corruption. This in turn undermined people’s faith in the institution of the Inspector General of Government that spearheaded the move.

Secondly, as happened with the prosecution of those involved in the purchase of junk helicopters, we know that certain individuals may be selectively excused. The whole prosecution process may also be bungled-up. Certainly, we worry when suddenly the President talks about championing the rule of law, letting investigations take place and letting people defend themselves.

In all this, honourable members, we must caution the IGG. While she and her institution may be acting in good faith, they must avoid being manoeuvred into the corner of public rejection. For then, like has happened to others, those who are now pushing her forward will disown her. Honourable members, on corruption, we must not relax our guard.

The Public Service

On the public service, we welcome the increased budgetary allocation to address the pension arrears. We urge government to consider the plight of the old pensioners. Old Second World War, Uganda Army and UPDF veterans who in 2001 sold their properties or borrowed money to register in Bombo army headquarters are still crying out for support. These and the old teachers who pioneered education in our communities need special consideration.

Regional Cooperation

Madam Speaker, we heartily welcome into our fold our brothers and sisters from Rwanda and Burundi whose countries were admitted into the East African Community at the last Summit of the Heads of State of East Africa in Kampala in June 2007. We also note with appreciation the recent progress in democracy and stability in the countries that neighbour us, and the role played by our troops in Somalia. The enhanced peace and trade benefit all of our peoples.

Work of Parliament

Allow me to also join His Excellency the President in extending our appreciation to this Parliament for the good work done during its First Session. In this Second Session, we in the Opposition will continue to work closely with all our colleagues in order to further strengthen Parliament and address the needs of our people.

Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM)

Madam Speaker, even when the Opposition repeatedly made their position clear, it has persistently been suggested that we are opposed to holding CHOGM in our country. The President alluded to this when he said: “…there have been some individuals and groups who have been working hard to see that CHOGM 2007 is not held in Uganda. They have not only come out with unfounded and malicious allegations but have all along been cynical about the ongoing preparations.” 

The truth of the matter is that we have been deeply concerned that being the next host of CHOGM, our country must uphold the highest standard of democratic practice as laid out in the CHOGM Harare Declaration. This concern has been legitimate, given the unjustified suppression and oppression of the Opposition by government.

Honourable members, we have also been deeply concerned about our preparedness to host this summit, not just physically but also logistically and functionally. Such concerns cannot be cynicism; for instance, we made it clear to government that it was not possible for the AYA Group, who were allocated Nakasero land, and the Saudi investor, who was allocated Shimoni School land, to build their hotels in time for the CHOGM meeting. Time has proven us right. (Applause) 

The matter of hotel space is even more worrying, honourable members. The President in his address reported that we have increased hotel beds from 1,500 to 4,300 to meet the summit target of 4,000. This would be well and good except that it means that through expansion and the building of new hotels, we recently added 2,800 beds to our hotel capacity. This is equivalent to adding 50 rooms to each of the 56 existing hotels, or to building 28 new 100-bed hotels or 14 new 200-bed hotels or seven new 400-bed hotels. Surely, where are these developments that we ordinary mortals do not see?

Honourable members, what about transport and emergency response drills when the summit is just three months away? Recently, at the East African Community Summit, just five heads of state with small entourages caused a one-hour long traffic gridlock at the Conference Centre. What will happen when delegates from 53 countries descend on Kampala in November? We raise these matters because we know that failure will bring collective national shame to all of us.

Finally, allow me, Madam Speaker and honourable members, to accept on behalf of the Opposition the President’s assurance that his government will not be extremely repressive after CHOGM. Our appeal to him is that government should not be repressive at all, mildly or extremely, even when upholding and enforcing the rule of law during and after his chairmanship of the Commonwealth Club of Nations. We are with him in asserting that as we move on, let us all work together for a better Uganda today and tomorrow.

I thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members.  May the Almighty bless us all. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Leader of the Opposition. Honourable members, last week the Business Committee met and we had an agreement with the Whips about members who will contribute. I do not know whether the Whips of all the parties have had time to interact with their members and inform them about the new system. I do have a list from the NRM. I do not have any from the FDC and other parties. I have only one entrant from the Independents. So, I urge the Independents to come to my office. I ask all the Chief Whips, maybe by tomorrow, to give us the breakdown of the contributors. 

Honourable members, to give everybody a chance to speak, we shall only give you seven minutes for now. If it gets pressing, we shall reduce to five.  

4.55
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Female Youth Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of the motion and the seconder. I also do appreciate the counter statement from the Leader of the Opposition. 

I want to appreciate His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda for delivering the State of the Nation Address. I am grateful about the areas of the social sector, improvement in UPE and introduction of Universal Secondary Education because those target my constituents. 

On the issue of the economy, I do appreciate it when the President said that the delay in the construction of the dam and load shedding contributed much to the downfall of the economy. Honourable members, we know that it is Ugandans who can improve the economy. When Ugandans are poor, when they do not have jobs, certainly there will not be economic growth. 

I looked at the statement on the economy to find out the new avenues that the Government is going to create to make sure that the issue of unemployment, especially among young people, is addressed. Madam Speaker, you know very well that the victims of drug trafficking and trafficking in persons are mainly young people who are jobless and poor. Because they have no alternative, they go into those deadly activities. As young people, we look to the Government to provide for us opportunities so that we can avoid indulging ourselves in such dangerous activities. When youth are desperate, they opt for these dangerous means for survival. 

I appeal to the President, since he knows that 74 percent of Uganda’s population comprises of young people, and of these 60 percent are out of school and 25 percent do casual labour where they are exploited. In the formal sector, there are few young people who are employed. That is why you find that many young people are victims of the crime of being idle and disorderly. They are usually victims when there is a demonstration by FDC because they lack what to do. They join such demonstrations even when they do not support FDC.

I appreciate the issue of protection of workers. I also appreciate the commitment of government to introduce many policies that apply to this effect. However, the female workers are still highly oppressed at their places of work. Even though we put those laws in place, the employers themselves have not appreciated this. We need to do a lot to enforce these laws and make sure that women are not oppressed at their places of work.

Madam Speaker, the other issue I want to talk about is still on the economy. The youth in Uganda used to have land. In every district of Uganda, there was land allocated to the youth. In Kampala, this land was sold off to the richest man, Basajjabalaba. This land is for the youth. It was allocated to the youth so that we can construct resource centres that can help provide opportunities for young people to train, read and learn but this land has been grabbed. In some other districts, the district administrations have taken over this land and they do not want the youth to even talk about it. I appeal to the Government to consider this issue and give this land back to the owners, the youth. (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nalubega, where is this land located? What is the plot number? If you want help why don’t you identity it properly?

MS NALUBEGA: Madam Speaker, I have already instructed the commissioner in charge of youth to give us the details of this land and I will bring them here so that we can get this land back; it belongs to us.  

On corruption, the President was very committed and he has always been committed in fighting corruption. We all know that what has deprived Ugandans of their right to get rich, to get employed and to enjoy this country is corrupt people because they steal everything and leave nothing for others. I do not condone corruption but I also doubt the methods and manner the Inspector General of Government uses to fight corruption. 

Honourable members, we have seen several reports written by the Inspector General of Government to this House also written directly to the President to execute the recommendations in those reports. Those reports have been lying in those various offices. Even for those that are sent to Parliament, the Inspector General of Government does not refer to them but the following year she will write another report. It is worrying and leaves a lot of doubt when one culprit is taken as a model in the fight against corruption yet there are several other culprits who are left free. This method should be consistent. If a person is corrupt, we have laws and a manner in which to handle these people; we should not be selective. 

I have seen recommendations of the IGG to the effect that somebody who has misused or abused office should pay certain monies back. In some instances, a person who has misused or misallocated some money should be taken to Luzira. I do not understand the difference here; one is being told to refund maybe Shs50 million and another is sent to Luzira over two million shillings and we say we are struggling to fight corruption. This method of implementing these recommendations of the IGG should be consistent and not selective. A culprit should be a culprit whether he is coloured or not. We might perhaps misunderstand the IGG if she continues handling her work the way she is doing it.

My last comment is on the opening remarks by the President where he was worried about the number of Independents in this Parliament. One of the Independents who seconded the motion tried to explain why they are many in this House. I think the Independents have absolute rights as other Members of this Parliament because we came here by law. It is the law that provides for Independents and I think the 7th Parliament – no, other governments in other countries had an oversight in this because we know that much as we are emphasising democracy, we do not really have democracy within our respective parties. When there is no democracy then we resort to the national democracy, that is the democracy of the people, and that is why we are here. 

I really want to emphasise that unless we, the heads of parties and those who believe in parties, appreciate the principles of good governance, we shall not avoid the Independents in this Parliament nor in other local governments. I want to appeal to all members of the respective parties to appreciate and accord due respect to the Independents because we are full Members in this House and we really speak for our people because that is the first purpose why you are voted as a Member of Parliament. You first become a people’s representative and then you become a party representative. And we shall speak with the mandate of our people and defend them and then we shall also defend the party principles. Thank you, honourable members and Madam Speaker. (Applause)

5.07
MRS ROSEMARY NAJJEMBA MUYINDA (NRM, Gomba County, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want first of all to appeal to Members, especially our male colleagues, that as you debate and present papers, you should know that we the women have multiple roles. We are mothers; we are wives; we are everything and we are legislators. Therefore, you should really try to be precise such that we go home early enough to attend to other responsibilities. (Laughter) Back to the State of the Nation Address –(Interruption)

MS NAJJEMBA: Am I protected?

THE SPEAKER: Order Members. Yes, you are protected hon. Najjemba.

MS NAJJEMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the protection. I now want to go to the State of the Nation Address by the President. I was very impressed when the President talked about funding political parties and I thought the Leader of Opposition would really acknowledge that. But I do not know whether it was by mistake that he did not or it was - I want to say that it is very important that as we are in a multiparty dispensation, parties should be funded. 

As we speak now, some of us are party heads in our different districts. But we know how much trouble you go through as a Member of Parliament looking after your constituency and at the same time looking after your party. So, I really want to thank government and the President because he brought it out and said that Cabinet has already debated it and sent it to the Attorney General. So, it will help us as we encourage multipartism and develop our parties. It is going to be very important that these parties have funds. The issue of the ground not being levelled will cease if we all get money. If NRM, FDC and all the other parties get money, then the ground at that point will be levelled. So, as we go into this multiparty dispensation, funding parties is very important. We are tired of shouldering party problems as individuals.

The other issue is on education. The President talked about teachers being deployed and they refuse to go to some schools where they are deployed. But let us not look at it as just failing to go; rather we look at the underlying causes. Why do teachers not want to go to some schools and they choose to stay in other schools? Maybe the conditions there are not favourable for them. How are the housing conditions, the electricity, the road network, the communication and the water supply? So, let us look at all those things.

In this case, I want to ask the minister concerned to ensure that teachers who decide to go to hard to reach schools are at least motivated. They should be given some incentives to make them work in those hard to reach schools. For instance, in my constituency, which is rural, you go to schools and you find that teachers are not there. When they come to Kampala, they take weeks without going back because of the conditions. But if the conditions can be worked on, then the problem of teachers not reporting on duty will be minimised.

The other issue is agriculture. “Agriculture is the backbone of Uganda.” It has been sung all along but for how long are we going to give it lip service? How much does it take from the national budget? If we are going to talk about changing the peasants from subsistence agriculture to commercial agriculture, how much money have we put in?  There is nowhere in the world that you will find that farmers - especially in developed economies - are not subsidised. But here, farmers work on their own, they just wait for nature, nothing much is being done. So, let us improve on agriculture as the backbone of this country by improving the budget, by providing the markets and by providing the good roads and all that. 

I want to be precise but I cannot leave without talking about APRM (African Peer Review Mechanism). APRM is a voluntary initiative by African leaders. African countries have come up to assess their performance. It is a self-assessment process. I want to ask all of you Members to take part in the APRM. This is the only chance we have as Africans to review ourselves. We are being reviewed in most cases by the western world but this is the time that we Africans are coming up with our homegrown initiative to review our performance in terms of governance. And when I talk about governance it is political governance, it is socio-economic governance; it is economic governance and corporate governance. So, I want to ask all of you colleagues to take part. The commission is there, the secretariat is there, you can also provide memoranda and look at how Uganda is performing, and then we shall improve as a country.

The other issue is the East African Federation. The President talked about it and I want to support him on this one. We can no longer afford to stand as Uganda in this global world. Very many factors have come into play and we need to compete as a country. But as Ugandans, the way we are with our 31 or 30 million people, we cannot compete. So, we need our neighbours and we need our colleagues to be able to compete together in order to have a stronger bargaining power and a bigger market. I have heard Members critique the East African Federation, but I think we need to look at why Uganda should join the federation. Can Uganda survive in this world on its own as a country with a population of 30 million people? 

So, if we cannot survive on our own, then we need our friends and neighbours in order to be able to compete. It is for that reason that you have seen Rwanda and Burundi joining the East African Federation. They are not being coerced; they have seen the benefits; they have understood and they know that their citizens will benefit from the federation. That is why they have come. So, it will be very disappointing for Members of Parliament to de-campaign this process. 

I know there are other issues we have internally as a country: there is the issue of Federo for Buganda. It has not been resolved. But maybe this is a chance for Uganda in that, as we sensitise people on the federation, we also look at our Federo as Buganda because indeed we need it. Thank you very much. 

5.14
MS JANET OKORIMOE (NRM, Woman Representative, Abim): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me the chance to contribute to this debate. I want to start by thanking His Excellency the President for the good exposition of the State of the Nation Address on 7th June, this year. 

Madam Speaker, I want to start my contribution from the cover page. I got so concerned when the Leader of the Opposition was contributing and the serious concerns he raised on how on several occasions he has been treated as an outcast during certain functions. I would like to urge my dear brother not to despair because he is always thought of somewhere else.  When you look at this cover page, you find the Leader of the Opposition pausing seriously and giving a very good smile. (Laughter) At least that is recognition. (Laughter) What about some of us who have not been recognised? At least for him he is here. So, he should not feel that he is always treated as an outcast; he is at least thought of.

The other thing I want to talk about is on page 4 under the political scene where the President noted the hurried manner in which the primaries were -(Laughter) 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Okorimoe albeit reluctant to receive my information. The information I would wish to give her is that, when the Leader of the Opposition talks about being marginalized, he is actually talking about the institution of the opposition. It is not him as a person because today hon. Latigo is the Leader of the Opposition, tomorrow it could be somebody else but the institution remains. Therefore, what he is emphasising is that there should be that recognition of the institution of the opposition and not him as a person. 

MS OKORIMOE: Information is taken but all the same, Madam Speaker, a number of Members of the Opposition have been recognised on this cover page. You can check it. (Laughter) 

I was on page 4 where His Excellency the President noted the hurried manner in which the primaries were conducted. Madam Speaker, I would like to agree with him totally. We suffered a lot during the primaries because of the way they were organised. This was not only for our party but even others. The casualties included people like hon. Cecilia Ogwal on the other side and hon. Omara Atubo. I think in future parties have to do a good job to ensure that people do not scramble during the primaries. The situation became so hard for some of us that we had to create desks in charge of propaganda and malice, for my case. (Laughter) So, it was just to cope with the situation of the poorly organised primaries. In future we need to do quite a lot on how to organise these primaries. At least I know of a Member who suffered during the primaries and he is still bitter up to now. And that is why he sits on the opposition side; not that he supports whatever is on that side but it was the effect of what happened in the primaries. 

Madam Speaker, the other point is on page 5, about constitutionalism and rule of law. The President notes that every Ugandan, starting with the leadership, has a contribution to make. Yes, this is true. Whereas this is so, we have some Ugandans who think that others have nothing to contribute towards this country. There are Ugandans who feel that they have a monopoly of ideas, which is not the case. There are Ugandans who feel jealousy of others and yet if we all united as Ugandans, we would put this country to greater heights. So, I urge all of us Ugandans: let us look at each other as Ugandans and then other things come later if we are to work in harmony for the betterment of our country.

The other comment is on security. I want to appreciate government for what it has done especially for Karamoja; the peaceful disarmament that is going on. We only urge that the process is speeded up so that we shall soon have a Karamoja free of guns. I appreciate mainly our sons and daughters in the UPDF for the peace they have granted some of us in Abim District.  We were under terror from the warriors but because of their hard work, we can now sit in my district and laugh. So, that is one good thing I want to appreciate this government for doing.

On page 33, on education, the President also notes the lowering of the teacher pupil ratio to 1:48, which is fairly good although there is need for improvement. He has also observed that payment of Ugshs 200,000 to primary school teachers has been implemented. Madam Speaker, whereas this is appreciated, we need to revise it upwards with time if resources allow because what a teacher goes through in the classroom is not the best. A teacher also has children to educate in higher institutions of learning and because of these meagre resources, he is not able to cope with the situation and that is why some teachers have other areas of work apart from teaching. You find that they are not able to concentrate in the classroom because they have to look for other ways of survival. So, with time we need to think of ways of raising their salaries upwards. 

In addition, there is this allowance, which was given to teachers from hard-to-reach areas. Some of these monies have been very inconsistent. Some schools are not even getting them; some teachers are not being paid. By the time I came to this Parliament, my district had just received money for only 11 months and yet it had been on the programme for nearly three years. So, it looks like this money is not going to the rightful beneficiaries. Sometimes government comes up with very good programmes but because of corruption, monies end up in wrong hands. There are people who are always out there hovering like lions to cheat using the pen and paper and they are worse than cattle rustlers.  These are the people we need to handle if things are to be corrected in Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, the other comment is on the issue of the kamapesa syndrome where people like money so much. Kamapesa has always been there –(Interruption)- I am quoting from the book. You can hardly address a meeting in the constituency and leave without spending. The President tells us that it is early enough and so we should try to counsel our people. But I feel it is too late because it is now so inbuilt in them that I do not know what we are going to do to ensure that we are free of this kamapesa syndrome.

Madam Speaker, with those few remarks, I want to thank you very much for giving me the chance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Next will be hon. Sserunjogi, to be followed by hon. Baryomunsi and in the absence of hon. Kasaija I will ask hon. Kakoba to make his contribution.

5.24
MR LASTUS SERUNJOGI (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is indeed an honour for me to be given this opportunity to make a comment on His Excellency’s State of the Nation Address. I am extremely grateful for His Excellency’s articulate way in which he put the achievements and identified the gaps in various areas during this first year of multiparty dispensation. I also would like to thank the Leader of the Opposition for coming out with a critiquing, not criticizing, statement in reply though I think it was more on the negative side and little on the positive. I still thank him for the input!


Madam Speaker, I would like to thank His Excellency, for his mature advice to all of us irrespective of our political affiliation by urging us to always observe positions of our parties’ stands when we are debating or making decisions so that we do not antagonize their interests. What this calls for actually is attendance of the caucus meetings and so on. I want to believe that it is lack of attendance, which leads to this sort of disparity. So, that advice is very important.

Madam Speaker, please allow me to make a few comments on the address. The first one regards retention of Kyankwanzi as National Leadership Institute. I come from Kiboga, the host district of Kyankwanzi. We, the people of Kiboga, are very appreciative of having this school retained not only because we are in the cradle of it but because of the output that we have been getting out of it from the Movement system to the multiparty system under which we now operate. 

I would not even advocate further if I had not been there just a week ago and realised its inputs and achievements. My comment is that, it should be given a home because even in last year’s State of the National Address, I remember we agreed that it should be given a home. Therefore, I am wondering whether it would not fit under the Ministry of Information and National Guidance. This is subject to debate.

On the economy, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the efforts of government in trying to improve the supply of power, which definitely is the basis that underlies the industrialisation efforts in this country. 

We have seen the efforts in this address on the construction of dams but my suggestion is that, as we continue constructing the dams, we should let the construction of the grids in respective places continue rather than waiting. For example, in Kiboga, there are towns along Kampala line where the wires are passing over towns for lack of step-down transformers. I am also quite aware that under the concessions and provisions for Umeme, they are supposed to construct lines within a distance of one Kilometre. But my hometown called Kibiga is in a power shadow yet it is within that distance. I suppose that the minister concerned looks at the construction of grids as we wait for the dams to come.

On Prosperity for All (Bonna Bagaggawale), I note with satisfaction the efforts taken by the government in already training the sub-county chiefs who are going to be operating these services at that level. I hope that this will be able to transform about 68 percent of our households who are still depending on subsistence farming. I would like to note that ideally, the Bonna Bagaggawale would be more appropriate if the country is covered like it has been done under the NAADS programme. As you are aware, the NAADS is well endowed with messages on the selection of enterprises. I am quite convinced that districts where NAADS has been already operating are going to do very well under the Bonna Bagaggawale.

Accordingly, I am happy to note that Kiboga District was offered the NAADS programme starting this financial year and it is already operational. I want to inform this House and we are really looking forward to utilising this opportunity. 

We, in Kiboga are also very appreciative and grateful to the government for the road works covering Busunju-Hoima road stretch. The Leader of the Opposition was saying that it has delayed. Right, it has, but this might have been due to one reason or the other. Otherwise, I want to assure this House that it is work well done. The Members of Parliament who travelled to Kyankwanzi last week can testify to that. We are hopeful that the road will facilitate the transportation of our extra surplus under the Bonna Bagaggawale production to the processing plants and markets. 

I know my time is out but, Madam Speaker, allow me to address the issue of education and appreciate the achievements made in the areas of UPE and USE or the universal post primary and training. It is well done. We, in Kiboga, appreciate because government has aided even community schools. If I had time, I would mention a number of them like Katoma in Kibiga, Busula Memorial and others.

However, I would like to also note that some sub-counties in Kiboga District were inadvertently omitted. These include Nsambya, Watuba and Kapeke sub-counties. They actually do not have any community or government aided schools though we are aware that the Ministry of Education is working on their papers. We thank you for all that attention. 

However, I want to note that there is still lack of government-aided polytechnics. I think we need to have a government policy on that. We thank government for the 15 polytechnic schools already started since 2003, but I think the number is still small and we also need a policy where private ones can also be aided.

Still on education, I note that there is need to assist and develop the available secondary schools that have examination centres. This will save students who in many cases walk long journeys to go to these examination centres. I would like to add that improving such centres should include the construction of science laboratories. I urge the ministry to look into this request with a lot of attention.

On the coming events, I would like to say that we appreciate the technologies especially the improvements on ICT. However, I would like to note that in Kiboga, because of too many hills, there are still areas that are lacking telephone signals from the private service providers though I am hopeful that the ministry will look into that.

And lastly, we appreciate the privatisation of the broadcasting services that has seen Kiboga, for the first time in many years under this government, get an FM Radio Station (Kiboga FM), which broadcasts on 89.5. I would like to thank the ministry concerned for making the environment conducive. However, we are still lacking the signal for UBC, both radio and television. Actually we are worried that we might miss viewing CHOGM proceedings. But I am sure those who are capable can still be able to put dishes. I thank you, Madam Speaker and I appreciate the exposure the President put to us during this State of the Nation Address. 

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the development in this House brought about by our Business Committee. I also appreciate that whenever our Business Committee comes up with a new procedure, it should be within the line of the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament. Rule 57 Rules of debate: Time and manner of speaking. “A Member desiring to speak shall rise and address the Chair and shall only speak after catching the Speaker’s eye” not the chief whip’s eye. The procedural matter I am seeking is, under what rule are we proceeding whereby in meetings we do not know where they took place, people caught the chief whips’ eyes and they are just being read to us to speak? Are we not in contravention of our own Rules of Procedure? I am seeking clarification. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will note that this House has a lot of Members and many times there are those who speak more than others and then there are those who never get an opportunity even to speak because they do not have the speed and capacity to catch the Speaker’s eye at the rate the others do. So, in our meeting, we said we should try as much as possible to give an opportunity to as many Members as possible to speak and we agreed with the whips that they consult the Members and come back to us with a list. 

I have been informed that your list will be ready tomorrow from the FDC. That is what your whip has told me. I have got from the UPC but there is only one Member and the others are not here. I do not have the JEEMA list. I do not have the CP list. We did it to ease our work and to give an opportunity to many more Members to contribute. 

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I think Members need to appreciate that innovations are very difficult to kick-start. On Thursday last week, when the Business Committee sat and adopted the new method, the Speaker did communicate it to the House on the Floor of this House. I think the most unfortunate thing is when you decide not to attend Parliament and then you come and begin undoing what was ably explained by the Speaker on the Floor of the House. That is a difficulty we as leaders in this Parliament face. It is not a matter of the opposition, I believe. I am sure there are still those on the side of government who have not even known the procedure that has been adopted. I think we need to give it a trial. As for the opposition, I think I have made it clear in writing to the Speaker that we will be able to submit our list formally first thing in the morning tomorrow. Please bear with us. 

MR KIBANZANGA: Madam Speaker, I am not opposed to this new procedure. My problem is, if you come up with an administrative arrangement, it should be within the line of our Rules of Procedure. This is my concern and as far as I am concerned, catching the chief whip’s eye is outside our Rules of Procedure.

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, with due respect to my colleague, hon. Kibanzanga, Prince, I have been in this Parliament since 1996 and I have participated in debates under the chairmanship of very many Speakers including one of the very eminent Speakers, hon. James Wapakhabulo. In most cases when we debated, the lists could be made of the Members who either wished to speak or those who wanted to speak in future. The only difference was that even when we had the lists, we still had to stand on the Floor and he selected scientifically using his list, but still picking from the Members who were present.

I am happy that this innovation is coming up because it is going to help many Members, especially the new Members who may feel timid into picking up the challenges and also help this Parliament not to be dominated by the more senior colleagues who may have all the tricks manipulating the procedures and speaking at will. 

The only worry is that, if a list is published and Members know it in advance, it may prevent the Members who are not on the list from coming up during the debate. The way we utilise the innovation should be such that, like the opposition whip said, this Parliament should come up with an innovation so that we enable democracy to flourish. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, would you like us to publish the list before lunchtime?

MR DOMBO: No, the lists should be made by the whips and given to the Speaker and the Speaker will utilise those lists as he picks from us as we stand up to seek for an opportunity to talk. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is the position, as I said in the beginning. I have the list of NRM. The chief whip of FDC said he is submitting his list tomorrow. I have got one from UPC, but there is only one UPC Member now. I do not have the JEEMA and CP lists. But certainly, we will go by what you have agreed.

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We as whips are trying to implement what was agreed upon. We are not usurping powers of the Speaker and for us in the NRM we are very democratic. Members were called upon to express interest and indicate on which day they would like to contribute. And, Madam Speaker, you have the names of those who were interested in contributing today. There is another list for Wednesday in your Office and another list for Thursday and maybe Friday. So, it is not that the whip is sitting in her office and picking on who should speak. All those who are here have already expressed interest. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I can add is that, in the Business Committee meeting, I particularly made an appeal to the committee to find a way of helping Members. I am aware of Members who do not stand at all and are here in this House.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, I would love, if you could make it very clear that if at all you book for Tuesday and you decide to absent yourself, you lose the chance. If some body is a Member of this House and does not want to stand to be seen, then you cannot choose him unless you are going to amend the rules. 

MR KATURAMU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Arising from what hon. Dombo has said, putting down names both from the opposition and the government side is a good innovation. But to make the debate flamboyant on the Floor, how do we treat Members who are not on the list particularly on points of information and clarification. Could they catch your eye so that they also participate?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think there has been no failure to catch the Speaker’s eye in the history of this House in my stewardship. You have always caught my eye and that has not been affected.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I just want to give a simple input that the process of making the list should not infringe on the freedom with which Members used to debate in this House. I still emphasise on hon. Dombo’s contribution. Much as the list is submitted to you, the power should still remain to the Speaker to exercise discretion to balance who should talk when and at what time, otherwise we are going to come here for a long ceremony of speeches after speeches and not a parliamentary debate and it will kill the spirit which we have been holding.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, we are doing this for only the State of the Nation Address and the general debate on the budget. The other matters will continue normally. Hon. Otto, I do not know whether you appreciate how difficult it is to give an opportunity to over 200 Members to speak in one week.

5.45
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am not one of the timid MPs hon. Dombo was referring to, because he was saying that some new Members of Parliament may be timid. But I think we are doing very well.

I want to thank hon. Sekikubo and hon. Charles Oleny for the motion they have brought to us and to also thank the Leader of the Opposition for his response to the State of the Nation Address. But let me clear one small issue from the on set, which the Leader of the Opposition raised on page 2, the second paragraph. He said that we operate in a bicameral multi-party Parliament. But I think this is not correct. This is a unicameral Parliament, because a bicameral parliament is where you have two chambers, the lower house and an upper house. The presence of government and opposition in the same chambers does not make it a bicameral parliament. So, I wanted to first clarify that for the records of this House.

I stand to support the motion that has been brought to this Parliament and given that we do not have a lot of time, I will just quickly comment on a few issues, which were raised by His Excellency the President.

First, I want to comment on health. In the President’s statement, he touched on the issue of Malaria being one of the leading causes of death and morbidity in this country. He went a great length to explain the need to urgently use DDT for in-door spraying as one of the strategies to fight Malaria.

Much as the Leader of the Opposition says that there seems to be consensus on the use of DDT, I still hear voices in the public, prominent members of the public opposing the use of DDT. So, I would like to urge Parliament, like the Leader of the Opposition said, that we should speak with one voice and promote the use of DDT. Because the arguments being advanced to stop its use are not scientifically correct. There is the Stockholm convention, which clearly guides on how DDT can be used for public health interventions. And for some of us who come from Malaria prone districts like Kanungu and others, we would like to Ministry of Health to move much more quickly in introducing DDT.

On the case of Kanungu, there was an exercise to spray using Icon earlier this year, which was supposed to be supplemented by another spray four months later, which should have been this July or early August and we hope the Ministry of Health is in the process of ensuring that we get another round of spraying either with DDT or Icon.

Still on the issue of health, we still have a very big challenge with our health services in this country. The interventions in our health sector are implemented under the Health Sector Strategic Plan, which runs for five years. But when you analyse the funding for the health sector, you find that the plan is only funded with 40 percent of what is required every year to achieve the objectives and the targets, which are set in this plan. And with this low funding, we cannot meet most of the targets which have been set. We shall be raising more issues when we discuss the budget, but I think there are critical challenges, some of which the President did not raise which must be noted: the issue of functioning health facilities and units, the issue of human resource for health and the issue of availability of drugs in our health centres are very critical, and we always have gaps which challenge us as Members of Parliament.

He also commented on the issue of ARVs and the subject of HIV/AIDS. It is a very big concern because we estimate that about 200,000 Ugandans currently need ARVs. But you find that only 84,000 Ugandans access them, let a lone the dropouts, because the monitoring is also not very strong. That means that less than half of those who urgently need ARVs in this country actually access them. That is a challenge because one of the problems that we have is that, up to 95 percent of the HIV/AIDS budget is funded by external donors. The domestic allocation is less than 0.5 percent. 

Therefore, as we confront the issue of HIV/AIDS, and as we look at the issue of access to ARVs and other forms of treatment, we must also look at how much we contribute as a country. And I want to suggest that in future, as we start the budgeting session, we should also explore possibilities of introducing a tax for HIV/AIDS treatment (for ARVs) so that we can have a fund where we contribute and be able to buy our own ARVs and other treatments, because some of these funders from outside are not sustainable.

I would also like to comment on the issue of education. I think a lot has been raised on the issues of UPE and USE. I heard the Leader of the Opposition saying that making UPE compulsory is an idea for the opposition. But I also see the NRM promising in its manifesto to make UPE compulsory. The Directive Principles of State Policy in the Constitution also say that UPE should be compulsory. So, I do not know when the opposition started that campaign. In fact, in our regions, the opposition, particularly FDC, was heavily de-campaigning UPE - (Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, I would like to give my colleague information that Ugandans own the idea of UPE being compulsory. I remember in the Seventh Parliament, the Committee on Social Services urged the Ministry of Education to make UPE compulsory, and as I speak, we already have a Bill on that. So it is not true that that idea is a brainchild of the opposition.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I think now is not the time for us to wriggle on what has been seen to be good to Ugandans. It is a fact that when you look at the platform of Forum for Democratic Change and its manifesto during last year’s presidential and parliamentary campaigns, we did acknowledge that fact that Uganda needs to embrace Universal Primary Education. And we underscored that it should not just be UPE alone, but that it must be made compulsory and this was arrived at out of the eight years experience that we had of UPE.

Because the official position of government has been four children per family and that preferential treatment should be given to the girl child and children with disabilities. But we said no, if it is not compulsory, what will happen in those communities, which have not yet appreciated the value of education. So, if NRM has got that position, which we already had, then I think we should applaud each other for meaning well for our country.

MS MUNYIRA: Madam Speaker, I get very amazed to see the opposition coming up to claim this programme at this time. That means that there are so many other programmes that the NRM has put up and they see that they are good for this country, but they just do not want to admit it.

Many times, the President has said that the policy was four children per family. But because children turned up in big numbers, so he said that there is no problem, “Muleke bonna basome” meaning that leave all of them to go to school. We have discussed this at different fora. I am very amazed that they would like to claim that it was their brainchild; that means that there are so many other programmes that have come up and have been rejected when they are actually good for this country. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I hope that all of you are aware that this is a resolution of the African Education Ministers in the OAU in 1963. That is when they resolved that we should have universal compulsory primary education. (Applause) So, also thank them as you battle for –(Laughter)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members for the contribution. My concern on making UPE compulsory is that, when it was established, it was done under an administrative instrument. The Chairman of the Social Services Committee referred to the Education Bill, which is before the committee. I have perused through it but the ministry is not very clear on that aspect of being compulsory, and I want to urge Parliament that when we debate it in the committee and also on the Floor, we need to introduce that aspect of making it compulsory. 

I also want to make a comment on the issue of pensions. It was raised by H.E. the President, expressing the commitment of government to address the various forms of pensions. I want to appreciate that but also say that it is one of the thorny issues that we face as Members of Parliament because there is a backlog of pension arrears ranging from servicemen that were in the East African Community. There are also servicemen who participated in various armies in this country. One of the problems is that, information does not flow very well to the public. Most of these claimants do not know where they should go and how they can access some of these entitlements. Therefore, we would want to urge the Ministry of Public Service and other concerned ministries to pass on information to the public so that they know how they can claim some of this money. 

The President also mentioned the various reports, which have been produced on investigations of several issues. He specifically referred to the one where the Police, as an institution, was investigated. He did say that some of the recommendations in the reports are implemented in a long-term basis. 

I would like to raise the issue of the welfare of the police force because when you go to their barracks - I was recently in Naguru- you find three or four police officers sharing one unipot. You find that one of them is married while one is not and they share the same unipot. I would like to urge the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the entire government that as we budget for these institutions –(Interjection)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank doctor for accepting this information. It is true that the state of conditions under which our police officers live is very deplorable, to the extent that even married couples share the same unipot. Complaints have been registered by police officers that when they are sent out on night duties, they are not sure of the safety of their women; other people seem to take advantage and also help them in that respect. This problem is real and we need government to come up and help our police officers. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Wadri, I think that will supplement what I was raising. It is also true that when you look at the statistics of HIV/AIDS within the police force, for instance, the infection rates are very high due to the poor living conditions, including accommodation. We, therefore, want to stress the point that as we plan for these institutions, we should put the issue of the police institutions as a priority. 

I want to briefly comment on the issue of multiparty politics because the President went at length to comment on various aspects of multiparty politics in this country. I think there is a lot of anxiety as we start multiparty politics under our 1995 Constitution, and we would want to appeal to the parties to, as much as possible, attempt to exercise and strengthen internal democracy so that we can grow as we move. There seems to be also little willingness for parties to embrace young leaders who are coming up to participate in the leadership of these parties. This is true for all parties across the divide. Therefore, we need to be patient but also we need to be accommodative in our parties because we are responsible for the future of this country. Therefore, parties should ensure that there is internal democracy; there should be participatory decision making within the parties; and the various parties should respect each other if we are going to move forward in this country. 

Under the current circumstances, I think the issue of Independent Members of Parliament and independent elected leaders is still relevant as we build the strength of the various political parties. In my view, it is still important that we maintain our legal framework of having Independent Members of Parliament and also elected leaders at various levels, as we strengthen democracy within our parties. I thank you very much.

6.01
MR ONYANGO KAKOBA (NRM, Buikwe County North, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this chance. I want to join the other honourable members in supporting this motion and I want to thank H.E. the President for his elaborate State of the Nation Address. I also want to thank the movers and the Leader of Opposition for the comments. I am going to restrict myself to three issues: One, national issues and as an expert on international relations and diplomacy, I will also talk on international issues. 

To begin with, I want to thank the government for the effort it has taken in starting a project that will provide power to this nation. I want particularly to thank the government for taking the initiative to start constructing the Bujagali project because without power we cannot do much. We know that power is the heart of development and if we are to move ahead in development then we need power. That is why I am grateful! 

The Bujagali project is in my constituency, and I want to report that the project has started. People are on the site and the project is moving on. However, as I made an appeal to this House some time back, we still have some issues on the ground that we need to resolve. One of them is the issue of land titles for some people who were resettled. Up to now they have not got the land titles. The other issue is of the transmission line. There is a high voltage transmission line that is supposed to be built from the site up to Mutundwe but the people who were affected have not yet been compensated.  I think those are issues that we need to sort out to make sure that the project is not delayed any further because we needed power yesterday.  

Madam Speaker, having talked about that, allow me to touch on two international issues that I wanted to talk about. One is the issue of Somalia and I want to thank our government for the initiative that it took to send troops to Somalia. All of you are now seeing the fruits. Things are not yet 100 percent but at least from what we hear, there is an improvement. My appeal to the other African countries is that, they should come on board because this is not a Ugandan issue. It is an African issue and we really need to come in and solve the question of Somalia. It is only then that we shall talk of a well-organised political federation at continental level.

Secondly, still on the issue of Somalia and regional peace, in addition to sending these peace missions, we need to work out a mechanism whereby we shall prevent these conflicts. We need to put in place early warning mechanisms because if you look at the models of the development of conflicts, they are basically two: One of them is that a big conflict develops as a big conflict right from the beginning. The other one is that, a big conflict starts as a small conflict but when it is not attended to, it develops over time into a big one.  

Most of the conflicts on the African continent fall in the second model. They normally start as small conflicts but eventually develop into bigger conflicts when they are not attended to. Therefore, if we had in place early warning mechanisms we would be able to detect those small conflicts and prevent them before they develop into bigger conflicts.  

A case in point, under the IGAD arrangement there was a protocol that was formulated (the early warning mechanism) but ever since that protocol was formulated, a number of countries have not ratified it including Uganda. It is unfortunate that the Minister of Internal Affairs is not here but since other ministers are here, they may pass on the message. We would be interested to know why Uganda has not ratified this protocol of early warning mechanism within the IGAD arrangement yet we have a number of conflicts here? And we feel such an arrangement would go a long way to prevent these conflicts. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, the other issue that I want to talk about is the issue of the African Peer Review Mechanism (APRM). I want to thank our government for embracing this review because it is one of the ways that we, in Africa, shall be able to check on our governance. When you look at it, it is voluntary. I only hope it will be made compulsory so that each African country is peer reviewed. It is the issue of governance that is bringing all the problems of under development and it is one of the major reasons and I believe if we handle it then we would go a long way in sorting out this issue.  More so, the question of leadership on the African continent needs to be addressed because most of these problems that we are talking about are as a result of leadership.  Once we solve the issue of leadership, then we shall go a long way in sorting out African problems.  

There is a brilliant scholar, Henry Bryant, who said, “The heart of the problem is the problem of the heart.” This means that if you want to solve the problems in the world then you need to look into men’s hearts. You need to look into the leader’s heart. Once they are sorted out, then the other problems will be sorted out. Thank you very much.

MR SSEKIKUUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I hope with this debate we are fulfilling our constitutional duty of Article 101(1) of the Constitution and I would think that when Members raise these issues there should be substantive leadership on the part of government to be able to respond to them. We should not be talking to ourselves.  

It is true that as the mover of the motion, I am taking note but I may not be able to respond substantively. With due respect to the honourable ministers in the House, I would think this debate deserves seriousness because Members are raising pertinent issues to the sector ministries, which the ministers around may not be able to cover.  Issues of defence, issues of foreign affairs and issues of the economy are very pertinent. 

May I suggest that we should not be here to comment about the present State of the Nation Address, but provide substantive answers and responses to the issues being raised by Members? I seek your guidance on that matter, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are absolutely right. Actually I am embarrassed that the Members who should be responding to all these issues are majorly absent. So, I have been forced to discontinue proceedings for now. I will adjourn the House to tomorrow at 2.00 O’clock.

(The House rose at 6.13 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 25 July 2007 at 2.00 p.m.)



