Wednesday, 24 July 2002

Parliament met at 2.33 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE NILE BASIN INITIATIVE BILL, 2002

THE MINISTER OF WATER, LANDS AND ENVIRONMENT (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the bill entitled, “The Nile Basin Initiative Bill, 2002” be read the first time. I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of the House.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, we have been used to a tradition whereby when the appropriate Minister lays the papers on the Table, they should be seen to have been received, but it seems to me that the papers he is talking about are nowhere to be seen.

THE SPEAKER:  Which papers?  We are dealing with the bill. 

MR LUKYAMUZI: The bill?

THE SPEAKER: Yes.

MR LUKYAMUZI: I am referring to the bill.  

THE SPEAKER:  You are referring to the bill?

MR LUKYAMUZI:  Yes.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE UGANDA TEA GROWERS (REPEAL) BILL, 2002

THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Dr Kisamba Mugerwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that The Uganda Tea Growers Co-operation (Repeal) Bill, 2002 be read the first time.

THE SPEAKER: The bill stands committed to the appropriate Committee of the House.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

STATEMENT TO PARLIAMENT BY THE MINISTER OF WORKS HOUSING AND COMMUNICATIONS ON THE ROAD ACCIDENT THAT OCCURRED AT RUTOOTO ON MBARARA-KASESE ROAD ON 18 JULY 2002.

MR RUZINDANA: Mr Speaker, I have got a copy of the Minister’s statement, but it is on the bus accident in Bushenyi.  However, there have been other accidents on the lake and in other places, and no statement has been made.  Can the Minister make a comprehensive statement rather than this one?

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, I think the observation by the honourable Member might be correct, but as far as the Minister is concerned, he is making a statement. I have not seen the statement, but since a statement of a Minister attracts debate, I think it will be appropriate after the statement has been made for the other observation to be made. We may not stop him from presenting the statement which he has prepared for today, but then he will hear what you say after he has made it.

THE MINISTER OF STATE (TRANSPORT) (Mr Andruale Awuzu): I thank you, Mr Speaker for allowing me to make a statement to the House on the accident that occurred at Rutooto on Mbarara-Kasese road.  As you said, after my statement, if Members have questions to ask about, for example, the accidents on the lake and other relevant matters concerning -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, you proceed with your statement. Do not anticipate a debate, you proceed with the statement.

MR ANDRUALE: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I am sure you are aware of the tragic road accident which occurred towards the end of last week, resulting in terrible carnage and heavy material loss. 

The accident occurred at Rutooto Trading Centre, 35 kilometres from Bushenyi District Headquarters on Kasese-Mbarara road. It involved a Kampala bound bus registration No. UAA 227C, belonging to S.B Safe Journey Bus Service, and a fuel tanker of DR Congo registration No. HZ1348C/KV91346 destined for the DR Congo. About 70 persons perished in this accident.  Two of the dead were identified as Indian UN peace keepers in the DR Congo and the number of Congolese accident victims is about 18.

The police accident report indicates that the fuel tanker lost control and collided with the speeding Isuzu Coach, thereby causing an inferno.  The police and the general public tried to put out the fire, but to no avail.  By the time the fire was put out, the accident victims were burnt to ashes and beyond recognition.  I, however, thank the police and the people of Rutooto for their attempt to rescue the accident victims

His Excellency the President, on behalf of Government, sent a condolence message to the bereaved families. I join the President also in conveying the Ministry’s condolence.

The charred bodies, except those of the two Indian UN Officials from the DRC, the driver and a schoolboy, were buried in a mass grave at Kasese. Government was represented at the funeral by hon. Crispus Kiyonga, the Chief Political Commissar and Member of Parliament. I represented the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications at the funeral. May the souls of the accident victims rest in eternal peace!

The likely causes of this accident were a mechanical defect in the case of the fuel tanker, and over-speeding in the case of the bus, plus undisciplined driving in both cases.  

Government will continue to sensitise, through seminars and road safety awareness campaigns, all motorists on the road accident menace. Road safety calls for much discipline in road use.  During the campaigns, motorists are warned about dangers of over speeding and driving vehicles in dangerous mechanical conditions, which are a major cause of tragic accidents, like the one in question.

To minimise the occurrence of such accidents, Government will soon bring to this House the Amendment Bill of the Traffic and Road Safety Act, 1998. The principles of the amendment bill are before Cabinet awaiting approval. The Bill seeks to re-instate the suspended and more deterrent sections concerning causing injury or death through dangerous, reckless and careless driving and over speeding. 

As a control measure, however, in the case of public service vehicle omnibuses commonly known as coaches, the Traffic Police shall be advised to monitor and enforce compliance with the public timetables. The timetables for the coaches are based on an average speed of 50 kilometres per hour, stops and traffic jams inclusive. Therefore, a journey of six hours, Kasese-Kampala, should not be done in four hours. The Police should check the timetable and punish offenders according to the law.

Let me once again thank the Government for arranging and facilitating the mass burial of the accident victims I also thank the Police and all volunteers who participated in the rescue of the victims and removal of the bodies from the bus wreckage. 

Let me once again take this opportunity to warn motorists, especially the public service vehicle drivers, to strictly observe the traffic and the road safety laws and regulations and the Highway Code in an effort to reduce road traffic accidents and loss of lives on the roads. Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Applause).

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it is proper for us to stand and observe a minute of silence in this respect.

(The Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking clarification from the honourable Minister on the following points:  

Number one: was his statement a news item or a report to this House? It was not sufficiently detailed to give us an idea of what the Government is thinking about this, except a casual mention that a bill is forthcoming on road safety. 

Number two: I would like to make the following recommendation to the Minister. At the moment, road traffic, especially heavy trucks, are carrying inflammable and highly dangerous materials during the busy hours of the day. Do you have any plans to restrict the time of movement of these trucks? You could restrict them, say, to only between the hours of 9.00 p.m. and 6.00 a.m. to minimise the exposure and contact with normal traffic, especially civilian.  

Number three: I have noted with great concern that there are other vehicles also carrying highly inflammable material such as carbon-dioxide, oxygen, nitrogen and who knows, maybe even herbicides, which could be equally inflammable. I wonder if you have taken any action to restrict such movement.

We have to restrict this transport of heavy trucks on the roads. Why don’t we move bulk cargo back to the railways? We cannot have this situation going on forever!  First and foremost, they are damaging our delicate roads. Within no time, these roads are destroyed.  As a matter of fact, I do not see any weighbridge between Busia and Jinja for that matter. I am not familiar with the area beyond Kampala to the West, but between Busia and Jinja, there is no weighbridge.  How do you know –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, you should be familiar with all parts of the country in view of what you did last year.  (Laughter).

MR SITENDA SEBALU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I left the Floor on account of your intervention, but I was not aware that I was politely being asked to resume my seat. If I may be accorded one more second to finish my –(Interjection)

THE SPEAKER: Then you agree with me that you should not have actually said that you are not familiar with other parts of the country other than the east. (Laughter).

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was simply saying that we need a weighbridge between Busia and the last point in the western part of Uganda to determine the weight of each axle, that is, the kind of weight they put on our roads. Last but not least –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  Proceed and finalise.

MR AWORI: I was following your facial expression, Mr Speaker. I thought you were politely asking me to resume my seat. However, last but not least, the point was raised prematurely by my colleague, hon. Ruzindana, that why should we get this statement on just one incident and yet there have been so many accidents?  

I was disappointed the other day when we lost six councillors from Karamoja district when they were coming from a very important NRM seminar at Kyankwanzi. Nobody mentioned anything in this House, not even a word from the Minister responsible or from the NRM Secretariat - nothing! 

These were people who had gone to learn something about promoting the Movement and they were killed and you said nothing! Are you sacrificing them on the Movement platter or what? I was very disappointed, and I am sure for every Karimojong councillor you lost, you have also lost more than 100 supporters.  I am sure you are aware of that.

Also, that particular vehicle in which they were travelling was hit by a heavy-duty truck. This is dangerous! We need to know from the Government the details of this bill so that we can add some more. But the most important thing is, remove heavy or bulky cargo from the road back to the railways.

MR SITENDA SEBALU: I am rising on a point of clarification from the Minister. I have listened attentively to the Minister’s speech, but he has not talked about anything like indemnity or compensation. 

In this very accident, one of my constituents called Mukiibi died, and the family was asking me that in such a case, in a catastrophe like this one, who compensates the bereaved family? Is it the insurance, because I understand this bus had third party insurance? Some time ago when we had an air crash, the families were compensated. Is it the Government of Uganda who compensated these families? 

This man who died had a family; he was a polygamist and he had two women and ten children. The children are now all orphans, left to nobody.  So, in this context, I want to know from the honourable Minister, who compensates the family; is it the Government of Uganda or the insurance?  Thank you very much.

MR KALULE SSENGO (Gomba County, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I do not know what immediate steps the honourable Minister is taking to control over speeding on our roads. Most of these accidents that have happened are as a result of over speeding.  Take the example of the accident we had in Iganga where over 60 people died, now there is this recent one and so many others that we have experienced in this country.  

I think it is not enough for the Minister to say that Government is going to do this; we need immediate steps! These coaches are a menace on the road. They are hell! In fact, if a coach comes near you, it is better for you to run to the bush and let it pass. These people are driving as if they are going to heaven.  So many people have perished because of these coaches – (Interjection). Mr Speaker, I would not wish these people to go to hell, that is why I am saying, “as if they are going to heaven.”

THE SPEAKER: No, I think the inquiry is; do you think people hurry to go to heaven?

MR KALULE SSENGO: That is the impression they are giving us, Mr Speaker.  Then we have got a problem of taxi drivers.  These are people who have no regard for other motorists. When a taxi driver finds you, first of all, even when he has made a mistake, he will start off by abusing you.  He will insult you; he will drive anyhow. You will agree that taxi drivers have caused most of these accidents we have had. I do not know what steps the Minister is immediately taking to punish these taxi drivers.  They have no regard for the law; it is as if they are in their own country!

On the question of driving permits, why do we not look into the manner in which people are acquiring driving permits?  Most of these taxi drivers you see these days begin off in a washing bay. They start driving those vehicles there, then they go into the taxi park, they start calling people to board the buses, then after driving for a few days, they go and buy these driving permits through illegal channels and the next day you find them driving taxis on the roads.  These are also people who cause accidents on our roads.  What steps is the Minister taking to make sure that people get driving permits through the legal channels?  

I would recommend, Mr Speaker, that if need be, let all these Ugandans be re-tested, because most of these people that are having driving permits never went through the normal process of being tested and all that. They just paid money and they were given driving permits! And these are the people who are now on our roads; these are the people who are causing us accidents. Mr Speaker, I thank you very much!

MR SAMUEL ABURA PIRIR (Matheniko County, Moroto): Mr Speaker, it is a pity that we lost such lives in such a situation that could be prevented. The minister’s statement that the people of Rutooto and the Police attempted to put out the fire from the burning vehicles shows how poor we are, not to equip the Police, the fire fighting force in the field.  We are supposed to have the Police equipped with the fire appliances.  You know this is a fire, which is a wild fire; it needs special chemicals and appliances.

Another thing is the traffic. We do not have Traffic Police Officers on the road any more.  They are only seen in Kampala, but on the highways, no traffic officer is there, simply because they are not equipped with the motorcycles to monitor the movement of the vehicles. So, Mr Speaker, I think the precautions we have to take are that the department of the Police should really be equipped and the highways should be patrolled. The fires have become now very, very destructive.

A few weeks ago, a school lost a building. They had to use ordinary water, and you know that fire has got categories – there is ordinary fire, electricity fire, gas fire; all these need appliances and chemicals which we do not have. And the department of fire up to now does not have any engine that can fight any fire that breaks out. So, the war of the fire is more serious than if you talk about Kony. All these buildings are at risk. So, we need to equip the department of fire brigade to save us, and then the traffic department.

I think if we are to test all the drivers in Uganda, a recommended age for a driver for a minibus is about 35 years, but today it is the youth who are driving, navigating these heavy commercial vehicles and they do not care about life. So, that is another thing we have to look at. Sorry, Mr Speaker, for all those people who perished!  Thank you.

MR GODFREY KIWANDA (Mityana North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I also rise to comment on this sad event where our people perished in such an accident.  Mr Speaker, I would like the Minister also to clarify on this. The way we see our roads being repaired, they can also cause accidents. Last time we were here commenting on the Kampala-Mityana road, but at times when we are going to our constituencies, you find a certain part being repaired. A driver can be tempted to increase speed on a repaired part, and another part is damn bad, and such cases can cause serious accidents. If we are giving out these contracts, I think the Minister should be in position to see whether these people being given the contracts are doing the best job possible.

Mr Speaker, another one is the way we are seeing heavy trucks carrying fuel in the city centre.  Last time we had another accident at the railway station here, near Mukwano Factory, and if such a truck was in the middle of the city, as we are seeing some of them going through the city, I think such could have caused a very, very big problem in our city. So, there should be some regulations as to what time these trucks should move because you can see them at times in the middle of the city with a very heavy traffic jam, and if anything happens from there, it can be disastrous. So, the Ministry should come out with a policy on how these trucks should get permitted to move in the city.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MRS KASULE LUMUMBA (Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask the Minister, has he tried to work with the Ministry of Gender to really know the number of orphans left behind, or you are leaving those to nobody?  You should work with the Ministry of Gender so that these orphans are registered and something is done for them. The front bench should stop neglecting orphans in this country!   

Another issue I want to raise to the Minister is that we have a problem of overspeeding, but I have noted that over speeding in Uganda goes together with overloading. It is only here in Kampala where we only sit three on a seat in a taxi, but beyond Kampala, you can even sit eight, despite the size. They do not mind. So, I also suggest that you work with the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the issue of overloading is looked into, even when it is beyond Kampala.

The Minister has said that there were foreigners in the bus and maybe some were tourists. Have you tried to communicate to their mother country to tell them what happened, so that politics does not take over and destroy the image of Uganda? We need tourists but the tourism industry might lose out because of that.  

I would like to inform you that we are now talking about accidents on the roads outside Parliament, but we might also have accidents in the parking yard of Parliament. Last week, they almost knocked a Member of Parliament when I was looking, just at the front, and it was a vehicle from the President’s Office. 

I am suggesting, Mr Speaker, if those people cannot respect us with their vehicles, why don’t they use their own gate and leave our gate. (Applause). There was also a day when a vehicle came with army men in uniform and they had rejected to stop at the entrance for the policemen to check them. So, if we have that problem of the other office underlooking this office, then we better get rid of them before we get problems   You see, Mr Speaker maybe you are always accompanied – (Laughter)- but some of us who move without accompaniment, some of us who do not have security men or women can easily be knocked by these people.  

Since we talked about public service vehicles and trucks, I would like to inform you that in Mabira, these trucks which carry sugarcane from various places to deliver it to SCOUL, move throughout the day and throughout the night. They do not have indicators or reflectors at all, and remember we have ever lost tourists in that area. So, can you please, Mr Minister, give some directive to those people so that the trucks stop moving during the night -(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague. Just to strengthen her statement on tourists, Abid Alam of Casements, a German investor and myself, almost lost our lives because of those trucks. In fact, most of the diplomats in this country never drive along Jinja road when it is past 7:00 p.m. because they call that a “killer road”. Government needs to act on this as a matter of urgency.  Thank you.

MRS KASULE LUMUMBA: Lastly, Mr Speaker, I personally feel that the statement made by the Minister is plain; it is lacking a lot of details, like other colleagues have said. 

I also request that when something happens, do not look at where it has happened, look at what has happened and give a statement. I also think that his statement does not really bring out what is going to happen after. Things are going to stay as they have been. I would suggest that, please, have some words, which show that there will be a change after this statement. Thank you very much.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO (Agago county, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to seek a number of clarifications from the honourable Minister following his statement. First of all, I would like to know from the Minister if he was aware of the fact that in the morning of that very day, when the bus collided with the fuel trailer, along Jinja road an army truck hit a fuel tanker and five soldiers died on the spot, and a number of them were taken to hospital. 

By the grace of God, we were going to Jinja to the show and we found the driver of the trailer, who was not over speeding and who apparently was not in traffic error, thoroughly beaten. If we had not intervened, he probably would have died for no fault of his. Was the Minister aware of that? If not, was it not significant that it occurred on the same day, and therefore, would have been commented on as part of what was going on, on our roads?  

Secondly, I am seeking clarification from the Minister. I see, in his statement, that there is a bill to amend the Traffic and Road Safety Act.  When you read it, the amendment seems to be motivated by what happened on that particular day when we lost so many people, yet the statement says that the amendment is already in Cabinet and has been waiting.   

I do not know, Mr Minister, whether you have statistics that give you an indication of what the real problem is on our roads. Yes, it is very tragic that 70 people perished in an accident, but it important to act, even under those circumstances, soberly. If there is one accident and you move to put an amendment, you may completely miss the point. 

What I see here are difficulties that we are facing by the nature of what is happening in this country.  We are having more and more vehicles on the roads, the roads are narrow, and because everyone is moving on the same road in opposite directions, even if you lowered speeds, accidents would still occur. 

In many of those countries where vehicles have become so many, the general trend is to say that vehicles going in one direction will take their own route, the other ones going another direction will take their own route. I do not know whether in our ten-year road development programme we have factored in the reality of this rapid growth in the number of vehicles using our roads, because that is the bigger challenge and not the accidents that manifest those challenges.

Lastly, I want the Minister to give me clarification on this speed limit of 50 kilometres on average. I remember that sometime ago, Police were arresting people. You would get vehicles leaving Lira and by 10.00 O’clock they are in Kampala. I remember that they were arrested for a few times, but after that it died out, simply because even the policeman, if he is coming from his leave and he has to report to Kampala before midday, he would prefer the fast bus. 

With those buses, the convenience is that you travel quicker and speed itself is not a problem.  If you go to the Internet, they will tell you we are now developing faster things because the world is getting faster and faster everyday.  Is it the most appropriate thing that we should go and merely impose speed limits, because once in a while these accidents occur, or should we study comprehensively what is happening so that we identify those things that need to be done without actually undermining economic activities, and the reality that life has become faster and faster?  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  

MR FRED BADDA (Bujumba County, Kalangala):  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I would like to thank the Minister for having come up with such a statement.  This is an ideal way of approaching matters that a person would expect of a Government that really cares for its people.  This has been done well for this last incidence. 

A government statement has been given; even the President sent condolences on day one, but this should be happening to even other incidents. For example, the one that happened in my district, Kalangala, when over 100 people drowned. The President never sent condolences, Government never made a statement, not until I stood here in Parliament and requested for a Ministerial Statement and the Minister had to give me a promise that he would come up with a Ministerial Statement concerning the incidences of drowning in about a week’s time.  It is now a month, nothing has been realised, and the people in my constituency are already complaining.  I also feel concerned as a human being that all Ugandans should be considered equally, because if a disaster falls in one part of the country, everybody must get concerned.

The Minister also promised on that day that they are going to put in place a bill to streamline and regulate the transport system on water.  I wonder why this Government is managing things by crisis!  Accidents have been happening all along and we have been talking about these matters but until there is an accident, that is when Ministers will promise that they are going to come up with a solution.  So, I request that Government should plan properly for the people.

Currently, Government has put in a lot of efforts to reduce the costs of life-saving gadgets like mosquito nets to reduce the deaths by malaria; condoms have been reduced -even free- to save lives from HIV. (Laughter).  I request Government in the same way to take deliberate efforts to reduce the price of life jackets to save lives by drowning. (Applause).  I do not get satisfied when the Minister says that the transport boat owners will be obliged to buy life jackets.  I want to inform this House that the community along the Islands use boats like one would use a bicycle on a certain road.  So, even if it is not this big transport boat owners in the Islands who own boats, owning a life jacket should not be a matter of bigger transport vessels alone. 

I also feel ashamed when I go to cross by a ferry to Kalangala and this ferry is a Government vessel but the life-saving gadgets on this vessel cannot even save 5 per cent of the lives on board.  So, I request Government really to come in and help to save the lives that are getting lost in all accidents, especially those on water.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS JESSICA ERIYO (Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I would like to add my voice here to send condolences to the bereaved families.  It is a serious matter that our people die day and night on our roads.  In fact, at night if you move around or meet these Police Patrol vehicles, almost half of the Police Patrol vehicles carry dead bodies to hospital.  

This is a very serious matter that needs a multi-sectoral approach, including prayers – (Laughter). We need to intervene seriously by interceding to God because all these things are not natural happenings.  The devil is here with us, trying to take our lives in various ways. That is why HIV/AIDS is here. And, Mr Speaker, when you go to churches, people are all the time praying, but if the people themselves do not pray for their own lives and they do not protect themselves, then they will easily die either by accident or by anything else.  So, the drivers must pray –(Laughter)- and the passengers must pray before the vehicle takes off. And, I would like to ask my colleagues to form a Committee or whatever in Parliament because we need to pray for so many things that are happening in this country. (Applause).  

I would like to commend the efforts of the Members of Parliament who meet every Thursday morning to pray for this nation.  

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable Member, what I observe really is that that line has many Reverends – (Laughter).

MS ERIYO:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to call upon these Reverends to increase their efforts in praying to God over these issues.  

Secondly, I wish to say that we need to increase our supervision of these trucks that carry charcoal overload because when a vehicle or some vehicles come from behind, they cannot see them. So this also a source of accidents on our roads. I think also there is an element of corruption because sometimes these vehicles are stopped by these traffic policemen and then they are released after a short while.  These heavy lorries and vehicles that carry matooke the way they are loaded! Mr Speaker, I would like to say that I thank the Minister if he has generated that bill, but it must come quickly to Parliament, so that we can discuss and pass it quickly.

There are big potholes that have been on our roads for years, not even months.  Sometimes I wonder why those potholes remain there for so long, hon. Minister! I do not know whether your supervisors are supervising all these potholes, but something must be done about them, particularly on the Bombo-Gulu road around Nakasongola. If you are not a tough driver, you just get off the road and yet so many vehicles travel on that road. What is happening?  Those potholes have been there for years since the early 1980s; why have they remained there? (Interjection) Is Kony in Nakasongola?

I think we also need some specific intervention on our road from Gulu to Adjumani. We know that there is insecurity there, but if we have some army men to protect people, at least pour something on those potholes, because where there are potholes is where we find high incidents of ambushes. So, if these potholes remain, there will even be more ambushes than what we already have.  Sometimes the convoy stops passengers and they are asked to come down to pick stones and fetch soil to pour in these potholes before the vehicle can move, especially when it has rained. 

On over speeding, some people have already talked about it, but this is a very serious matter that even recently, one of our colleagues had bought his very new bus which overturned on the road, and it is a very big loss to him and to the people and the families of the people who were in that bus and Parliament, definitely because our colleague lost his asset.  

Last but not least, I would like to say here that there are some Government vehicles, whether they are local government vehicles or ministerial vehicles that are in bad mechanical conditions, and I think because they are in ministries or local government, the drivers drive without caring whether they can be arrested or anything.  

Recently, we were in a small car travelling from Kampala to Kireka around Nakawa where the traffic was too heavy. A Kampala City Council vehicle carrying a dustbin came from behind and knocked us and manoeuvred its way through the heavy traffic and went away. And there was no number plate behind; it was even looking ramshackle. It was not even fit to run on our roads in the city where we have tourists and other foreigners in this country.  So, Mr Speaker, it is already sending a bad name out there that Uganda does not care about the vehicles on its roads and some of these are Government vehicles. We therefore need to do something about all these roads.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister for the statement; however, it is a bad precedent that Government is actually displaying to its people. 

I do not know whether it is intended for Government to be making partial planning or what, because of recent, when we had a tragedy in Kalangala, the hon. Minister strengthened the use of life jackets, but to my surprise, we have a ferry in Buvuma which is supposed to carry an average of 200 people and it has a float for only 25 people. Even the DPC Lugazi wanted to stop the ferry from crossing but the people were just miserable. About 200 people were there and they had no life jackets. This is a Government ferry but the owners of the boats were actually penalized, and they had to buy their way out to be allowed to cross.  

So, why does Government wait until we have a problem then they just make it a routine for the policy enforcers to get money? Because, if life jackets are not available, what do you expect the people to do? They will give something kidogo and they will be allowed to go!  Actually, now the life jackets are tax free, but honorable Members will agree with me that in this free market, the forces of demand and supply determine the prices.  So, the moment the Ministry of Works announced that every fisherman has to buy a life jacket, then the market people had to restrict the supply and increase the price.  At the end of the day, you come here and say, “let us make the life jackets tax free”; the benefit is not there.  

I am appealing to Government that in order to save life, I know Government does not want to do business because of the problems before, but you can still import life jackets and we buy them at the normal market price rather than being exploited. As we talk Members, you cannot afford to buy a life jacket, which is about 50,000/=. If somebody can fail to pay 5,000/= what about 50,000/=? You can compare and contrast really.  So, I am just appealing to Government to save the life of the islanders by providing us with life jackets.  

About two years ago, the honourable Minister promised that Kalangala, our neighbours, will be having a steamship, but up to now, I just read it in newspapers that even Ambassadors are fighting over who is to supply it. Now, where is the problem?  The steamship has been budgeted for year in year out and the Minister should actually tell us whether the steamship will be coming or not, because if Kalangala gets a steamship, it can even assist us in Buvuma and in Kigulu. So, we do not know really where the problem is; they should tell us. 

But let me conclude by appealing to Government that as they are working on the mainland, they should also think of providing us with the life jackets, not free of charge but at normal market rate rather than being exploited by the dealers around.  Thank you.

DR FRANK NABWISO  (Kagoma County, Jinja): Mr Speaker, I thank you very much for giving me the opportunity to make these comments.  As you will recall, as early as December last year, I formulated a question, which was sent to the Minister of Works, Transport and Communications. The question was about the increasing accidents and carnage on our roads. I did not know that hon. Andruale Awuzu was in charge of this portfolio. 

So, my first question is: why has it taken seven months before a minister can come out with a statement on these road accidents? I want again to raise this question: why are the Ministers not answering questions from Members of Parliament?  If Government has no answers to these questions, let them tell us so that we tell the electorate that Government is not capable of answering these questions!  

The second issue is that I do not believe that legislation will solve all the problems  What is most important is to educate our people about good manners on the roads.  I have done some research and discovered that the Road Safety Committee does not have enough funds, and that is why the taxi drivers and bus conductors are not given enough seminars, and that is why we have this over-speeding.  So, my last question is: how will legislation alone ensure that we cure ourselves of this madness?  

It was His Excellency the President who chased away traffic policemen from the roads.  What is the position now?  Has Cabinet reviewed this matter?  Are we going to allow these people back?  Have we done any study to find out the number of accidents which have occurred since traffic police were chased away from the roads compared to what was there before?  Because, if we do not go into these matters we shall not solve these problems we are talking about.  I thank you very much for allowing me to speak.

MR JACK SABIITI (Rukiga County, Kabale):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I thank the honourable minister for the short statement he has made to this Parliament, but I have the following observations to make:  

One, I think most ministries and departments feel that their functions are no longer important, and they have directed their attention to the war in the North.  If you look at what is going on now in every ministry, it seems the entire attention is directly to the war, and yet ministries and departments are not concentrating on their work to make sure that the funds released by this Parliament is put to better use.  

My concern, Mr Speaker, is the poor and shoddy work done on our roads by the Ministry of Works.  All roads, be it murram or tarmac roads, the work done is very, very poor.  A road constructed today hardly lasts a year before it has to be repaired.  This has resulted into many potholes that are impassable, and this has certainly added to accidents on our roads.  

I noted that the Ministry of Works gets the biggest chunk of funds; I think it is the biggest on our budget followed by Defence.  Now, one wonders where all this money goes, if we cannot put road signs, if we cannot put the proper humps on our roads! You put a hump today, in the next three weeks the hump is gone. What materials are used? It appears we are not using the exact type of materials on these roads.  I would like the Minister to explain to me whether they have failed to supervise the road works. 

We have heard Members of Parliament talk of a road in West Nile, which should have been completed but they have only constructed four kilometres. You know, this becomes a problem.  So, the Minister should come out and explain to us why this shoddy work, why our roads are not properly done, even murrum roads. Although we always complain about these heavy rains, but even these murrum roads are not properly supervised and as a result we get poor roads and accidents take place.

The next point I would like to talk about is the work of Police and Ministry of Works -(Maj. Kazoora rose_)

MAJ. KAZOORA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Sabiiti.  In the 6th Parliament, I stood here and laid on the Table letters from some officers in the Ministry of Works who were trying to connive with officials of STRABAG Company that was making the road from Mbarara to Ibanda.  The honourable Minister of Works promised the House then that he was going to discipline those officers and assured the House that that road would be well done and it would be among the best in the country.  

I had a function in Kashari and over 100 Members of Parliament attended it and the Minister of Works was there. I repeated the same concerns, and the Minister said that he was assuring the country that that road was going to last.  Mr Speaker, as I talk now, the road is pealing off, and it was handed over, I think, one year ago.  That is the information I wanted to give hon. Sabiiti.

MR SABIITI:  Thank you, honourable Member. That adds more flesh to what I have been talking about.  You look at Natete road -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  But I think you have to heed to what the honourable Member for Adjumani said. I think these roads are supervised by people who are not God fearing -(Laughter)- and as a result they cheat and we suffer!

MR SABIITI:  Another area I wanted to touch on is the work of the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Ministry of Works.  I am always confused whenever I am at Kampala Bus Park.  I wonder whether really we have a Ministry of Internal Affairs!  I do not know whether Ministry of Works has ever sat down to think of how to demarcate these roads to making sure that vehicles take specific direction.  There is total confusion from morning to evening, and yet there are many policemen at Kampala Bus Park.  I would like the Minister of Works to pay a visit to that place and find a way of making sure that traffic flows in the right direction. There is a problem in that place.

Lastly, in rural areas such as in my constituency, Rukiga County, it is not the speed that is causing accidents. If you travelled on the Muhanga-Nyarushanze-Rukungiri Road where hon. Kagonyera comes from, you would feel this is not part of Uganda. The road, it appears, has no care at all and as a result, to travel from Rukungiri to Kabale would take you about five hours. It is as if you are travelling from Kampala to Kabale! Even if you are not speeding on that road, you are likely to have an accident with another oncoming vehicle, because the road is so bad.  

I therefore appeal to the honourable Minister to remember the majority of the population who live in the rural areas. You have told us that all roads leading to district headquarters should be given priority, but that road from Kabale to Rukungiri needs your attention. That is the only road that leads to Kabale and Rukungiri.  

As I said the other time, another road, which needs your attention is the Rubanda–Kanungu road. May I ask the honourable Minister, I saw a booklet produced by your Ministry, where you have put so many roads which are in Bushenyi and Ntungamo under Kabale as if those roads are in Kabale. I request the honourable minister to think about the people of Kabale to know that they are part and parcel of this country. Therefore, when you are allocating funds, remember that Kabale district also needs good roads like any other district. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR ANDRUALE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Members for their questions and points of clarification. Members have been intimating that this paper was taken to Cabinet because of this accident, but this is not the case. It is in fact a coincidence that this paper was actually discussed and passed in Cabinet today. 

The Traffic and Road Safety Act which we are trying to amend was passed in the last Parliament in 1998. Those of you who were here, and those who were away but abreast with news will remember that when we tried to implement this law, there was lot of rioting in the taxi parks because of the heavy fines. The taxi drivers thought that that law was made against them, but that was not the case because the law was made to control all drivers, including Members of Parliament. So those are sections of the law we had not implemented when the law was passed. We are now in the process of amending that law so that the sections are dis-aggregated and it can be implemented more effectively. I would like to inform hon. Aggrey Awori that when this amendment comes, it will be debated here, and definitely there is no worry that he will have the right to put an input on that law.

The statement I made earlier on is not a news item as hon. Aggrey Awori was trying to suggest. You will notice that it included a lot of items on what the Government is trying to do about reducing road accidents in this country, and to the best of my knowledge, that has not been in the news as far as this accident is concerned.

On the question of restricting the hours at which vehicles carrying fuel can move, you will remember hon. Aggrey Awori, in the 1960s, a law was put in place, which stopped all heavy vehicles from moving at night. (Interjection) - I am informed that it was in the 70s. It was found that it was uneconomical and the country was losing a lot as a result of restricting the movement of vehicles. Therefore, I do not know whether we would be wise to try and do the same thing where Government tried and found that it was burning its fingers. 

This also applies to movement of inflammable fuels or items For example, we cannot restrict all fuel tankers from coming to the city centre because there are a lot of petrol stations in the city centre itself. So these vehicles definitely have to come to the city centre to deliver fuel. But we are trying to build by-pass roads: the Northern by-pass, and afterwards the Southern by-pass. When that happens, of course, we can then make laws to say that vehicles which are not coming to deliver fuel in the city centre, must pass outside the city. You cannot restrict them when you do not have an alternative for them to use.

Hon. Awori referred to carbon dioxide as an inflammable gas.  From the little chemistry I did up to senior four, I know carbon dioxide is in fact a very non-inflammable gas. It is actually the gas, which is used to put out fire. (Laughter). It is not an inflammable gas. Carbon dioxide is not explosive. 

It is the policy of Government to encourage bulk transportation by rail. Actually, we are doing our best. The slogan of the railways is that, “go rail and save the roads.”  So you are trying to convert the converted.  But the problem has been that the railways had become so inefficient that people found it cheaper to move their cargo by road.  But we are trying to improve the railways and we hope that in future more and more cargo will travel by rail.

THE SPEAKER: But you have a railways network from Mombasa to Kasese only, how will you go to Masaka and Adjumani?

MR ANDRUALE: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Of course you are right in saying that the rail does not go everywhere, because there are other places where you would not be able to go by rail, let us say, for example to Kasese or to Karamoja and so on.  Thank you very much for that.  

I apologise for the fact that we have not been able to come here and make a statement on every accident.  

Hon. Sebuliba Mutumba, to the best of my knowledge, the insurance company pays compensation, that is why -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, I do not remember hon. Sebuliba having made any contribution.
  
MR ANDRUALE: I am sorry Mr Speaker.  Third Party, that is why it is compulsory for all vehicles to have Third Party Insurance in case of accident, so that the insurance company pays for the injuries or death. It is not the Government’s obligation to pay compensation to anybody.

Hon. Kalule from Gomba, it is true these coaches are over speeding on our roads, and we are actually trying our best to find a way of controlling them. We are thinking whether it will be possible to introduce speed governors. We could ask the manufacturers to put speed governors in coaches that are coming into Uganda but you know that our people are very clever. You can put these governors but they dismantle them and use their vehicles as they want. I remember I said here that it is actually the people we need to educate, because even if you put laws, if they are not ready to obey them, then there is very little you can do about it.

For taxi drivers, it is true we are going to do something. We are actually doing something about the P.S.V drivers.  It is going to be in the law very soon, and this is not as a result of this last accident; it has been in plan.  We want to limit the age to above 28, although a Member suggested 35. We are also introducing computerised driving permits. That should also help in solving the problem of people getting driving licenses illegally. Actually, we have already tendered and we are in the process of giving the contract to somebody to produce computerised driving permits for the whole country. Police Fire Fighting  –(Interruption)

MR RUZINDANA: Mr Speaker, the Minister has talked of 28 or 35 years.  What is the rationale for that age, and how do you justify that you would not be interfering with the rights of others to be employed? 

MR ANDRUALE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I remember one Member of Parliament was suggesting 35 years this afternoon, but the ministry is advocating for 28 as the limit. I think that is because he is taking into account the fears of the honourable Member of Parliament. But then, you see, we have to take into account the maturity of the individual.

The current law allows somebody to drive a vehicle at the age of 18, but we think that for somebody at 18 to drive a P.S.V. is very unreasonable because they are young – they do not have the responsibility. We think that when they reach the age of 28, they have seen enough of the world and they can value life. This will come to you in the House and you will debate it here. This is just a suggestion by the ministry.

Police Fire Fighting. There is a paper in Cabinet about fire fighting in the country as a whole, but as you know we have problems with financing all our endeavours in whatever we try to do. Government would like to have fire-fighting equipment in all the districts if possible, but currently we cannot afford it.

Traffic Police officers on roads. A Member also mentioned rightly that it was His Excellency, the President, who removed the traffic Police from the roads. This is quite true, because the traffic Police were really embarrassing us as His Excellency himself has said. When some drivers are stopped by the Police, instead of stopping, they just take out a one thousand shillings note and throw it out of the window and continue driving. The Police officer then runs to collect that one thousand shillings note, which is really a very embarrassing situation. When the President saw this with his own eyes, he removed them. But I am glad to say that we are trying to train the Police, we hope that we will bring on the road a traffic police force, which will be able to do the work properly and not embarrass us.  

Hon. Kiwanda, Mityana road is suffering the effects of other parts of the Fort Portal road, which was supposed to be tarmacked from Kyegegwa to Kyenjojo. But we were only able to take that section into first class murrum. The money was not available – DANIDA withdrew. There was not enough money to tarmac that section, but it is a very good section; I drove on it over the weekend. However, the Ministry of Works is trying its best to find other sources of funding to tarmac that section. We are also sorry that in spite of the tarmac roads we have at present, the road from the roundabout at Natete to Mityana is the worst tarmac road in the whole country, followed by the first section of the Hoima road. We are also trying our best to get those roads done.  

The repairs which are being done currently, are just minimal. We intend to put in place a better form of road maintenance, and afterwards get the whole road rebuilt. We are being stopped by funds.

The Member from Bugiri wondered whether we were taking a census of orphans. Though it is not the Ministry of Works that deals with orphans, but since you have put the question, I am sure the ministry responsible for dealing with orphans, I believe, Gender, Labour and Social Development, will handle this.

Over speeding and overloading. It is true this is very dangerous. As I have said, this law is coming to the House. We have now been authorised to take the law to the Solicitor General for formulating, and then it will come back to Cabinet, and then it will be brought to Parliament.  Over speeding and overloading are dealt with in that law and it will come here and you will have the chance to deal with it.

Foreigners in this accident; we do not know how many foreigners were involved. It was said in the papers, but we cannot guarantee. The only foreigners we can certainly know were in the bus were the two UN workers, a Lieutenant Colonel and a Major from the MONUC force in Congo, who were coming to Entebbe to catch a plane to India; they were going on leave. They were identified because UN personnel in war zones wear fireproof tags. If they are involved in a plane crash and get burnt completely, the tags never get burnt.  So, those corpses had those tags and were identified. And of course, that of the lorry driver because he died in his lorry. A boy was also identified because he was not part of the transport; he was just outside. So, those were the only four who were identified. 

The rest of the bodies could not be identified. We could not tell whether they were Ugandans or Congolese or what from the bodies. The only figures we got were from the people who saw those who boarded this bus. That is how we got the list of the people who were on that bus. The relatives came and said, “so and so was on the bus”, and that is how we came to know there were 18 Congolese. About the tourists, we cannot tell. You see, when a white man and a black man burn, the result is the same.

On the question of our own gate and that for President’s office, I think this question was addressed to the Speaker or Clerk to Parliament, and therefore, I cannot deal with it, because they are the ones who deal with administration of Parliament.  

The sugar trucks in Mabira forest, we are aware of this. When we get the Police out on the roads, this can be handled. We can also deal with the sugar factory itself and make sure that they do not endanger the other road users. We know they have caused a lot of accidents, and they have got other road users killed. 

We have not made a Ministerial Statement about the lake accident yet, but we will. When you suggest that we make statements depending on where the accident occurs, I do not think this is quite correct. We have reported on major accidents before, and if my minister promised to make a statement on the accident on Lake Victoria, he definitely will.

A Member asked whether I was aware of the accident at Kitigoma. Yes, I am aware of that accident. I have even got figures on it here. In fact, there is more than one accident everyday on Uganda’s roads. If I were to make a report on every accident, then we would be occupying all the time of Parliament. For the Minister to come here to make statements on daily accidents is asking for too much.

In developed countries, different categories of vehicles each take their own routes, as the honourable Member said. This is the best alternative, but those people are so advanced that they can afford to do that. You know that we are struggling in our country just to make all the district roads tarmac. We are also struggling to get two-lane roads all over the whole country, and we are failing! So what is the rationale of thinking of roads for different categories of vehicles going in different directions when we have got small roads that we cannot build to our satisfaction? So I think this is really expecting too much.

When you say you want us to build roads like they do in Europe, that will not help. Look at Entebbe road, the section of it that is a dual carriageway; that is close to what the honourable Minister was describing. On the road we have vehicles travelling - some in one direction and the others in another, with a strong barrier in the middle. But I have witnessed accidents where the driver crashed that barrier and flew over onto the other side! So, it is not only the road that is the problem but also our people.  

We are educating the masses. The Road Safety Council is also handicapped because it does not have enough money, but we are trying to educate, especially the school children, because they are very vulnerable. We are requesting the Ministry of Education to introduce road safety in the curriculum of the primary school syllabus so that the children at least learn how to use the roads safely.

It is important that we put speed limits by the roadsides because our roads were built to contain certain speeds. Our roads are built to contain speeds of about 80 kilometres only, and therefore, we have to limit the speed of drivers. If you build a road to accommodate 80 kilometres, you cannot allow people to drive on it at 100 kilometres per hour. That will be committing suicide. Within the urban areas, we ask drivers to lower speed up to 50 kilometres and sometimes to 30 kilometres. 

It seems apparent that my minister promised to make a statement on the drowning in the lake; I will remind him to do so. There are a number of statements from all ministries which are supposed to be made; a whole list of them. When the Ministry of Works is given a chance, we will definitely respond to those. We have actually got the written answers ready and are just waiting for the time when we will be asked to make the statements.

The Members of Parliament from the islands are complaining about the principle that the boat owners should be the ones to buy life jackets. We still insist that that is the correct approach because these boat operators are doing business. When you are doing business, you should protect your business interests. In other words, you should protect your passengers. 

Just like on the roads, the taxi owners are required to buy fire extinguishers for their vehicles. I think it is only right that the boat owner, who is making money, should make sure that the passengers survive so that next time they can travel with him again. If you own a pleasure boat that you use with your family, it is in your own interest to make sure that the people on your boat all have life jackets, if you value the people you have on board. 

On that point, I want to congratulate my colleague, the honourable Minister. If he did not have a life jacket on that boat, he would have died just like his colleagues. He had on a life jacket and he so was able to swim from wherever the boat crashed to Entebbe. For more than three hours he was able to swim. The life jacket holds you up and you can propel yourself slowly, rest and wait for help. That shows how important life jackets are.

On the question of Government supplying free life jackets, I have got good news for us. There is a firm from South Africa, which is starting an NGO on the lake to save life. They will do both water surface and air rescues. If any aircraft for example crashes into the lake, they have volunteered to rescue it free of charge. They are going to be based at Kawuku. But the best part is that there is an NGO they are inviting here to manufacture life jackets in Uganda. This NGO has promised to give out these life jackets free of charge to all water users on the lake. So, as Government in our development efforts, we are very grateful that this firm is going to provide free life jackets to the passengers of boats on the lake.

Hon. Jessica Eriyo talked like a priest and since – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, please complete your reply. We have another debate, so please expedite yours.

MR AWUZU: I will not comment on that further. But as for the potholes on the Gulu roads, we are working on the Atiak-Moyo road under the El-Nino Scheme. I must say that Adjumani is very lucky. It is the only district in the whole of Uganda that is going to get a concrete road.  There is no other district in Uganda, which has a concrete road. 

On the embankment, Adjumani is going to get a number of kilometres of concrete road and we are also going to tarmac one kilometre of the main road in Adjumani town. We have actually already tarmacked about 2.3 kilometres in the same town. So Adjumani is getting on very well indeed.

Government vehicles are supposed to obey all road regulations, like any other vehicle. I expect you, honourable Members, to note the number plate of the vehicle that misbehaves and report it to the Police. Whether it is a Police vehicle or a vehicle from the President’s Office, they are all supposed to obey the traffic regulations. Do take them to court whenever they break the law. You should not say that because this is a Government vehicle, it has different laws. We have the same laws. 

I know a lot of Government vehicles are in dangerous mechanical condition, but if the finance officers in those ministries were really doing their work properly, those vehicles should not be in that condition.

For the Kalangala ship, definitely the money is in the Budget. You can see it from our statement, and we have finalised the tendering process. Within six months, you are going to get your Kalangala ship. Since it is a ship which can go from port to port, probably we can arrange for it to visit Buvuma Islands also.

Hon. Dr Nabwiso, you put a question to my minister and as I have just said, it is one of those questions due to be answered. It will be answered. 

I talked about educating the people; it is not just the laws that will reduce accidents. We have to educate not only the school children but also everybody else, and the legislation alone cannot reduce accidents too.

On the question of whether the number of accidents has reduced or increased since the Police were removed from the roads, actually the accidents have been rising steadily. They were rising even when the Police were there on the roads. I have got the figures with me here and I can give them to you afterwards. There has been no specific rise attributed to the removal of the Police from the roads.

Hon. Sabiiti, shoddy work really depends on how you look at the work. For example, for murrum roads, when you see a grader on the road, you expect it to do much but it does not. I am sure not just Members of Parliament alone but even people from the village expect the tractor or grader to do wonders on the road, but that might not be the case. This is because there are different types of intervention on these roads, and these depend on how much money we give to the contractor. 

If we ask him to do light grading, that is what he will do. That is the cheapest. He will just take his machine and push the murram from the sides onto the road. He does not compact it and then he will go away. If you come around and say such a person did shoddy work, that would not be true. That is what the amount of money you paid him can accomplish.  

Then there is heavy grading, which includes spot re-gravelling. Here he does more work and puts murram in places where it is not. And that costs a bit more. Then the most expensive is routine periodic maintenance, where he has to put murrum on the whole road and compact it so that it looks like a new road. So next time you see a grader on the road, do not just say that it is doing shoddy work. (Laughter).

I forgot to answer hon. Eriyo’s question about the potholes on the Nakasongola road. I used that road recently too. Actually, those potholes are being attended to; they are being sealed. The problem is that when some of us see murrum being put on a tarmac road, we get worried and say, “what is this man doing putting murram on a tarmac road?” Let me inform you that all these tarmac roads, their strength is the murram underneath. So when you are repairing, you must return it to its original strength, that is murrum with lime, and then the bitumen is just a coat to stop water from seeping down through it. So you do not repair the road with bitumen. You start with murram and put the bitumen on top.  

I am sorry that some of these road humps have been disappearing as fast as we put them in place, and the ministry is handling this problem. We have now come up with a design of humps, which you must have seen on a number of roads in the whole country. I think they are doing well and we are going to put them wherever they are required. Very many people, however, do not want humps on highways. One of them is hon. Dr Okulo Epak. He is very much against them. He is not the only one. Hon. Kagonyera also does not like them. They say, “this is a highway, why do you put humps on highways?” And then there are some of us who say, “my people are dying, give us humps.” So what do we do? Do we put the humps on roads or not?

Hon. Sabiiti talked of the shoddy work on the roads in West Nile. I must say that, for example, the section between Nebbi and Arua was the best section of work done in Uganda since the 1960s. And the Israelites are doing a very good job. Within less than a year, they have already done more than a quarter of the work. They have in fact tarmacked up to 20 kilometres of roads so far. They said that the three years they were given is too long. They will take only 30 months.

On the contrary, the Chinese working on the Nebbi– Pakwach section are very slow. We are worried about it but we have a contract to respect. They are asking us to relieve them but we cannot because it is a contract. They have got to first fail to honour the contract before we can relieve them, for then they will pay us. If we move anyhow, Government will run into a lot of losses financially. So we cannot just relieve them. 

About the Ibanda road, I have nothing to say because I am only responsible for road maintenance. The honourable Minister gave a statement about it because he is responsible for road development, not me. I can however inform the minister about what you have said.

The problems at the bus park are an issue for KCC to handle. It is not a ministry problem. The smooth running of traffic within the city is a KCC problem. So you should get in touch with KCC to arrange something so that the vehicles move freely at the bus park.

The roads you talked about in your constituency, unfortunately you did not mention whether these roads were Ministry of Works roads or feeder roads. There are feeder roads that are the responsibility of the district local governments. We give a lot of money to these local governments to repair these roads but we do not have the prerogative to tell them how to use this money. They make their own plans, and it is their responsibility to see which roads are worked upon.

Last but not least, we would like to construct the entire district headquarter roads in Uganda with tarmac. We have done less than half the work, and we have got more than half left. We are struggling to make sure that more and more of our roads are tarmacked. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Whereas Article 156(2)(a) and (b) of the Constitution allows that,

 “In respect of any financial year if it is found- 

(a) that the amount appropriated for any purpose under the Appropriation Act is insufficient or that a need has arisen for expenditure for a purpose for which no amount has been appropriated by that Act; or 

(b) that any amount has been expended for any purpose in excess of the amount appropriated for that purpose or for a purpose for which any amount has been appropriated by that Act, 
a supplementary estimate showing the sums required or spent shall be laid before Parliament, and in the case of excess expenditure, within four months after the money is spent;

Now therefore, be it resolved that Parliament approves the Supplementary Schedule for the Financial Year 2000/2001 attached to this resolution. 

I hereby lay the resolution on the Table, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, together with this, I do want to lay on the Table some corrections and clarifications, and a summary to be read together with the documents.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The appropriate committee of the House, which should report to the House, should consider the documents.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

(i) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2001/2002

(ii) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2002/2003 ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE.

(Debate continued.)

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (Kawempe South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also thank the Minister for his speech, but I want to refer to –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Again I want to remind you, honourable member, you have five minutes only. Proceed.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: But five minutes is too little, Mr Speaker, I have never contributed since we resumed in this House. 

Anyway, referring to page 3, paragraph 8, the Minister says that Government will maintain micro economic stability and deepen and accelerate reforms I am worried here because he continues to say that inflation has gone down, but what I have come to realize is that we are controlling inflation at the rate at which we are effecting inflation in Uganda.  

When I refer to the health sector support programme, we are supposed to get money to help this sector so that the population can be accorded medical care, but I have been made to understand that even the per capita expense has been curtailed.  

Mr Speaker, honourable Members of Parliament, you should remember that one of the impediments to growth and development is the malaise we suffer.  For instance, we all know the consequences of AIDS and malaria. Recently, it was reported that we had already got two million orphans due to malaria and we are already contributing so much on AIDS.  

Recently, during this new partnership for Africa development, one of the writers stated that if you are to go into development, we should look at the health of our people. But if we control inflation at the expense of giving drugs to our people, then I am really worried. 

According to the statistics, 380 people die of malaria daily. You can multiply that by seven, and the answer you get, multiply it by four, and the answer you get multiply it by 12 and then you get to know the number of people who are affected by malaria alone, yet there is AIDS, as I have already said. 

In paragraph 10, regarding whatever we get from our exports and remittances from abroad, I would request the Minister concerned and the Government, instead of promoting this business of selling textiles and apparels, we export our skilled people.  Let us export our people there, they get the money and we get the dollars we want, instead of going into the intricacies of intensive production of quality things, which are not going to be bought by these Americans. 

Recently when I was reading through certain literature, they said that most of our exports, especially vegetables and fruits, must pass through what we call a pest risk assessment. On top of that, the American Government has already submitted 175 billion dollars to subsidize its farmers over the next 10 years. Why don’t we export our people who do not need to be subjected to pest risk assessment and already they are remitting over 540 million US dollars? 

The other time the President was opening a branch in Bugolobi with a Sri Lankan, but our Kaswada is there! Mr Speaker, honourable members, you remember Kaswada of UGIL? Some of you have come across shirts like Yamato, Zenbury, Commander, and VP. I remember hon. Lukyamuzi, when you put on that Zenbury one time, you looked very appealing. Why don’t we promote the Kaswadas instead of getting other people? These are people who have been here, we should promote them; and our shirts and garments have been selling! Therefore, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

DR NDUUHURA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you honourable member for giving way. I would like to inform the House that Mr Kaswada has got the attention of Government and he is getting all the assistance he can from Government. As a matter of fact, he is already producing the shirts that the honourable member has mentioned.  Thank you.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: I thank you, but still let us not look at the Sri Lankan alone. The point I wanted to emphasize is that there are so many Kaswadas here. Some Members of Parliament here may be Kaswadas. What I am trying to say is that let us invest more in our people. The market is here, our people are here, they are the anthills of the savannah; they are seasoned, and they can do better work. In fact, I thought he was going to produce apparels and textiles, but he is a mere tailor. 

I am still concerned about the money being given to public administration. I remember one time during the Accountants breakfast meeting at Grand Imperial Hotel, the Minister of Finance, hon. Ssendaula, said that our hides and skins fetch between 20 and 30 billion shillings. That is one item of agriculture, and yet I am dismayed to learn that this Financial Year agriculture alone is going to be given 40.8 billion. If one item alone can fetch so much, I would wish that we tried to help the agricultural sector such that it meets its demands. We should not forget that agriculture employs over 80 percent of our people. Whatever we do, whether we enter into NEPAD, whether we go into AGOA or AU, agriculture will remain the index under which our people are going to be employed. 

I gave you the example of hides and skins. If that item alone can fetch between 20 and 30 billion, then why do we give things like administration 400 billion, Defence over 200 billion and then the mother of the whole economy is given just two per cent of the entire Budget, which runs at over 2,200 billion Uganda shillings? 

Lastly, on the private sector participation in water service delivery in urban towns, it is expected that water systems in 33 large urban towns will be privatised under an operating lease. I would wish that the privatisation of the water systems be gradual. I remember the Secretary for Finance was also alarmed at the speed at which we are forfeiting certain service utilities. What will happen, because water is one of the services that surely should be kept by Government? I feel overwhelmed, I feel defeated as we allow most of these utilities to be divested. I wish Government would hold onto some of the services. 

Already on electricity, hon. Lukyamuzi promised a lot of defence for the people, the subsidy has been removed and now we are talking of rural electrification. Now, when the water is going for privatisation, what are we going to tell our people? Very soon they are going to privatise all the clouds, the oxygen and even the rainfall if you are not very careful!

I refer you to James Ngugi’s book, Devil on the Cross. One of the investors, according to that book -(Interruption)

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, the member holding the Floor has raised a very serious point, and I would like him to clarify to me on how oxygen and rain is going to be privatised and by whom?

MR MUTUMBA: Thank you. Let me inform the House that this man was saying, you just pollute everything; you pollute the environment, you pollute the water bodies and next they will import machinery to purify all this. If you do not know, even in Japan, traffic policemen are given sacks or oxygen carriers where they breathe because of the level of pollution.  

If a man can decide to pollute this oxygen, which is about 24 percent of the atmosphere, and the level drops to five percent, very soon the poor men like us will end up paying for the services of oxygen. Even the rain, by the way, can be controlled. And at this rate we are privatising everything at a fast pace; whatever is remaining will be the rain, oxygen and the rest, which of course is going to be affected. 

You know about deforestation and what is happening. The carbon dioxide level is going up.  So, to even purify the oxygen, you will need an investor, and that is almost another way of privatising. That is why I am saying that at the rate at which we are privatising, most of the utilities should be checked. Otherwise, we will end up being annihilated and besieged in our home country.  I thank you.

MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (Rubanda West, Kabale):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join others to contribute to this Budget Speech. I would have raised this when the Minister of Works was here, but I strategically reserved this contribution. 

My concern goes straight to the Kabale-Kisoro road. Last time, I was given information that money had been earmarked and we have been waiting for this road. Actually, the accidents on Kabale-Kisoro road do not happen because the road is good but because of the level of potholes. Last time the RDC almost died on that road because of dodging potholes. 

In this financial year, paragraph 50 of the Budget speech says, “we expect to commence upgrading of the Kabale-Kisoro road and funds have been solicited for upgrading…” My concern is, where is that money that had been earmarked for tarmacking that road, where has it gone? If it had been there at that time, now what has happened in the course of time?

In paragraph 55 on extension of services to private sector companies, my concern goes to my constituency, especially in mining wolfram and also to some other investors within the area, especially on the issue of electrification. 

The investors on Lake Bunyonyi who are investing in the tourism industry, which is one of the sectors that is earning the country good foreign exchange, are being requested to contribute up to 500 million so that electricity is extended there. I would like to call upon Government to at least appreciate our local investors and run to their help in case of need at an appropriate time. For example, the Ndyamuriro mines where they mine wolfram, have already started and they are exporting, but the problems that the private investor, who is a local investor, is facing are enormous.

Still on rural electrification, which has been earmarked in this Budget, when you look at the cost of electricity today, even we who are in the urban areas and earn some little more income than the rural people are failing to pay for electricity because of the high bills.  

The alternative to save electricity is energy saving bulbs, and we would have been using these bulbs, but I am told the taxes on these bulbs is much more than the tax on ordinary bulbs, which consume more electricity. So, I would like to call upon the sector concerned to do something. 

These energy saving bulbs in the beginning were being looked at as a luxury, but now they are a necessity. So, I would like to call upon the sector concerned to repeal that requirement so that the taxation rate goes higher on bulbs that consume a lot of energy and then it is reduced on these energy saving bulbs.

Another concern I have is on health. In my constituency, Rubanda West, if I can use that as an example, some time I had gone there with hon. Tibarimbasa and what we saw was traumatising. We saw with our own eyes a woman who died in pain as she tried to deliver. The reason was because the money that had been earmarked for the theatre is nowhere and work is so sluggish. 

The supervising mechanism in social services delivery is not strong. I do not know what has happened, but I think this theatre should have been finished. Again, there should be a deliberate mechanism so that the referral system within the health sector is improved. At least if there were some ambulances in referral hospitals, then maybe some lives would be saved. If there had been a theatre, and if there were an ambulance, that poor lady would not have died the way she died. It was so traumatising, and it is something that one would not like to see dragging on and on.

Mr Speaker, thank you very much for giving me this chance to contribute on this noble cause.  Thank you.

MR JOSEPH MUGAMBE (Nakifuma County, Mukono):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will begin my remarks on the revised revenue and expenditure estimates and budget proposals of the fiscal year 2002/2003 by thanking the honourable minister and his team for the good preparation exhibited by the quality of the materials they gave us.

Mr Speaker, I would like to draw the attention of the House to the Background to the Budget, page 9 bullet 3. The Minister points out that he would like to raise fiscal revenue, and on page 22 he goes further to tell us about the revenue performance.  

When you look at table 1(b) of the Budget Speech, it is also giving us details about revenue performance, and it is actually declining.  Now, he has also given some remarks on how the revenue is declining. Here, I would like to pose a few questions: What is the cause of the fall in revenue collection? What is the way forward? Perhaps he could say he has mentioned them. I remember recently, we passed an amendment - (Mrs Zziwa rose_)

MRS ZZIWA: Thank you very much, hon. Mugambe for giving way. The information I want to give concerns the plight of the public toward revenue collection.  The public acknowledges the efforts in Uganda Revenue Authority, but the public continues to express their frustrations over several big shots that evade tax. And I think that is one of the many reasons why the morale is so low, why the public is not intending even to pay more tax. So, I thought I would bring that as a point.

MR MUGAMBE: Thank you for that information. I would like to start contributing. We recently made an amendment and in a way we scrapped the pre-shipment inspection, which was in line with the advise by WTO, however, I would like the House to note that in other countries where pre-shipment was scrapped, there was an alternative. Some of them have destination inspection, others have retained pre-shipment. 

Actually, recently Rwanda was advertising for pre-shipment. When you look at Nigeria, I could look through what they went through, but they have gone back to destination inspection. In Kenya they still have COTECNA as their pre-shipment inspection company. What I would like to propose here is that we get another independent auditor of this Revenue Authority like it is done in procurement. In procurement, there is a third party procurement agency which checks on the activities of these procuring entities.

In the same way, you can pity the revenue officers, and I do not know where they are trained from, because most of the old stock seems to have been retrenched or something. I do not know whether they have trained all of them. In the absence of pre-shipment inspection, they may not be in position to know or compare prices. They may not be in position to know whether the bill of lading is correct or not. There is no tracking system, because there can be switching of items within, between Uganda and other countries.  You know, revenue collection is a very important issue and unless the Minister of Finance addresses it seriously, we shall have a problem. 

Of late, they have come up with scanning. How can scanning per se enhance revenue collection, because for example, concealment could be a problem? There are expensive items – could be like paper, a scanner cannot know whether this is 80 gram paper brought in as 60 gram paper.  Someone can bring in paper as a raw material whereas it is a finished good! 

Mr Speaker, I would like to wind up by making another proposal.  The last proposal I would like to make is, instead of the Revenue Authority spreading out so thin, they could identify problematic areas like: one, goods; two, importers.  There are some problematic importers who are importing problematic goods. I know the Minister knows. There are goods that are very difficult to verify. If they could identify five of them, which they know are bringing in a lot of revenue, that in a way would enhance on revenue collection. 

On page 23, you talked about collection of revenues by local government. I have already paid my personal graduated tax, but honourable minister, this is a problem. Very many people are dodging it, even people who are well paid. I know Members of Parliament have paid, but many people are dodging it. It is a problem to collect; it is very expensive to collect. 

Can the Ministry come up with a study to see what replacement can be there?  What do other countries do to collect tax other than this graduated tax?  For our people there in the villages, it is bringing a problem in delivery. An LC chairman, if he insists on collecting taxes, people will hate him. And if he does not collect taxes he will have no counter funds, so there will be no projects. So, he is faced with a choice of evils. So, this is something that should be seriously looked into. I know you have studied it, but I would request you to come up with an alternative.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR NYEKO OCULA: (Kilak County, Gulu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker for giving me a chance to give my views on the budget. As we are talking about the budget, we have to reflect that the budget is both a political and administrative tool.  We also have to reflect and recall that in this august House, we have got over 300 manifestos, different ones, because we came here via a system called individual merit. And all these interests must be taken care of in this budget. The President’s manifesto is there, ours are also there as Members of Parliament; they are over 300, and therefore, Mr Speaker, the time we are being given of five minutes only to push our manifestos in this budget here, is actually very little. So for my case, if you could give me about seven minutes or so I would appreciate it.

I would like to emphasise in this budget the fact of value for money.  If we are to go paragraph-by-paragraph, analysing this Budget Speech, the time is not there.  But I would like to emphasize the fact of value for money. 

The best that honourable members of Parliament can do is to emphasize that the little money we shall budget for each of the ministries should be effectively utilized. Also, the Executive should take it from us that if we are pointing fingers at any of them, that we are not happy, that it is because we are emphasizing the issue of value for money. And when we are talking in this House, Mr Speaker, we talk while looking at our constituencies. 

As I am looking at Kilak Constituency in Gulu District, it is unfortunate the value for money in Kilak County itself is difficult to see because of the on-going war. Nevertheless, I appreciate the fact that in the last financial year, some of the government departments, especially that of roads, at least did something which was tangible on the ground. I appreciate that so much, however, as I am talking now, things are terribly bad and I do not think that if things continue the way they are now, any value for money is going to be seen in Kilak County.  

As I am talking now, all my people are displaced in different parts.  In Kilak County alone, rebels have so far burnt seven camps. I am talking about Marawobi camp  -for record purposes- was burnt down completely; Guruguru was half-burnt down; Okunggedi was burnt down; Labongogali camp was burnt down; Wiyanono (Pagak) was burnt down; Ome camp where there is a farm for Brig. Oketa, was also burnt down, and of recent, we have also heard of burning down of a camp in a place called Okidi.  

With all these factors, Mr Speaker, it becomes very difficult really to implement some of the Government programmes when you are talking about the budget. I therefore, call upon the concerned authorities to ensure that at least peace prevails in that part of the country. Otherwise, our sitting in this House is almost basically useless, because nothing will go onto the ground.

Mr Speaker, when we are talking about value for money, in my constituency we are talking about value for money going to Defence.  Last year, we gave a budget to the Minister of Defence to effectively ensure that the LDUs and home guards are effectively equipped and properly catered for.  As I am talking now, the money we gave last year, at least in my constituency, nothing tangible came out of it.  Up to now, the home guards are still walking on slippers with no gumboots, going to confront the rebels. As I am talking now, the home guards are ill unequipped. The money we gave last year has been mostly used for buying tanks and so on, which are not useful for fighting the guerrillas. I must say this on a point of disappointment!

I must say also one thing that as we have been talking about value for money, we would like always the people who are on the frontline to be paid promptly so that they can do their work effectively. I call upon the Ministry of Defence that if you can improve on that, then this idea of “we shall not pass your budget” and so on, will not be there. Because if we pass your budget and then there is value for that money, automatically we shall not have any problem.  As I am talking now, there are a lot of problems

I would also like to talk about the war in the North. I have been fairly disappointed, even in this august House, when issues are being said about the war in the North, people think that the people of Acholi land have some support for this war, yet they are the people who have suffered most under this war.  We have even made attempts as civilians to quell this war. But when Members mention in this House, I even hear people clapping that the Acholis support this war.  This is the misconception, which must be brushed aside.

I also hear people talking very seriously that the matter of peace talks is not something, which is viable. Mr Speaker, I was especially disappointed that a high ranking Government official in the name of Col. Otafiire, despite the fact that the President of Uganda has already assured the Ugandans that there can be a leeway for talks, a whole Government Minister, a powerful Government Minister goes around in the press and everywhere saying that there cannot be peace talks with Kony. This is very unfortunate!

One time there was Father Dr Okot, who said that where things are very difficult, reconciliation is the only moral authority. And reconciliation is the only moral authority which can bring peace to the Northern part of Uganda. I pray that Members of this august House, all stand up firm and we follow what the President is trying to pursue, the matter of peace talks and dialogue with Kony. 

The amount of money going in that war is very excessive, leave alone the loss of life.  If you look at the kind of life being lost in that part of the country, it is not only people from Acholi land. People who are on the frontline are from all walks of life in Uganda.  That one we have to see how to go about.

Mr Speaker, I would like to talk briefly about governance. Since the early 90s when the Movement Government came into system, there was some bit of stability in governance and there was a lot of decentralization of powers. But currently, more power is now centered on the President. The President is doing almost each and everything, including what you would expect ministers to do. For example, when you are talking about AGOA, I do not know how informed even the Minister of Trade is about AGOA; the President is doing everything. When there is anything in the Ministry of Finance, finally the President steps in as a person.  I think this is a very, very dangerous trend. Our ministers should try to assist the President so much in pursuing the objectives which the country stands for.

MS KIRASO: Thank you very much, honourable Member.  That is something concerning all of us but are you trying to suggest that the President steps in because the ministers are incompetent or that they are not sure of their work, so he does all the work for them? And is it possible for one person to do the work of 66 people?

MR NYEKO: I would like to say that the ministers may be incompetent, because where the President steps in when the minister – at times they are even about three or four ministers in place, definitely there is already a problem in the ministry and the President always tries to push that there should always be no problem.

MR NDUHUURA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and the honourable Member for giving way. This question of AGOA has been coming up time and again.  I would like to assure the House that AGOA is very much in our hands with the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry. The President is interested just like any other person who wishes AGOA well, but we are firmly in control. We have got a whole committee on AGOA. As a matter of fact, we have noticed that many Members of Parliament are not aware of what is going on. So, we have decided that the Ministry comes up with a ministerial statement on AGOA, which will be coming very soon.  I thank you.

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, thank you honourable Member for giving way.  I am standing on a point of information regarding the President intervening in work, which is supposed to be done by ministers.  I just want to inform you that we have three Arms of Government: the Executive, Legislature and Judiciary. The Chief Executive is the President, where ministers belong. The ministers are supposed to advise the President and likewise the President is also supposed to do so.  

The President has come in not only to do some of the work which might appear to be work of the ministers, but he also goes to our constituencies as Members of Parliament and do mobilization, which is part of the work of Members of Parliament. When the President visits your constituencies, it does not mean that the area MP there is incompetent. He just comes in as a Chief Executive of the nation to work with the Member of Parliament from that constituency.  I thank you.

MR NYEKO: Mr Speaker, that is their information.  I took it, but it may not be very correct because the purpose why the ministers are put there, they are supposed to be active, not just to be sitting on the Frontbench and terrorizing us in the House here. They are supposed to be active; they are supposed to assist the President!

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order.  I was very hesitant to interrupt the honourable Member but thank you for allowing me to give this point of order.  The Constitution defines the powers of the President; he is the person who appoints and disappoints ministers and the executive authority lies with the President.  The President appointed ministers and they are performing, because if they were not performing, he has powers to disappoint them even on the first day of appointment.  Is it, therefore, in order for the honourable Member to say that the Ministers are incompetent and not doing work, that he is more knowledgeable about the competence of Ministers than the President who appoints and has powers to disappoint them?  Is the honourable Member in order, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: No, I think my understanding here is a question of misunderstanding the role of the Executive and the role of the President.  The President is the Executive as hon. Nankabirwa has said, and he delegates powers to ministers to read this very budget.  The presenting of the budget is supposed to be done by the President, but he delegates the powers to the Minister of Finance, and you saw that on that day, after the Minister of Finance had read the Budget Speech, the President came in, because it was his duty to work together with the Minister of Finance.  So, if you are given powers and you delegate, there is nothing wrong for you to also come on with the delegated powers and perform.  But your point was whether he was out of order or he was not.  It is a question of misunderstanding, and I think he has understood now. Maybe the problem may not arise.  

MRS MUKWAYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleague, for allowing me to seek this clarification.  Do I understand my colleague to be meaning that the President alone can do all the work that we the 66 ministers are doing, so that we can retire and go home?  This one year, which we have completed, we have done nothing– (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, he is not going to answer that question, but I think his understanding is that the President having given portfolios to the ministers, he would only just wait to receive the reports and approve them.  But as I have explained, the President can really come in because he is the entire branch of the Executive. The President and the ministers are one, so if one comes to assist here and there, or to advise there is nothing wrong.  It is not an indication that one is incompetent, as I have already said.

MR NYEKO OCULA: Mr Speaker, in Acholi we have a saying that when your forehead is itching, scratch it.  You do not scratch your stomach when your forehead is itching.  For me, the way I look at it is that much as the President has delegated powers and so on, there are areas where the ministers are reluctant and redundant. That was my point of argument.  If anybody has another contrary point of argument he/she can stand up and argue the case out; this is a general debate.

I would like to conclude with the issue of governance.  We have observed in this country that there have been elections and elections.  As we are talking now, the election of the LC II has not been held.  The country has been moving along as if the existence of the LC II level is not very important.  I don’t know whether really a change cannot be made so that the LC II level can be scrapped, because since that time up to now, the absence or the presence of the LC II level is not even felt at all.  I do not know really why it cannot be scrapped and we save a lot of bureaucracies in the system.

I would like to conclude by saying that this august House is now the eye of Ugandans.  If you look at the press, any small thing they think about is the Parliament, because the hope is in us.  I beg that this year, as we begin the second Session of this Parliament, we move consistently and help our people.  Thank you very much.

PROF. VICTORIA MWAKA (Woman Representative, Luwero): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I want to thank the Minister of Finance for his budget speech.  I want to address the UPE programme.  

Everybody is very proud of that programme; the President is proud of the programme, the Minister of Finance was proud of it.  It is given a very big budget of 26 per cent of the national budget but, Mr Speaker, I am scared about the way this UPE is being implemented.  The intentions are good but the implementation is failing us.  I say that because of the continued circulars from the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Education with regard to accountability of UPE funds.  

We are told that just a handful of districts have accounted for this money and, therefore, no more money is going to be released to any district until accountability is done.  That is as good as starving a sick person who has diarrhoea because, if the money is not released and you know that there is nothing coming from the parents, what is going to happen to those schools?  The accountability is not supposed to be done by the children and the parents, but the people in charge are not accounting for the money.  

In Luganda we have a saying that “kiiso kya mbuzi kirekerera omusi nekitunulira omubaazi.” That means, a slaughtered goat, instead of looking at the person with the knife, the dead eyes keep on looking at the one who removed the skin.  To me it seems it is the equivalent.  So, I beg the hon. Kinobe’s Committee on Local Government really to save the situation and see that the accounting officers of districts account for this money, otherwise UPE is going to go down the drain if we are not very careful.

Secondly, on accountability, I learn from reliable sources that Dr Hyuha Mukwanason who was the Academic Registrar of Makerere University is on indefinite leave for two years. I wonder if up to now the man is still getting the money.  Why I am saying so is because the person now holding the portfolio has been acting for two years.  So why is he acting?  Most likely there are two people; the other one is there still enjoying his money and this one is acting.  That is inefficiency.  Why do we fear?  Do we fear that the man will go to court?  Was he dismissed wrongly? I beg the Committee on Social Services to check whether actually that professor has been dismissed from the books of Makerere University, or he is on the payroll.  

DR BYATIKE: Mr Speaker, the Appointments Board of Makerere University and the Ministry of Education are handling this case. It has not been concluded, so I cannot tell exactly whether we are paying two people.  In any case, if one is interdicted, there must be somebody doing that work and as such he must be paid.

THE SPEAKER:  Although we do not want to quote from newspapers, just two days ago I was reading a newspaper and there was, I think, a reply in one of the Committees where the Minister of Education said he had already dealt with that issue.  That was the report which I saw in the papers.  I do not know whether it was correct or not.

PROF MWAKA:  Thank you, Dr Matovu.  You are just confirming what I am saying.  How can you fail to resolve a problem for two years?  Two complete years and somebody is getting the money!  That is what we are saying that there is a way we make our expenditures and we do not care much on how it is done.

Mr Speaker, there is insecurity in Luwero, and we are being told that these are thieves but our people are very scared.  Once beaten, twice shy!  The people of Luwero are very scared about this Itongwa. Whether he is a thief or a rebel, the answer is that there is insecurity.  Cars were stolen and burnt, guns are being stolen and the Chairman LC III of Semuto has appealed to Government to give us UPDF for protection.  So, it is good the Minister of Defence is here, the Minister of Internal Affairs is not here, but why do we have that insecurity? Can I please be advised on what we can do about that problem?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa):  Thank you very much, Prof. Mwaka, for giving way.  I also sympathise with the people of Luwero, and I have stood here to give you information that His Excellency the President, who is the Commander In-Chief, last week on Thursday set up a very special committee comprised of very senior members from Police, Defence, ISO and ESO.  The situation is partly a spill over of what is happening in Kampala.  We are really down on the necks of the armed robbers that have been terrorising people in Kampala and some places of Wakiso and neighbouring districts.  So, I would like to inform my people of Luwero that Government is not sleeping, and we have made it clear that for those people to mention that they belong to Itongwa is just diversionary. We are pursuing them and God willing we shall net them.  Isha Allah.  

PROF. MWAKA:  Thank you very much hon. Nankabirwa for that re-assurance.  Lastly, I beg your indulgence to allow me talk about the road accidents because I missed out when this issue was being debated. 

THE SPEAKER:  Just briefly because we really finished that.  

PROF MWAKA:  Yes, very briefly, Mr Speaker.  The Minister said that motorists are warned about the dangers of over-speeding and driving vehicles that are in dangerous mechanical conditions, which are a major cause of traffic accidents.  To me that is contradictory because, how would they have warned the motorists about over-speeding and so forth, when the traffic policemen are not on the road and they are only in Kampala where there are even no patrol vehicles; we are just fundraising?  So, even 1900 DMCs are back on the road. You go in the rural areas and see what is happening.  Even on highways just 10Kms away from Kampala, you will find these vehicles with no licences and what have you just because there are no traffic men on the road!

Secondly, the vehicles are no longer checked before licensing.  Originally, there was a catch point where people would take their vehicles to Naguru for inspection before getting a licence but now, any DMC gets a licence.  What type of monitoring is that?  They may say that because of these programmes on TV - but with two per cent consumption of hydro electricity power in the rural areas, who sees the TV where these people are making their campaigns? Or, even if it was radio, they put it on at 10.00 O’clock when people are not listening to radio.  I beg that we revisit the issue of returning traffic policemen, because we are asking, which is a better devil, one policeman to get one thousand shillings or losing 100 people?  I feel, I rather leave that policeman on the road to get the 1,000/= but save 100 lives.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, one time we had speed recording equipment.  I was a victim of that system when I was in the CA. I was speeding from the constituency to catch the CA in the afternoon.  One policeman stopped us and he was standing in a distance of about three kilometres and another one was there with a recording machine.    I had to be taken to Katikamu and I paid a fine of 30,000/= there and then. Even though I was the Deputy Chairperson of the CA, I did not quarrel but I said, “Thank you very much, you are doing your work.” They laughed and I moved away.  What happened to that speed recording equipment?  Were they experimenting with it?  It has ever happened and you know they have been there. 

Now, if those things are returned, these people will get scared because they will know that there are policemen on the road, and you do not even see them but you only known when they stop you and say your speed has been 120; that is a crime and then they get you.  So, let us get that equipment, it is going to solve part of the problem.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you honourable Members. I have got a list here of people who made contributions and I see them again standing.  I do not want to mention their names but I have the list here. According to our Rules, you cannot contribute twice on the same debate and this has caused a problem.  Please, those who have already contributed, I pray that you don’t stand again because I have the names here.

Hon, Minister, you want to have a general debate? I will give you an opportunity.

MR MARTIN WANDERA (Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to preface my submission by thanking the Minister of Finance for all the effort they have invested in maintaining macro economic stability in this country. However, I wish also to express some concerns about the budget speech, and I would like to address myself to what I consider are some of the inconsistencies in the conceptual and theoretical issues in the Budget Speech. 

On page 4 of the Budget Speech, the hon. Minister of Finance observed that one of the principal government programmes to support exports is the Medium Term Competitive Strategies (MTCS) Paper. In the MTCS, it is observed that Government will maintain open trade policies because protectionist policies inevitably damage incentives for investment in export production. This statement is also captured in the speech of the Minister of Finance in last year’s budget speech, however, honourable Members, you will recall that during this year’s budget speech, the Minister of Finance announced an increment on tax for second hand clothes, and his argument was that he was trying to protect local textile industries. I find this a bit confusing. 

He is saying one of the principles guiding export production in this country is the MTCS; MTCS says protecting local industries kills the incentive for export production, and now he is telling us it is good to protect local industries, yet about two years ago, when the Uganda Manufacturers Association asked for some protection from imported goods, the Minister of Finance told them that this was not possible because they were going to make them inefficient. My question is, is protection okay for foreign investors, but when our local investors ask for protection, it does not work? I would like the Minister of Finance to tell me what is the clear policy on this matter.  

The other issue that I would like to address myself to is the issue of inflation in this country. I would like to thank the Minister of Finance for bringing down inflation from the three-digit figure to a single digit and sometimes to even minus levels these days. The Minister of Finance observed in the speech that the annual headline inflation rate, which includes food prices, was actually negative for most of the year. He went ahead to say that the falling food prices were caused by good climatic conditions. 

I find this statement, as a student of economics, seriously misleading, because the price of foodstuffs is a function of a number of variables. What the Minister is trying to tell us is that the price of food stuffs is a function of only supply, that because the climate is good and we had a good harvest, so prices were going down. Why doesn’t the ministry consider the issue of demand? 

The Minister is saying food prices are falling, but hon. Members, you know that there are many people in this town and many other towns in this country, who are going hungry. Every lunchtime people go to the City Square for fresh air as their lunch; they have air burgers or air sandwiches. What this tells us is that people do not have money in their pockets. If people had money, they would be able to buy food and I do not think that the food prices would be falling the way they are. 

The other implication of falling food prices is with respect to the household income of our people. We know that our people’s main source of income is food crops that they sell to us who live in the urban areas. I am surprised that the Minister is not concerned about this. The food prices are falling, which means the income of the people in the rural areas is being affected. The Minister is telling us nothing about what he is planning to make sure that we address the issue of food prices.  In the last year’s speech, I talked about the issue of income tax in this country, which severely erodes the capacity of our people in the towns to buy food from our peasants.

The other issue I would like to address myself to is the proposal by the Minister of Finance to the effect that before vehicles come to this country, they must receive certification of environmental safety from the countries of origin. I am happy that the ministry is concerned about protection of our environment, but there are other implications to this. First of all, our people importing vehicles will have to pay the authorities certifying in the countries of origin. This is going to make vehicles expensive in this country, and yet for me I have been driving second hand cars. When these cars come here, they are not smoking, but when they get into this country, because of poor maintenance and servicing, they start smoking. 

I think what the ministry should be doing is to make sure we put in place regulations to enforce maintenance and servicing of vehicles within the country other than inconveniencing people who have no option but to drive second hand vehicles. 

I would also like to thank the Government for putting in place policies to promote employment in this country. However, when people go to get jobs, they are not looking for an address because even where they come from they can be easily located, but they go to get an income. Our experience in this country is that many investors come here, give people jobs, but jobs without appointment letters so there is no kind of formal contract. This is even against the law. They pay people peanuts yet they take away a lot of profit. This problem is not helped by the fact that the Ministry of Labour, which is responsible for ensuring that the conditions of work in our country are improved, is not well facilitated by the Ministry of Finance.  

If you look at the budget for labour administration in this country, it is always at the bottom of the bag. If you go to many districts, since recruitment of public servants was decentralised, up to now they have not seen the importance of the labour officers. Even where they have appointed them, they do not provide them with the budget to make them work. I would like to ask the government to take the issue of labour administration very seriously. Otherwise, work places are going to become a theatre for workers’ rights violation.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR KULE MURANGA (Busongora North): Thank you, Mr Speaker for this opportunity. I would like to join other Members in thanking the Minister of Finance for this Budget. However, there are certain issues, which I want to comment on.  

I would like to commend the Government for the efforts it has put to pacify our Rwenzori region. As I speak now, at least the people can sleep and do their normal business.  But having worked with UPDF and our wanainchi to eradicate the ADF, there still remains a problem, because any time, rebels can regroup across the border. We were promised that we would have security roads along the mountains so that any other group may be denied access to the mountains, but as I speak now, that promise has never been fulfilled. 

Although we were able to make security roads in other areas like the North and we were proposing more in Karamoja, but the Rwenzori region has remained without security roads. This makes it very hard for our soldiers to carry their luggage up to the mountain, leave alone carrying their food. I am sure any time some rebels can regroup in Congo. So, Mr Speaker, I would like the ministry concerned to fulfil their promises so that we can have these roads, which will work as development roads after the situation is restored completely.

I would like also to request Government to consider having a special programme for the areas which were affected by ADF. We have many programmes in Northern Uganda and Karamoja; I do not see why we cannot have a similar programme for the areas which were affected in the Rwenzori Region. I expected such a programme in the budget of this year.

Our area is well endowed with tourist attractions ranging from the mountains, the animals, the several game parks, but looking at the roads we have, they do not reflect that Uganda gains anything from those tourist attractions. Take an example of a road that takes tourists to the mountains, it has never been worked on. We always work on it locally, and the budget should have reflected at least that road to be worked on. This means that maybe we do not appreciate what we gain from the tourist attractions we have.  

Mr Speaker, we have been having problems, even last time we buried about 70 people. The problem is that fuel tankers and passenger vehicles have been moving on the same road, yet if the railway was operating, some of these fuel tankers would be carried by railway to reduce the volume of traffic on the road. But because the railway was closed some time back, you find very heavy trailers and small vehicles moving together, and accidents have resulted. 

I was expecting the Minister in charge of Finance to reflect that he is going to revitalise our railway system, because we have so many things. For example, Hima Cement Factory wants the railway to be revamped so that they can have limestone from Mugura, a place near Kamwenge, and at the same time transport their cement to Kampala. We also have the Kasese Cobalt Company, which also wants the railway to carry their bulk materials. But because of lack of a railway system, all these people use the road via Mbarara. This makes the road so busy and some accidents are bound to happen.

Mr Speaker, I was expecting the minister to show that there is a will to repair, or even sell if they cannot repair this railway system so that it can work. We have a lot to carry on that railway line, but I do not know why it was not budgeted for.

Mr Speaker, there is no way the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture can work without an efficient road network.  We can only talk of this to succeed when the last farmer in the village is well connected to the main trunk roads so that he can easily sell the produce. But even if we pump a lot of money into PMA, we shall not gain much unless the road network matches with the production. I was therefore expecting to see a deliberate effort to make sure that these small roads reach the small farmers.  

I cannot do much because time is against me, but I hope the few points I have raised will find their way and things will be rectified. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR PETER MUTULUUZA (Mawokota North, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Since there is little time, I will go straight to the point and these are the issues raised by my people in the constituency as far as the budget is concerned. There are about five points, and one of them is PMA. 

As you are aware, Mr Speaker, I come from a predominantly agricultural area, but my people actually take PMA as a myth in their constituency, because it has not really generated any tangible results on the ground.  A lot of money is sent to the district, they say they are undertaking programmes for capacity building, but when I go to my constituency, they complain that actually they have not seen any such capacity building programmes.  

When I read the popular version of PMA, there was nothing like provision of agricultural implements like tractors, spraying pumps, construction of cattle dips, insecticides, and insemination. My people are saying they need all these. Instead of channelling this money through the district, they are proposing that Government should purchase tractors and at least give each sub-county a tractor as it used to be before - and sorry the minister concerned is not around - but I hope this appeal will reach him. I understand in the early days of NRM, tractors were provided, but I understand they were mostly used by politicians. One fall is not enough to really discourage somebody, that was a problem, but I think if we resume that programme, it will help our people. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, is the issue of fisheries. My constituency borders Lake Victoria. We have about two to five landing sites, but these sites are not well constructed. The roads leading to these sites are full of potholes as deep as pit latrines. In spite of that, the vehicles that collect fish use them. Actually, very soon there will be no access to these landing sites. There is no clean water at the landing sites, no toilets, no services at all! I am requesting the minister concerned to look into that and improve our landing sites. 

Another problem we have is lack of access to running water. In the whole of Mpigi District we do not have a single tap of running water. Our town, Mpigi Town Council, does not even have piped water, yet when I went to Western Uganda, even new districts like Kanungu and small towns like Kihihi all have water. I am wondering, what happened to our district? The whole district lacks even a single source of piped water!

MR ELIODA TUMWESIGYE: I thank you for giving way. I would like to inform the honourable Member for Mawokota that it is not good to generalise. When he says Western Uganda, what does he mean? Because, even in my constituency, I have a very big town council of Kabwohe with five big secondary schools and a main hospital, but it also has no piped water. So it is better to give specific examples only rather than generalising.

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you for that information, but I am just trying to express my disappointment. I am talking about a whole district without any clean water source, yet in the President’s Speech and in the Budget Speech, they said 51 percent of the population has access to clean water. And that was for last year! This year they say it is now 56 percent of the population. I am wondering how true this is, when my people in the whole district, which is only 30 kilometres from Kampala, have not even a single clean water source. And for your information, honourable Members, Mpigi Town Council has a population of about 11,000 to 15,000 people. These have only one well, whose water was recently found to be contaminated to a level of about 75 percent -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, it seems you have not been following the allocation that was published in the newspapers to districts, for water. Is it not a fact that your district has got some allocation for improving water? 

We get a list of moneys sent to the districts monthly, and one of the items catered for is water. You are saying Mpigi does not get any money for water? The money is sent to all districts and I think it is uniform. Did you not see this allocation; did you not get interested in it?

MR MUTULUUZA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. Well, I checked in the allocation but I did not see money allocated for that purpose. 

I will talk of health in my constituency. I thank the government for allocating some money to NGO health centres. I however note with concern that most of the money that is allocated to these NGOs does not get to them. I found out last financial year that they were allocated Shs 33 million, but only got Shs 18.2 million. I have written to the Minister of Finance to address this problem and perhaps find out why this happened. 

I also want to address the issue, which I pointed out when we were considering Vote-on-Account, of maintaining two missions in Zaire. There is one of Goma and another in Kinshasa. According to the Ministerial Statement, Goma is supposed to get Shs 1.4 million, then Kinshasa Shs 69.468 million –(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable Member, do you really not think that that issue will be exhaustively dealt with by the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee? That committee is handling the Policy Statement of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and definitely they will summon the minister concerned to make a clarification on that.

I imagine that when they come here during the Committee of Supply, that issue will come up and the minister will definitely come in to answer. So, why do you not pursue that specific one with the committee?

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker for that information. Lastly on the question of insecurity, I want to join the rest of my colleagues who have recommended negotiations with these rebels in the North. The war has taken so long. If we have failed militarily, we should negotiate. Let us sit on the table and find out how to best end this. I believe this war can be stopped, and our brothers in the North will also enjoy the peace that was ushered in by the NRM Government. Thank you.

MRS BENIGNA MUKIIBI (Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here in my capacity as the Woman Representative for Kibaale. I would like to also thank the President for his Address to the Nation, and also the Minister of Finance for the Budget Speech. 

I would like to put on record the appreciation of the people of Kibaale. They were pleased to hear that the Land Fund is going to be operationalised during the next financial year and that Kibaale will be at the centre of this. We are very grateful because we have been waiting for this for a long time. We hope that this kind of activity will go a long way to enhance peace in that area. 

I would like to also take this opportunity to thank His Excellency the President for the way he handled the Kibaale issue after the LC V elections. I do not want to go into the details, for most of you have been following the trends in Kibaale District. I would however like to thank the President who got concerned and put in a lot of effort to study our situation and find an appropriate solution. 

I also thank the honourable Members who supported us and who supported the President’s move. I know there was a lot of criticism, but I would like to say that Kibaale District is a bit complicated and unique in Uganda. I call upon the people of Uganda to always bear with us. We have a history which is not terribly good, and we are still struggling to grow and be ourselves. We have been denied a lot of rights in the past, but we are trying to find our feet. When such things happen, I think the rest of the Ugandans should be considerate and give us affirmative action –(Laughter)- like the President did. We salute him and appreciate because if it had been otherwise mishandled, it would have led to more bloodshed.

I beg to report that now there is calm in the district. We have come to a compromise with the Chairman LC V, who was elected unopposed two weeks ago. We are actually looking forward to the swearing in ceremony, which is to take place on Friday, 26 July 2002, and you are all invited.

In handling the disturbances in Kibaale District, the issue of peace and stability was paramount. We were all looking for a solution that would enable all the ethnic groups in the district to continue living there in peace. Whatever was being done was in that spirit. 

I would like to assure the people of Uganda that nobody is being displaced, and nobody is going to be sent away. What we were really looking for was a continuous stay of all of us in that area in peace, as we have been doing before. In Kibaale you find many ethnic groups there and we have been welcoming people from all over Uganda, and even outside. We have been living there in peace. 

I must also say that what developed recently was also an eye-opener for all of us to continuously look for ways of living there in harmony. It was, in my view, a blessing in disguise. After this, we are going to sort out the issues that emerged. Perhaps it was not even clear to us that they were causing problems before. Like the land issue - this has been outstanding. It is historical. The people of Kibaale have really suffered without any land rights and I would like –(Interjection)- that was one point that came out, but which we have always known. 

There was also the issue of integration. We have had so many settlers before, but of recent, we got groups of people who settled en masse. And I think this is actually unique to Kibaale. It is not in many parts that you get people settling en masse. You wake up one day to find an additional 3,500 families. While you are still grappling with that one, next year there comes another 1,000 then another and another!

I think this is what has destabilized the stability that we have always enjoyed with different ethnic groups. I know we have put all these issues on the table so that Government can continue to address them. They have emerged from these disturbances we had. That is why I call it a blessing in disguise, because now we are going to be able to address these issues. 

It will also be a pilot project for the rest of Uganda, because many people are moving. We are all on the move and we should have definite policies of resettling people and not just placing them in different areas. Since we are here for the next four years, I am giving you all an invitation. We should all work together to find solutions for such developments, and I hope this will be done in the near future.  

I also take this opportunity to appeal to the absentee landlords who own land in Kibaale, to take this opportunity of operationalizing the Land Fund to come up and process their land titles so that we can all come out victorious. I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity.
 
MR THEODORE SEKIKUUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Finance for the Budget Speech. I will right away go to paragraph 60, concerning the administration of justice, law and order. 

I understand that the Judiciary is constitutionally mandated to quickly administer justice to the people of Uganda. I also well know that they have been having constraints like any other ministry. However, access to justice in rural areas was improved through the construction and renovation of Police stations, Prisons, training schools, and opening up offices of the DPP, among other provisions in the Budget. I however urge the minister responsible to take a closer look at the Inspectorate, more particularly the Grade II Magistrates. 

Government should come out and clarify on the position of Grade II Magistrates. We have one in charge of Lwemiyaga and Ntuusi, and he seems to be unguided. He is trying all cases from defilement to theft, and he cannot work with even his superiors. So I want the Government to clarify on these Grade II Magistrates. They should respond to the case that I have cited, and I have also had the opportunity to report it to his superiors.

On pages 19 to 23, the Budget Speech talks about the valley dams, piped water, gravity schemes, tap water and many others. Last year, the Minister in charge of Water mentioned that in the dry areas of Sembabule, Kabula and Gomba, there would be a system of water harvesting. This, unfortunately, appears to be prominently missing in this Budget. 

At the moment we are hit by drought. People walk distances of up to 20 kilometers to the swamp to get water. And that water is unhygienic. There are dead animals in that water, the situation is alarming. I wish the minister were here to hear this and perhaps do something about it. I understand that our water level is so low that we cannot have sustainable boreholes in the area. We do not have any piped water either, and the valley dams are non-existent in some areas. As a measure to avert the drought, I suggest that the minister could concretize the idea of water harvesting that he started last financial year. He should make it a reality.

I will end with the Land Fund on page 20. Paragraph 74 says, “increased security of land tenure is an integral component of PMA under the framework of the ten year land strategic plan.”  And it provides Shs 9 billion to cater for the Land Fund. This is right, Mr Speaker, because it tallies with Article 237 of the Constitution and section 40 of the Land Act. However, the Budget limits the pioneering of this fund to Kibaale, yet currently we have a very big land problem in my area in Lwemiyaga. 

A population of 1,885 people are being evicted from land covering 740 hectares. That land had been mortgaged and it was sold by NPART to Mr Enos Tumusiime and M. Kabega. They are totally disregarding the rights of the bona fide occupants who are there currently. They are being treated as trespassers. I would like the Minister of Justice, if she is here, to comment on how one can – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Justice is right in front of you.

MR SEKIKUUBO: I saw her engrossed in some other affair. Anyway, I would like her to come out with a substantive comment on how 1,852 people, making up 730 families, can be evicted from their land. They are now trespassers because of some collusion between some buyers, and NPART, which sold this land at Shs 6 million!

Mr Speaker, on this very land, we have a valley dam that was constructed in fulfilment of a presidential pledge, which cost us Shs 40 million. We also have two boreholes there, and we have churches and other public places. Despite that, they are going ahead to evict people, calling them trespassers yet they have been there since time immemorial. They were there even before I was born. Those are my concerns, Mr Speaker. Thank you very much for giving me this opportunity.

MR TOMSON ANANG-ODUR (Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is unfortunate that the time allocated to us on this important topic is limited. I however wish to thank the Minister of Finance for his speech. I also thank the President for his State of the Nation Address, and the Budget Committee for the brilliant critique of the budget, which they presented to this Parliament. I also thank hon. Augustine Ruzindana for an objective survey of the State of the Nation Address.

Mr Speaker, I associate myself with what the Member of Parliament for Kibaale has said. I have said before on the Floor of Parliament that the Land Fund is very important for establishing peace in Kibaale. I went there and I noticed that that was the issue. I am now happy that it is being realised, and I am sure we are going to have lasting peace in Kibaale.  

On page two of the President’s Speech we are reminded that an independent, integrated and self-sustaining economy is our main national goal, but to me this goal is not necessary. It is not even achievable in the present global context within which we are operating. In fact it is contradictory to our other goals, commitments, and the trends that we are witnessing in the world today. 

As you are aware, honourable Members of Parliament, Uganda is committed to the Union of East Africa, to the Union of Africa, to COMESA and other regional bodies. We are also committed to the global context of the world within which we are operating. We are in fact ardent and prolific students and supporters of ABA and AGOA. Mr Speaker, if these commitments are to be implemented, they will not result into an independent, integrated, self-sustaining economy. That cannot be. 

It can only result in regional interdependent economies, which I think we are trying to aim at. To me, these concepts are not being focused, these concepts are being looked at but I do not think that serious thought is given to them. It is therefore clear to me that what we should be talking about as Ugandans is emphasising regional integration. 

We should be emphasising our gains in comparative advantages, in resource endowment, and in economies of scale. That is what we should be emphasising. We should be looking at where we can excel, because we have the resources. We should consider where we can excel, because we have got better-trained manpower. That should be our focus. We should concentrate on that and export what we have. I think the Minister of Finance should consider this.

Anyway, our goal is not achievable for one or two reasons. First, I have realised that our government is pro-foreign investors, not local investors. This is very clear from what we do as a country, and it is very unfortunate. A foreign-dominated economy cannot be independent. That is my point.
 
Secondly, the inputs by IMF and World Bank into our policy formulation are, in my view, too much. In fact I think they put in more than our own government. This has the impact of making any policy we formulate an ingredient in a non-independent economy. These are foreigners and they have got their own interests. So, Mr Speaker, I think we need to take a closer look at this issue and then think about our policy directions. 

There is a lot of importance attached to good governance. The President, in his speech, dwelt in length on it, and the Minister of Finance referred to it too. This means all of us realise good governance is a prerequisite for economic development. However, when we are talking about good governance, my understanding of it is that it must be a situation where we have a free, competitive and democratic system of governance. It is only in free and democratic societies where individuals and society can develop their potential and creatively apply them for development.

I want to submit here that our system, which has in fact been described variably as guided democracy, cannot lead to the prospect we are trying to gain. In free, democratic societies, opposition groups and political parties are looked at as partners in development. I think Government should take a look at this very clearly and see how it can be developed in our own case.  

The President is saying that we should not waste time on the POA, I do not agree with that. He says that it is sterile to talk about that, and that we should not talk about a sterile issue. We all realise that in the last election, we had almost two million people who voted for change. And I want to add that if the election had been entirely free and fair, that number would have been much greater than that, perhaps even double that. These people are talking about change, and this topic, therefore, is very fresh. I would like to say that this topic cannot be sterile.  

I want to submit that you cannot gag half the population, which is yearning for peace, yearning for democracy and fundamental rights. I think this is a very fundamental issue. To me, the issue cannot be sterile. It may be the minds of some people who are opposed to this which could be sterile, but I think that there is need for us to move on and make sure this is done.

I do not have much time, but I want to quickly say that on pages 2 to 4 of the minister’s speech, we are given economic figures of sustainable Gross Domestic Product, increasing per capita incomes and decline in the incidences of poverty.  I have travelled this country very widely and I can say this on behalf of my constituency, there is widespread poverty. In fact, in many instances, poverty is increasing.

In the north, Mr Speaker, studies have shown that 67 per cent of the people live below the poverty level, in spite of these rosy figures. I think there is need for us to move away from these rosy figures and see how we can make sure that what we are talking about is consistent with what we can see; so that as a nation we can all look at the situation, work on it and develop instead of covering up what is obvious.

Lastly, on page 13 of the speech, we are given a list of roads which are being worked on. Page 13 gives roads which have been worked on the previous year, and page 14 gives a list of roads, which are going to be worked on.  

I note that there are 11 cases of roads to be worked on, and out of these 11, there are two roads for the whole of the north and east. There is Jinja-Bugiri and there is only an item of 107 Kilometres of roads in the North, in what they call the Road Emergency Programme. I know that there is tarmacking of Arua-Nebbi road, Ntungamo-Rukungiri road, Mubende-Fort Portal Road, Busunju-Hoima road, Gayaza-Kalagi road soon, and Kafu-Masindi.  

If you look at the regional distribution of these roads, Mr Speaker, I only wish humbly to say – (Ms Kabakumba rose_)

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Odur, you have really taken a lot of time. You have been saying you are concluding; please conclude.

MR ANANG-ODUR: I would like to conclude. I am sorry there is no time to take the information, madam, but we can discuss that outside this Parliament.

Last year I asked about what was going to happen to the Lira-Soroti road, which happens to be a major highway - in fact it is the Great North Highway. I know that apart from the Tororo-Kampala road and the Kampala–Mbarara road, there is no other road in this country, which is busier than this particular one. The ministers concerned are not here, but I was last told that it was going to be a roll over. I do not know whether this year in fact it has been rolled off completely, because I do not see it at all in this new programme.  

Mr Speaker, this is only to request that as a nation and as leaders, it is good for us to have a look at what is happening in the country generally and to apply the few resources we have, so that all of us can have early integration in the development for the whole of the country. I think this is fair. 

This is called for in the Constitution, and I think this is what the people of northern Uganda and the rest of the country would wish to have. I am sure if this could be done, all of us would be happy. And I am sure we can have fast development for the whole of the country. Thank you very much for this opportunity.

LT GEN. ELLY TUMWINE (Army Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to add my voice to thank the President and the Minister for their statements. I will in brief comment about some points, which I think have more or less come out through the debate on the Budget, of course laying emphasis on the interest of the constituency that I represent, the UDPF.  

Many times when we are discussing the Budget, a lot is said about how big Defence is, about how much is being spent, and sometimes perhaps being wasted or misused here and there. We do not balance this with the real conditions of the members of the UPDF, who are members of everyone’s constituency in this Parliament.  

Knowing that all the soldiers of the UPDF come from all the constituencies, I wanted to point out that it is always important that when we are speaking here in Parliament, we should know that we are speaking for those members of our constituencies who are in the UPDF. They take a lot of interest and sometimes ask why Members of Parliament are speaking like this, especially when they think that you do not lay a lot of emphasis on their welfare. 

UPDF soldiers have been living in conditions that other soldiers in other countries do not live in, mainly because of the preparation of the doctrine of the UPDF to bear with the economy, and that is the relevance with the Budget.

Every time we are discussing the budget in the UPDF, there is always a big shortfall, which affects the welfare of the soldiers. So, I wanted to point that out. Whenever we talk here, know that our constituency members are being affected by the proposals of cutting the Defence budget, of making it small. 

We do not remember the point that the difference we have with some of the other countries is that we are still at the stage of building. Many of you Members of Parliament build houses and you know what it means when you are building the house. At different stages of building is when you need certain batches or amounts of money to put in. At the foundation, you need a certain amount, at some stage you could put in little but at another stage, let us say you are roofing, you either have all the iron sheets or the tiles together or you wait until you have them and then do it. 

Sometimes some of these stages are just like building. And I wanted to appeal to you that when it comes to looking at the Defence budget, if you broke it down to the different votes where this money is going to be spent, you will see there is a lot left to be desired.  

I wanted to talk about how this is related to the peace dividend. The peace dividend is when you put in something, how much do you get out. How much do we need to put in in order to harvest peace?  

Everybody is concerned about the current situation in the north and I want to take this opportunity to say something. In strategic terms, there has never been a better situation to solve the problem of the north than now. The situation might look a bit worrying because of what is happening, but it is like when you are cooking, you might see the water running up and down, but that is when the temperature is ripe for the water to be boiled. 

So, I would like to appeal to you that when we are discussing these things, we should look at the strategic considerations; where have we come from; how many groups have been opposing this regime and destabilizing peace; and which ones are we left with to deal with.  At this point, I would like to appeal to all Members of Parliament, by voice, by effort, by everything, to support the UPDF to finish the job.  Do not cut their struggle; do not cut their speed by speaking behind to curtail their morale. 

If you have read, in all wars of the world, the morale of the army depends on the support they get from the citizens of the country. If Members of Parliament are not going to give that morale to our soldiers who are in the trenches in Sudan or in Uganda, who are at the frontline and they are only hearing bashing from Parliament, those who have microphones, I think it does not augur well for long-term peace. So, I would like to make this appeal, Mr Speaker. 

On the economy, which is very close and very relevant to the well being of Uganda, I would like to comment on two points on AGOA. In my own capacity and as part of freedom fighting, I have taken the role of trying to look for possible markets for things that are produced in Uganda. I feel very saddened when people try to pre-empt, to curtail, and to reduce the speed of something, which is basically simply good.  

You hear people asking, why is the President taking the advance role of AGOA? But he has always been at the frontline! Where there is war in Karamoja he goes; is that interfering with the Minister of Defence’s job? Where there are problems in Kibaale he goes; where there are problems in every constituency he goes! So, really, I would like to say that freedom fighting means that if there is something good, go for it. 

That is how I went to Sri Lanka with my own money. What did I go for? I heard there was a delegation going and I wanted to find out what was happening there. With my own funds, I went and I discovered three things which I would like the members of this House to benefit from.  

One; countries which are producing textiles in the world are dying to find a country which produces cotton, which can produce yarn, can produce textiles and be able to export. Most of the countries which produce textiles and garments, do not have cotton. Countries that have been supplying America now have quotas and taxes on top of those, and they are looking for opportunities where they will reduce more than 15 percent of their export cost. 

I discovered that those who are producing shoes and leather products do not have hides. Uganda is among the few countries in the world producing big numbers of hides, which are of very high quality. Out of simple farming methods, open range, our cows are not scratched by too much sengenge. Our cows, like the Ankole cows, do not have a hump, which reduces on the size of the leather. Our cows have a lot of shades as compared to the other areas. And we slaughter about one million cows; those are one million hides. While the meat might be cheap, the hides market is very high. 

What happens in Uganda? Uganda was the only country in East Africa, and in Africa, which had no tax on hides; it was only Uganda - the last one was Tanzania. What had resulted was that Uganda was now losing out on the market. So, I would like to support the minister’s proposal of establishing 15 per cent tax on imported leather products, because that will guarantee many companies to invest here because we have the raw materials.

Thirdly, on the second hand clothes, I have been championing the move to try to produce Ugandan-made products 100 percent. Like the shirt I am putting on, the material is from ATM in Mbale, 100 per cent cotton, and it is hand printed by Creations Limited. The cost between this shirt and a second hand shirt is very little. If we had many metres, like Nytil, ATM and others are trying to do, we would finally balance the cost of the second hand shirt with a locally produced shirt, which is of better quality and good.

In summary, because of time, the last point I want to make is about how much I have been saddened by the sectarian talk in this Parliament. Whenever we are discussing Kibaale, whenever we are discussing groups in Teso, I fear there is still so much sectarianism in our talk. A psychiatrist and psychologist once said that we are what we know and we become what we hear and what we see. At this time in history, to hear Members of Parliament being so sectarian and against the constitutional provisions and the statutes! 

I want to make an appeal that it should be taken seriously, so that it reduces the hate-talk, it reduces the conflict between us, so that we talk more about unity, we talk more about love, we talk more about sharing problems rather than creating hatred between us. I thank you, Mr Speaker

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member. Hon. Sempangi will now speak and then you will wind up. Honourable Minister, I think I will give you the first opportunity tomorrow; you will be the first one. The chairperson of the Committee will then wind up and the Minister will finally wind up. Please be very brief because a number of issues have already been covered.

REV. DR KEFA SSEMPANGI (Ntenjeru South, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to mention issues that concern the people I represent.  I support the motion on the Floor, and I appreciate the Budget speech. 

On page 9, among the strategic exports mentioned are coffee, cotton, textiles, tea, fish, beef, hides and skins and horticulture. I think pineapples are under horticulture, but the people I represent would like to have the word “pineapple” included among the strategic exports for this country. 

The people I represent want it to be put on record that they support the president’s trips abroad so long as the president goes to promote textiles and to establish trade. I have heard some people say that the President is going out begging, but if somebody is not going for aid and goes for trade, it will be misuse of the English language to call that “begging”. I think that is promoting advocacy for the products produced in this country. But the people of Ntenjeru South would like the President, whenever he goes out, to also talk about pineapples.  

We are happy in Ntenjeru that through UNAFA we now have a machine for drying pineapples and we would like to see the marketing of these dried pineapples guaranteed. Mr Speaker, the Chairperson of the Budget Committee mentioned something about NAADs, but I would hesitate to grant more funds to NAADs until this pilot project has shown that it is viable for our people.  Will NAADs meet the expectations of the resource-poor farmer? We are waiting to see whether NAADs is working, whether it will support and promote the marketing of the products for this year. If we can have a market for pineapples, we people in Ntenjeru South, we have no problem to support NAADs.  

Mr Speaker, I read in the papers that Shs800 million was set for the compensation of the people who are losing property where the road from Nebbi to Arua is being made. But in my place, I have people who are living along the Nile riverbanks and they were told to vacate without any compensation. 200 metres have to be cleared from the water inlands and people have lived there for many years and now they are told to leave. They have no objection to leave, but they are asking why are they not compensated when other people who lived where the roads are being built and where electric posts are passing are being compensated? They are very, very willing to leave.

On the same point, Mr speaker, I want to come to irrigation.  We would like to appeal to the Nile Authority people to allow us irrigate from River Nile because from the contract which is being signed, these people want pineapples throughout the year, but we are depending on the mercy of the sun. We cannot tell these people that we can supply you pineapples for three months, but then for four months, we have no pineapples because we have no rainfall. So, we are appealing that we may be allowed to irrigate from River Nile.

Finally, Mr Speaker, this concerns me as a person who has interest in children.  I also read in the papers that the amount of heroin and concaine is increasing in high institutions of learning and in schools. There is the Anti-Narcotics Unit, which I think will do a lot of work because when people are using heroin, they are using needles. And I read in the report that people are contracting HIV/AIDS through these needles. 

I think the Ministry of Education needs to put in a lot of effort to sensitise Schools and children against use of heroin. It is a deadly drug. Some of the children are suffering, you find some have developed big tummies and eventually they die. I think the Ministry of Internal Affairs will also participate to make sure that this heroin is tracked down. Otherwise, we will continue losing more children dying of HIV/AIDS because they use heroin.  I thank you.  

MR ELIODA TUMWESIGYE (Sheema County North, Bushenyi): First of all, I would like to thank the Speaker and this august House for standing and observing a minute’s silence in honour of my late mother when we opened Parliament a few weeks ago. Your words of sympathy and encouragement helped me go through the bereavement.  

On the budget, I have few comments.  The first one is on fuel.  The Minister of Finance did indicate that he had increased excise duty specifically on petrol from 580 to 610, but within a few days, all the fuel companies increased the prices, for not only petrol, but also for diesel and paraffin.  I checked even in the Finance Bill, page 91, the excise duties did not change. So I would like to appeal to the Minister of Finance to let people know that these companies are just taking people for a ride.  They just took advantage of the Minister’s statement, which was specific on petrol, and they increased for everything and this is going to have an effect, particularly for diesel and paraffin.

Secondly, the Minister also indicated that starting in September 2002, all the vehicles would have to be inspected before they come into the country. I do believe that this is a very, very short period of only three months considering the transportation like from Japan to here. So, there are a number of traders and a number of people who are asking the Minister to possibly increase that period, especially since it may not necessarily have a lot of financial implications.

The other point is on macro-economic considerations. It has been mentioned and even in the speech somewhere that donor money sometimes has a lot of macro-economic implications, and also implications on physical deficit.  However, I think I am not an economist but just a mere doctor, and I beg the indulgence of posterity not to judge me harshly when I say that to me, this looks like a poor man’s economics. A poor man may be there with a very, very bad house, and you say, “let me build you a very good house”, he says, “no, no, I do not need this house because I will have no furniture to put in this house” and it goes on. In Uganda we are getting only 460 million dollars in export only - 460 and then somebody comes and says let me give you more dollars and you are saying “no, this is going to affect my inflation which is very good at negative, and the food prices which are low are going to be affected?”

A few days ago, the Minister of Finance was quoted as having said that he will reject money to put up hospitals because he has no money to buy drugs.  This was like saying we cannot build a dam because we may have problems paying bills. What we are asking for the Minister of Finance, we do not need money to build big hospitals? We just need money to rehabilitate hospitals, and money to build small aid posts, which can help reduce on the infant mortality and reduce on the deaths! 88 couples now have to go through the headache of having a baby. The woman carries the pregnancy, delivers and before the end of one year, 88 out of 1000 have their children die, after the child has started smiling. The only solution could have been to put a small aid post in each parish. Maybe that can help to treat the malaria that is killing the children. 

We have evidence of that when we put money in Kumi to rehabilitate the health centres, put up new ones, now it has the best delivery system and the results are showing. The big indicators we are looking for we cannot get them. This idea of refusing money because you do not want a change in the inflation rate, I think it is not going to take us very far.  I would have talked much more, but because of time, I am not talking on that point any more.

Lastly, on Makerere University, although I am a Member of the Social Services Committee and I can always ask questions, but there is also something burning which I thought the august House needs to put into consideration. 

Right now, a lot of peasants are selling their property to pay school fees for their children at Makerere University. One semester they sell land, the second semester they sell whatever else is remaining, the third semester they cannot continue.  Previously there was a grace period, but even that grace period has been removed. Now, I am appealing to Government and the people in my constituency have asked me to appeal to Government that, instead of the President and the Government saying, let us take 4,000 students on Government sponsorship, free, no payment, why do we not spread this to about 8,000 or 10,000 such that each one of them contributes as cost sharing maybe Shs250,000 or 300,000 which already they have been paying at A’ level. Possibly this can help the peasants also have hope of their children going to Makerere University.

I know we are soon debating the quota system here in Parliament, but I do not think that it could be a solution as even when you allocate places to districts, it would be the chairmen LC V and the leaders in the districts that will take advantage of this system, and therefore, maybe even the poor will not be able to access it. For sure, Mr Speaker, I would have wanted to add more, but in the interest of time, allow me to stop there, I will be adding on more points as time goes on. Thanks you a lot!

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable Member, and I thank you honourable members for enabling this debate to continue. I hereby certify that all the Members who wanted to contribute to this debate have contributed and there are no more Members interested to contribute, and therefore, the debate will end here.  Tomorrow as I have said, the hon. Minister of Constitutional Affairs will make some observations and then the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget, and then the Ministers.

Honourable Members, tomorrow is the day for the burial of our dear friend, the late Hon. Betty Okwir; those who will be going to Lira for burial, transport has been arranged here. You will leave at 7.00 a.m. so you should be punctual so that you can travel to Lira. 

With this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. prompt.

(The House rose at 6.28 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 25 July 2002 at 2.00 p.m.)


