Wednesday, 25 July 2007

Parliament met at 3.00 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to address the chairs of the standing committees of the House. During this time of the year, we normally have an understanding that the standing committees should be in abeyance for sometime to permit the budgetary process to be concluded. However, I understand that some are sitting simultaneously with the sessional committees causing lack of quorum and making it difficult for the clerks to coordinate the work. Unless there is something very urgent, I am appealing to the chairs of the standing committees to at least give us these two weeks so that we can beat the deadline of 15th August. Thank you.

In the gallery, we have students and teachers from the debating club of St Josephs Secondary School Naggalama in Mukono District. (Applause) They look really smart. They are represented by hon. Mugambe and the Woman Member of Parliament for Mukono. You are welcome. (Applause)

I can also see hon. Aggrey Awori in the gallery. (Laughter) We also have the speaker of Soroti District and various speakers from Soroti counties but I understand they are stuck in the lift. When they come, I will let you know.

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS DELIVERED TO PARLIAMENT ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY H.E THE PRESIDENT ON 7 JUNE 2007. 

(Debate Continued)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday hon. Hood Katuramu was on the Floor and I had indicated that after him we would have hon. Sematiko, hon. Yiga and then we would go to this side –(Interruptions)- You will all speak. 

MR GEOFREY EKANYA: Not about this, Madam Speaker. It is a matter of national importance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But that was yesterday and you were not here. You asked me for time yesterday and you were not in the House.

MR EKANYA: I beg for your pardon, Madam Speaker. We had a meeting with an American guest together with hon. Nandala and several other members of the Public Accounts Committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, raise the matter.

3.05
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, under our rules, I beg to raise this matter which is very important. I have been following matters concerning Government transactions with UMEME and I have established the following: That the agreement signed with UMEME is disadvantageous to this country, and that the review Government carried out is still very bad and does not help this country.

Government installed power equipment in my constituency, hon. Dombo’s constituency and several other constituencies. They placed transformers for health centres and schools. However, to this day, UMEME has refused to connect these health centres and schools to power, yet according to the agreement they are supposed to provide power within a radius of one kilometre to the grid. I have consulted the Ministry of Energy and they told me that UMEME wants to be paid before they can switch on power for these schools and health centres. Some are in hon. Okecho’s place. 

When I investigated further, I established that Government provides for any pole that is replaced on any line in this country. If the Ministry of Energy does not import poles, UMEME will not replace any pole that has fallen down as a result of rain, theft, accident or rot. I have also further established that Government purchases any transformer that is replaced or installed in any place. 

I therefore asked the technical officials what UMEME is doing. Their work is to collect money from the consumers and transmit it to their home countries. I realised that this is theft, robbery and fraud. We cannot just sit and see this going on. Most of the technical officials I have talked to in this ministry have admitted that this was a bad deal and the government needs to get out of it urgently. In Tanzania, the government entered a similar contract with a company to provide water but the government has got out. In Zambia, it was on railways; there too, the government has got out. 

Madam Speaker, this is a matter of urgent importance that requires Government’s immediate action. We cannot continue sitting here and yet according to the agreement, UMEME was supposed to bring in a given amount of capital. They are supposed to replace transformers, to install new units and to cut down power losses but they have not done so. They are saying that Government must provide new poles and transformers, and if they are to connect any new consumer Government must replace the whole facility and pay for the cost of collecting that revenue. 

Hon. Migereko has admitted this in confidence to some of us and he has been pleading with us to give him time. We have given him time, and hon. Dombo is my witness. He has given hon. Migereko time because he is the chairman of the committee dealing with that, but to this date nothing is moving. I am begging this House to take immediate action, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I hear from the Minister of State for Energy? Does he have something to say about this matter? –(Interruption) 

MR ARUMADRI: Madam Speaker, I am very grateful that this matter has come to the Floor. In the region of West Nile where rural electrification is supposed to be implemented, we are facing a raw deal. One pole costs two million, and this is in order for one to be connected to the grid. As if that is not enough, the high-tension power line from Arua to Nebbi is, I think, 33 KV. If anybody wants to be connected to it, he must first purchase a transformer. In that way, the spirit of rural electrification is being lost. Citizens are seeing power lines overhead but they are not party to the services they are supposed to give. 

I would like the minister to tell us categorically whether this is in the spirit of rural electrification, where peasants have to purchase a pole at two million shillings. Is it affordable? Can a peasant buy a transformer? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I keep telling you that if you really want to be assisted you should package your matters properly. Hon. Ekanya, you told me yesterday that you wanted to talk about the 32 points vis-à-vis the 28 points in Universal Secondary Education. That is the matter you wanted to talk about, not energy –(Laughter)- yes, it is an ambush. Yesterday you told me that you wanted to complain about the difference between the students who are admitted with 28 points and those of 32 –(Mr Ekanya rose_)- No, do not raise it now. 

I have not understood what you want from the Minister and I do not know whether the Leader of Government Business has understood what you want, and you want us to take action now. Where is the agreement?

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I formulated a question on this matter, to this date that question has not been brought forward. In fact, there are three questions I formulated and one is about Uganda’s trade with Europe. On the matter of education, I have had a discussion with the Minister and we have agreed on the way forward for the time being. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And you did not find it necessary to inform me? I gave you opportunity because I thought you were going to talk about that matter –(Interruptions)  

MR EKANYA: No, we discussed for just a few minutes outside. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, if the question is missing, the Speaker’s Office will undertake to bring it as soon as possible. 

MR HENRY BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, the issues of UMEME and electricity are not new in this Parliament. It is not the first time that members are raising this matter. Outside in the towns and in our rural constituencies, people are suffering with high electricity rates. The other day, we read that power rates are going to increase by 30 percent and they are only awaiting the approval of the relevant ministry. 

The nature of the complaint that hon. Ekanya is raising is so important and this issue should be investigated by the relevant committee. These matters are beyond hon. Ekanya and hon. Arumadri’s complaints. I beg, Madam Speaker, that this issue be thoroughly investigated by the relevant committee so that you can give a lasting solution to this problem of UMEME and electricity in this country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I said that I do not have a problem with what he has raised. My query is on the packaging. Why don’t we agree to discuss it substantively, maybe next week, and formulate what you want to be done? It is important I agree, but let us package it properly so that we can get the right answers and solutions.

3.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY (Mr Simon D’Ujanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank my colleagues for raising these issues. We would be pleased to answer specific issues. As you may realise, this is a very vast sector. I cannot comment on what my colleague, hon. Ekanya, has alluded to, that my senior colleague has admitted in confidence on certain issues. He will come here and explain that for himself.

However, I would like to say that it is not true that UMEME is not investing in this country. Just a month ago, I commissioned a programme for rehabilitation. It is on changing transformers and conductors, worth US$100 million, provided by UMEME for the next four years starting 2007. This investment is going on in accordance with our agreement. It is worth US$ 100 million and the details are available.

As far as Aggreko is concerned, I am aware that there have been a lot of complaints from that region about the cost of installation. I have received these complaints not only from the members of this august House but also locally. It is true that we are operating in very remote rural areas, so these costs are looping a bit high. My ministry is discussing with ERA on whether there can be some intervention. It is not true, however, that consumers buy transformers. They only pay for what it takes to deliver to them energy but they do not buy those equipment.

In as far as increase in tariffs is concerned, I read about it in the Red Pepper but I have no knowledge of any intentions to increase power tariffs. As you may observe, Madam Speaker, we would be delighted to react to specific questions brought in a certain format. Thank you.

MR EMMANUEL DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, Kampala Traders Association and other concerned organisations have forwarded issues concerning the energy sector to the Office of the Speaker by way of petition. This would have required the Committee on Natural Resources to sit and conduct public hearings to ascertain certain claims that were made in the petition by the people who presented it to the Speaker.

However, at the time the petition was presented, the government was busy negotiating for funding the Bujagali Hydro Power Station. Because of the negative publicity that the petition at times derives, we concurred with the Minister of Energy to defer attending to the petition to enable Government to conclude the procurement process and the funding exercise for the Bujagali Power Station, which has now been concluded.

The Committee on Natural Resources sat this morning to set up priority for the entire session. Apart from the budget process and the ministerial statements, which are the priorities to be handled for this period up to the end of next month, the next item that has been scheduled for hearing is the petition, which claims many misdealings by UMEME.

Allow me to state, Madam Speaker, that what is happening in the energy sector really leaves a lot to be desired. I want to say this without compromising my position because I am going to hear the petition. I do not believe that Government is going to achieve much in the rural electrification exercise if fundamental reviews are not done on how the UMEME agreement with UEDCL is being implemented. 

Let me give a specific example: during the time of presidential elections, Government installed so many transformers in many places. They are there in Mbale, Pallisa, Kapchorwa, Tororo and Butaleja. The transformers have been installed and the schemes have been constructed but the only problem is that the schemes have not been energised, just turning on a switch to enable them get power. They have not done that for over a year now. 

Given the rate at which people steal the wires and transformers – yesterday I was reading in the papers that the Operations Manager of UMEME was complaining about the Shs 3 billion that they lose due to such thefts. However, one of the causes is that some of these lines have not been energised and are in themselves an incentive to the thieves. They are just lines hanging.

Let us leave the exercise for the enquiry that is going to be taken by the committee. However, I want to say that it is in the interest of Government in future to make sure that this agreement is reviewed to ensure that the process of delivery of rural electrification is done in accordance with the objectives of Government.

Madam Speaker, I want to leave it at this and wait for the outcome of the enquiry during the petition. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable member, so what you are saying is that as soon as we finish the budget process you will handle the petition and all the matters surrounding it.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, on the issue which hon. Dombo has admitted; Government cannot install power, connect the whole system and it takes one year for UMEME to just switch on. They are just demanding for money. Women who would access good services, like immunisation programmes, cannot move because UMEME is demanding for money to switch on a transformer. If we allow the process hon. Dombo has talked about, then I think it requires the Minister of Energy to take immediate action to have these lines switched on. Otherwise, thieves will keep on picking the wires and then the people will not see any service coming from Government.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I can ask the chairs of the various committees, especially the sessional committees, to start sitting immediately and invite the Minister of Energy so that you discuss these matters. Let us do that quickly. We do not need to wait for the other petition.

Honourable members, I informed you that we had some guests from Soroti. We have in the gallery Mr Joseph Osoto, the speaker of the District Council of Soroti. He is accompanied by a number of speakers from the various sub-counties of Soroti. These are: Mr Charles Emaju; Mr Stephen Asoil, Gweri Sub-county; Mr Simon Okiring, Soroti Sub-county; Mr Michael Ongom, Arapai Sub-county; Mr Osman Oyoma, Kamuda Sub-county; Mr Peter Obuli, Asuret Sub-county; Mr Willy Oriokot, Tubur Sub-county; and a very special person, Mr Bernard Ababa, the deputy speaker of the district council. He is over there. He is disabled but a very strong man. You are welcome.

Honourable members, I think let us go back to the State of the Nation Address. We shall have hon. Katuramu first.

3.24
MR HOOD KATURAMU (NRM, PWD, Western Region): Madam Speaker, I join my colleagues in thanking the mover of this motion. I thank H.E the President for this State of the Nation Address. Yesterday I listened carefully to the issues which the mover, the seconder and the Leader of the Opposition talked about. I felt that the NRM Government in this one year in the multiparty dispensation has made incredible achievements. I say this because when I first listened to the lamentations in the opening remarks of the Leader of the Opposition, I thought that actually nothing had been achieved by the NRM Government. However, later when I read his submission, I found that he confessed that indeed the NRM Government had scored in many circles, and I want to list some of them.

Uganda has revived its image both on the continent and in the world. We have achieved that after coming from many years of turmoil that have dented this country, which has been living on and its people have been surviving in crisis. It is not by accident that Uganda was chosen to host CHOGM from the many member states of the Commonwealth. It is after a thorough examination of the performance of this country in areas of constitutionalism, democracy and the rest that we were chosen to host this important meeting, which brings together members of the Commonwealth fraternity.

Between the 11th and 14th of June 2007, this country hosted the first ever Commonwealth Women Affairs Ministers’ Meeting, commonly known as WAMM. This is in recognition of the gender sensitivity that this country stresses on the role women play in national development. It is not, therefore, by accident that this success could go unnoticed.

As we are fast tracking the East African federation, this country has been privileged to host all heads of state of the EAC including those of Rwanda and Burundi who are soon joining. This is a clear manifestation that Uganda is moving on the right track as a peace bearer in the region; otherwise, all countries that are going to form the East African Community would not have been inaugurated here in Kampala. I believe this is a great achievement not only for NRM but for the country at large.

Madam Speaker, yesterday the Leader of the Opposition correctly said that there are few survivors in the House from the last Government where we had a multiparty dispensation. He said that they are only four including hon. Kawanga and hon. Prof. Kamuntu. This implies that multiparty politics is new to many of us and therefore we need to have enough time to re-orient ourselves to this new dispensation. That is why I would like to say that the lamentations that the Leader of the Opposition gave in this House are correctable and surmountable. I believe that the authorities can correct such loopholes that tend to dent our multiparty dispensation, like recognition of the Leader of the Opposition on national functions. I think that can be corrected.

Government has indeed invested a lot in the social services sector. Honourable members will agree with me that a country whose population is characterised by disease and ignorance cannot have its population participate in national development efficiently.

It is against this background that the NRM Government has invested a lot in the health sector. The President in his address mentioned the fight against malaria, which the Leader of the Opposition also applauded. He talked about the laying of infrastructure in primary health care. I think this is a great achievement because disease has been a factor that has negated development in this country. (Interruption)

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Madam Speaker, I would like to agree with my colleague when he states that Government has put a lot of money in the improvement of infrastructure to fight the disease burden. However, it is just unfortunate that we have put a lot of money in building health centre IIs all over the country. In Kapelebyong alone, we have eight and none of them is functional since 2002. They are just white elephants. We put them there and praise ourselves as helping to fight the disease burden; we would rather treat patients under a tree than have a white elephant which has no function for our people.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us hear from the person who gives the money.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I just would like to inform my colleague that in this financial year’s budget we have put a total of Shs 11 billion to support –(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is an important matter. This money is going to your constituencies.

MR OMACH: This is going to support the health centre IIs and IIIs. We have also put an additional Shs 8 billion that is going towards the rehabilitation – (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. The Minister of Finance’s budget very clearly indicated that the government is short of Shs 13 billion meant to fund essential drugs. The Minister of Health petitioned the relevant committee of this Parliament, and the civil society have raised this in a document which was circulated to all MPs, that in this year’s budget essential drugs are short by Shs 13 billion. Is it in order for the Minister to continue speculating and lying to this House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ekanya, the Minister was addressing the issue of equipping the health centres which hon. Malinga complained about. Hon Malinga said that they have been constructed but they are not equipped. That is what he was responding to. Maybe they will also talk about the essential drugs, but he was talking about the health centres.

MR OMACH: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your counsel. We have that Shs 11 billion for those health centre IIs and IIIs and we have additional Shs 8 billion that will go towards the support to the regional referral hospitals. So, it is now up to you to appropriate the budget accordingly. I thank you.

THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Stephen Mallinga): Madam Speaker, I am sometimes amazed by the attitude of the honourable member from Kapelebyong. I have just been discussing with him -(Laughter)- how he should equip his clinics. The laziness is at his district. There is a line of equipment for him. He needs to send it to his director of health services in the district to come -(Applause)- to the Ministry of Health and start buying equipment for all his clinics. 

The credit works like this: district health officers, every one of them, are entitled to equipment if they report how many clinics need equipping in their district. They come to the ministry and work with the commissioner who is responsible, and he will give them a line of credit for equipment as they need. Because some of these clinics were built through NUSAF, we do not know that they exist and it has never been reported to the ministry. The clinics we have built have been equipped.

MR KASSIANO WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am a little bemused that the Minister is coming to lecture to us about his administrative machinery. Under a decentralised system, the central ministries are left with the responsibility of ensuring quality services, among other things. Under quality assurance, it is the responsibility of the line ministry to ensure that the technical officers from the centre are conversant with their sector responsibilities, which involve on-the-spot assessment of the needs that they are responsible for.

Is it in order for the Minister to come and over emphasise what he should have done in his Wandegeya offices? The system should have already been effected by his line ministries, rather than coming to us and saying that we should be the ones to go down to the ground and direct the director of health services of the respective districts to come and give this information. Is he in order to execute his administrative duties here on the Floor of this House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Malinga was raising a very important issue, that his hospitals are not equipped. The Minister was saying, actually your people have not asked for the equipment. He was informing him to assist his director of health services to come and ask for the equipment.

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Madam Speaker, I was giving information to my colleague and I appreciate the role of my namesake, -(Laughter)- the honourable minister. I also appreciate the fact that he is one year old in the office and he has not visited Amuria District. I am very aware that 50 percent of the health centres I am talking about were built by the centre and they are the most dilapidated. They were not built by NUSAF, and I am grateful the hon. Omach – (Interruption)

DR STEPHEN MALLINGA: I would like to inform the honourable member that in Amuria where he comes from, people have been in camps. Where the clinics are, those areas were abandoned. That is why some of the clinics were not being utilised. People are going back to their homes and we are in touch with what is going on in Amuria. We are going to equip and make these clinics functional.

MR KATURAMU: Madam Speaker, I hope I will be compensated for my time interrupted by points of information and order. This is exactly what I was trying to come to. If Government can extend health infrastructure - eight health centre IIIs and IVs in Kapelebyong - this should be appreciated. We should not be criticising but discussing the question of equipping this health infrastructure. 

You cannot achieve development unless you plan first. Government looked at the issue of bringing services nearer to the people, pregnant mothers who had been walking long distances to attend antenatal clinics -(The Bell rang.)- No, I think, Madam Speaker, that is being unfair. (Laughter) What I wanted to say is that this Government has put in place social service delivery mechanisms which both members of the Opposition and members on the government side should support in order to extend services which are badly needed by our population. 

Look at the education sector, for example; if you look at the data given, it shows that we had slightly above two million children in primary school before the advent of Universal Primary Education and that we now have above seven million. That is a great achievement which we should support but not criticise. Government has introduced Universal Secondary Education and what is required is to see how best we can package secondary education so that more of our children can attain education at that level. 

Currently, we have 17 private universities and six public universities in this country. This is a clear manifestation that we are moving in the right direction to fight ignorance in our country. If it was not for a clear and comprehensive policy that supports the private sector to invest in education, this achievement would not have been realised. Above all, I am very happy that the public universities which we have so far are now evenly distributed in all the regions of Uganda. Each region has a public university. This is something which we should really support as a nation. 

I wish to thank the Leader of the Opposition, particularly for his remarks about the social sector which I have dwelt on –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You should be winding up

MR KATURAMU: Yes, please. The Leader of the Opposition said: “…the Opposition would like to register their appreciation for all the progress so far made in the labour, education and health sub-sectors.” This is a good gesture. As a nation we have to look at national critical issues that concern all of us and support them. It should not be that if something is introduced by Government then it should be opposed. (Interruption)

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Madam Speaker, while my colleague says that - and we appreciate this - there are universities across the country, unless Karamoja is not one of the regions of Uganda, - (Laughter) - I would love to hear from the honourable Minister of Education what plans are in place to extend one of the university branches to Karamoja. We are told that we belong to Gulu University and they have opened a branch in Lango. We would also want to learn some of the tricks people learn in universities so that we can realise the issue of development there.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I thought you were giving information to hon. Katuramu. Are you now making your own requests? (Laughter) Please wind up.

MR KATURAMU: Madam Speaker, when I was talking I said that Government has distributed, initiated and established public universities in the four regions of Uganda. As far as I know, Karamoja is one of the districts in Northern Uganda and Gulu University in the North would also cater for the people of the Karamoja sub-region –(Interjection) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up.

MR KATURAMU: I wish to say that since we have adopted the multiparty dispensation, all of us need to follow the rules that multiparty politics requires. One of the rules is to ensure that political parties strengthen their internal mechanisms and methods of operation, including internal democracy because it is a precursor to democracy at a national level. 

I wish to register my appreciation for all the achievements which the President has highlighted in this address and all the challenges that have been mentioned together –(Member timed out)

3.46
MR GORDON KATENDE (NRM, Mityana County North, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to express my support for the motion and to thank the mover and His Excellency the President for the State of the Nation Address, which was full of the policies of the NRM Government and the achievements of the past one year under the multiparty dispensation. I would also like to thank the previous speakers who have supported the motion.

I want to state that on the political scene, H.E. the President stated that in his previous address he had reported that the government had decided to retain Kyankwanzi as the national leadership institute. For this, I would like to thank him. Some of us have already enjoyed some of the benefits of Kyankwanzi. Unfortunately, in his presentation the Leader of the Opposition castigated that move. However, this was a constitutional requirement and Government is supposed to enable all Ugandans to fulfil it. I will quote the Constitution concerning the duties of a citizen. Chapter Three, Article 17(2) says: 

“It is the duty of all able-bodied citizens to undergo military training for the defence of this Constitution and the protection of the territorial integrity of Uganda whenever called upon to do so; and the State shall ensure that facilities are available for such training.” 

Therefore, His Excellency and the NRM caucus were fulfilling their constitutional obligation. The leader of the Opposition states, on page 4 of his reply: “…Rt hon. Speaker, this time around, maybe the folly of dressing up decent honourable Members of Parliament in military uniform - and making them fumble with AK47s, a manifest of the expired communist military mindset - including our grandmothers such as the much loved and highly respected hon. Namirembe Bitamazire –(Laughter)- will awaken us all…” I think that the Leader of the Opposition was not in order to castigate that Members of Parliament were actually having communist –(Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Will you take information? Let us hear from hon. Namaggwa and then the minister.

MS SAUDA NAMAGGWA: Madam Speaker, I just wanted to let the House know the inconsistency within the Opposition. Despite what the leader of the Opposition is saying, two officials from his side have already expressed interest in going to Kyankwanzi. (Applause)

THE MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Namirembe Bitamazire): Thank you very much. I want to inform this House that this was my third time to go to Kyankwanzi. (Applause) I have always been there and I enjoy every minute I am there. (Applause) 

Let me also inform you on a lighter note that the vibrancy which I have enjoyed in my life is because I involve myself strategically in such activities. (Laughter) Therefore, Madam Speaker, I am giving information to my colleagues on both sides that I enjoyed wearing the uniform; it energised me and I participated fully and effectively. I am very new now after that exercise. (Laughter)

MR KATENDE: I thank the honourable members for that information and I think my other colleagues are now better informed.

Madam Speaker, one of the problems we have in this country is lack of patriotism and knowledge about our country. What I would have expected the honourable members to do is to contest for the adjustment of the syllabus and the curriculum. So, if Government forwards that enabling law to put that curriculum and syllabus in place, then I would expect maximum support. (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: I listened passionately to the honourable member who quoted the Constitution, saying that it is a constitutional duty that took the NRM MPs to Kyankwanzi. He is consistently going ahead to say that it is lack of patriotism to state that Kyankwanzi military school is not serving any national purpose. 

I would like to seek information from the honourable member. The constitutional duty which you read to us right now did not specify that the NRM MPs shall be taken for national military training. It did not qualify it. So, what is patriotic to you? Is it the person who invited a selective section of the House or a person who should have fulfilled the constitutional mandate without discrimination to members who sit in this House? What do you make of all this? If those are the arguments you learn from Kyankwanzi then I am worried about where we are heading to. (Laughter)

MR KATENDE: I thank you, honourable colleague, for the question. Actually, all able-bodied Ugandans are invited to go to Kyankwanzi. If you want to go tomorrow, the door is open. You have even heard that some members have already applied. I think next week we can invite all the people from the Opposition. I will be the coordinator. 

Madam Speaker, on page 7 His Excellency went ahead and stated: “I was happy to see the statement in the press by both the Uganda Human Rights Commission and the Uganda Law Society. While both organisations reiterated the freedom and rights as enshrined in the Constitution, they clearly pointed out that they are not absolute and are not enjoyed by trampling on the rights and freedoms of others.” 

The above is quite good, but I would like to also state that in Mityana we have a new mode of insecurity as a result of some people trampling on the rights of others, especially people who are buying land and leaving very many families homeless. Recently, I even heard that in Mukono somebody razed a whole school and left people homeless. So, I think people acquiring property should also respect the rights of the other citizens. 

I also salute the President -(Interjections)- They took part of my time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the more time you give away the less you have. So, the choice is yours.

MR KATENDE: I salute the President as the Commander-in- Chief for a job so far well done in bringing freedom to the people of Northern Uganda and chasing Kony. However, as far as the double justice is concerned, we would request that Government forwards a detailed explanation about the Mato-oput so that -(Interjection)

MS BEATRICE ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of order because my colleague is making a statement which is very controversial when he says that the President has chased away Kony and given freedom to the people of the North. The issue of the war in the North is very controversial. We are all quite aware that right now, the government of Uganda and the LRA are at the negotiating table. Is the honourable member in order to say that they have chased away Kony while the truth of the matter is that the two parties are at the negotiating table? This could jeopardise the peace talks. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was in Pader less than two weeks ago and I met the district council and the people. They told me that for the last eight months, they have been living well without any problems. Is that not progress? This is what they told me in Pader. (Applause) Please conclude.

MR KATENDE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your ruling. I request Government to bring forward detailed explanations about the double justice because most of the Ugandans, especially in communities which do not practise it, are not well educated and yet they are also part and parcel of the people who suffered under Kony attacks.  

On the national economy, His Excellency stated that he would encourage the use of solar energy. We have got a lot of substandard solar gadgets; my request is that the Uganda National Bureau of Standards crosschecks and really makes sure that we get value for money. We also request Government to maybe use uranium, which was found in Uganda, as an alternative and cheaper source of energy because many countries are using it. 

On Bonna Bagaggawale, the people of Mityana are very enthusiastic to take it up. In his statement, His Excellency said that there would be more factories built for value addition. For us, especially the people growing tea, we are very eager to see that a tea factory is put up especially in Mityana. Farmers could get more than 10 times the value from the green leaf if they had their own processing plant. Our request is to have the funds and equipment availed so that we can add value to the tea that our people are producing. 

Lastly, on education, we are very grateful that the government programmes of USE and UPE have ably enabled our people to join school. However, about the SFG that was scraped, we request that it be replaced. We could not afford to get all the slots in USE because some primary schools were not given enough rooms because SFG was remitted to certain districts but our district never got the chance to benefit from it. Thank you. 

4.00
MR ANTHONY YIGA (NRM, Kalungu County West, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of the motion and accordingly thank His Excellency the President for the State of the Nation Address. I would also like to thank the Leader of the Opposition for his reply. 

I would like to, however, express my discomfort in two particular areas where the Leader of the Opposition referred to the good intentions of the government as false promises. When it came to a university for the eastern region, the Leader of the Opposition referred to it as political expediency. I would like to say that we need to polish our language. I urge the Opposition to tone down their language; otherwise, we may end up becoming provocative, which I do not think is healthy for this country as we nurture multiparty democracy. 

Madam Speaker, I suppose the Chief Whip of the Opposition has taken note of the message and he will convey it to the Leader of the Opposition. Thank you very much. (Interruption)  

MR JOHN ODIT: I know my friend, hon. Yiga, is a very senior member of this House and he knows very well that this is an august House. Looking at the way he posed; he started by wearing a very long face, looking tense and then angry. Is he in order to convey a message from the opposite to this side in the mood in which he presented it? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think hon. Yiga has a very pleasant personality and a pleasant face. It is obvious. (Laughter)

MR YIGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. I would like to especially thank H.E. the President for his guidance to political actors when he hinted that we should be law abiding and be guided by the Constitution. I would like to add that we should also have respect for leaders and authority. What we have seen recently has made me get worried. 

This week, we heard what happened in Mukono where one of the leaders of the opposition DP had a scuffle with the Police. She was told not to go ahead with the public rally but she forcefully went ahead with the rally, and that is why the Police came in to disperse them. I think this is not healthy and we need to really restrain ourselves. If the Police have denied you authority to carry out a public rally, then you can go to the courts of law and challenge that decision. Otherwise, this confrontation will not take us very far. We need to be disciplined and ensure that we really nurture our multiparty political dispensation; otherwise, we are going to get this country into many problems if we become militant.

I would like to share the concern of the President –(Interruption)

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: The President talked about respect of constitutionalism, and we took an oath here to protect this Constitution. Article 29(1) (d) of our Constitution guarantees freedom of assembly, freedom to demonstrate together with others peacefully and unarmed, and to petition. It does not say that the Police should stop you if you are assembling freely or if you are demonstrating peacefully with others. Is it in order for my colleague to stand up and state, in this august House, that it was wrong for the leader of DP to assemble freely and demonstrate with others peacefully without provocation from the Police?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have not had an opportunity to hear from the Minister of Internal Affairs about that matter so I do not know the circumstances under which they assembled. I cannot rule on that one. Proceed.

MR YIGA: Concerning the increasing number of Independents, I share the concern of H.E. the President and I pray that our political parties improve on their internal democracies so that we lessen the number of Independents coming to Parliament. 

The other issue concerns discipline, which is very critical in our multiparty setting. I am concerned about the cheap popularity and loose talk, which is prevalent in Uganda these days. I pray that our political parties strengthen their discipline so that members follow the party line.

On security, I also commend the Commander-in-Chief and the UPDF for their efforts to bring peace to Northern Uganda. I also would like to commend and urge Government to pursue the peace talks to their logical conclusion so that our brothers and sisters in Northern Uganda can enjoy peace. 

On Karamoja, I support disarmament and also request Government to come up with a development programme for Karamoja so that Karamoja can also enjoy peace and development as other parts of Uganda do.

On prosperity for all, I would like to thank the President and the government for their efforts in zoning, the choice of enterprise selection and all the other good ideas that have been propagated these days. My concern is on the failure or the slow pace at which the government is allowing farmers to access credit. If we could improve on acquisition and provision of credit, then our farmers would be able to adopt the new technologies that are being propagated by NAADS. Otherwise, presently a lot of money is being spent on training and seminars under NAADS yet peasants are finding it very difficult to adopt the new technologies being propagated. The implication, Madam Speaker –(Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Wind up.

MR YIGA: Madam Speaker, members rose on points of order and I could not say no, and you allowed them. (Laughter) It was you to rule.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Anyhow, you have used more than 10 minutes.

MR YIGA: But they ate up my time. Can you allow me one minute. I would like to end with education. I would like to thank the government for all that they are doing to educate our children, but I am concerned with one particular aspect where most of the parents are becoming passive. They are waiting for the government to do everything including feeding their children yet our Constitution is very clear. Article 34(2) of the Constitution states: “A child is entitled to basic education which shall be the responsibility of the State and the parents of the child”. 

I would like the Ministry of Education to come out clearly and state what the responsibility of the parents is, otherwise the message that is going round is that people should produce as many children as possible and Government will educate them. Can we tell parents what their responsibility towards these children is? Many children go to school without eating and they do not even buy for them uniform. I would like to end by urging the Ministry of Education to come out clearly so that we state the responsibilities of parents in education. Thank you.

4.10
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the President for delivering the State of the Nation Address. I am grateful because it gives us an opportunity to address some of the issues we would not have had the opportunity to say anything about. 

When the President delivered his State of the Nation Address, I was out of the country and I therefore missed his body language. (Laughter) However, I think I can imagine what it was, and I am proceeding from there. One of the delicacies in the North, particularly in Acholi, is the white ants because they come once in a year. Missing them is a very big matter. Likewise, the State of the Nation Address comes once in a year and it should be taken very seriously. It is a very important day for this nation and even for the people who write the President’s speech. 

I have perused through this document and I find it full of story telling; it has a lot of stories. I find the document full of very many concocted figures; for example, this person in Masaka, on page 29, getting Shs50 million from three acres of land every month. Shs50 million! Madam Speaker, unless there is a goldmine – (Laughter) - or an oil well on that land, there is no miracle that can make a mere farmer fetch Shs50 million from three acres. (Interruption) 

MS NAMAGGWA: I want to find out whether hon. Okello-Okello is in order to speak out of ignorance. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, I am from Masaka, and you can be my witness because I have hosted about 60 delegates from your constituency to witness production at this woman’s farm; she is actually a miracle lady. Is he therefore in order to speak out of ignorance? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okello-Okello, if you have figures to refute what the President said please present them. I have been to that place myself and I have taken several delegations of people from Kamuli there. I believe she makes a lot of money, but if you have figures to refute, please let us know.

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, let me provide information. That farm is 100 years old and the truth of the matter is that the proceeds from the farm do not attract Shs50 million. The interest developed by either tourists or farmers themselves and the training is what provides the extra income. I am saying this because before the man died, I took a few farmers there and I am quoting from this very source. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are saying that she has got an outreach programme? That is what you are saying; that in addition, she has an outreach programme which brings Shs50 million a month. 

MR REAGAN OKUMU: The information I want to give hon. Okello-Okello is that I have looked through Uganda Revenue Authority documents on taxation and I have not seen that farm reflected among the taxpayers in this country. (Laughter)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Madam Speaker, there is no crop in Africa or anywhere in the world that you can harvest every month. If this is agriculture which uses rain, there is no miracle that can enable you sell your crop every month and fetch Shs50 million from three acres. It is not possible. If it is gate collections, it is not agriculture. That is a different thing. (Laughter)

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Madam Speaker, many people have been lined up to contribute - at least from my side - but the trend of this debate seems to be moving off the core of the State of the Nation Address. We are always guided that we should not speculate in this House; shall we stop speculating? 

If need be, Madam Speaker, this Parliament can organise a trip for hon. Okello-Okello to go and visit this farm. When we talk of agriculture, if you go there it is the bigger picture, including poultry, piggery, goat rearing and zero grazing. I have been there myself. 

For hon. Reagan, some agricultural products do not attract tax. That is why you will not see Mrs Kiiza in the records of URA. However, all that is being done here now is speculating, yet if we took a trip to Kiiza’s farm we would get the facts and be convinced. Thank you.

MR NSUBUGA WILLIAM: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Okello-Okello. The information I want to give hon. Okello-Okello is that he is just concentrating on the crops but your colleague, the landlord, has just told you that there is even training and he is getting money from training. He is training people on his farm and so all that is income accruing from his farm. 

When you look at the issue of tax returns, hon. Reagan, you know very well that agriculture is still under the informal sector and you are trying as much as possible to broaden the tax base. You also know that our people’s tax compliance ratio is very low. So, if a man is actually even exporting, there is no need for him to declare unless URA goes to him. Ask yourself, if a person has been getting Shs50 million, where has URA been? For your information, I want to confirm that actually –(Interjection)- the person in Masaka is just one of them, but even in my constituency we have fishermen who earn a lot but they do not pay taxes because - why should they pay? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us leave the issue of Mrs Kiiza alone for now. If you are interested in finding out how she works, we can facilitate the committee to go there. Let us leave Mrs Kiiza for now.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable members for the information. However, if every farmer set up a training institute on their farm, then I do not know who will be training who? (Laughter) 

I would like to say something about the social sector. For the last 21 years, our country has been sharply divided between north and south, economically, politically, socially and security wise. As if that is not enough, the policy on USE has added something to that. There are schools which are exempted from USE, where the rich people take their children, and the majority of these schools are in the south. North of the Nile, we have USE. So, in this country we are training two categories of people: children of the rich who go to Budo, Mwiri, Namagunga, Namilyango and the like and the wanainchi like us who are abandoned in the USE schools. This is very dangerous for the future of this country. Unless we treat this country as one body, the results in future will be disastrous. (Interruption) 

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank hon. Okello-Okello for giving way. You realise that when the NRM Government came into power, it introduced the public-private sector partnership in the development of this country. Right now, the largest number of schools in the country have been funded by the private sector.
 
The private sector is a risky venture. Given the war situation that has been in Northern Uganda, definitely it was not attractive enough for many private investors to put up private schools there because this is private money where people want a return. Given that the war is coming to an end, I want to assure you that there will be so many private individuals, including Government, who will invest in the public sector and in schools. That will really improve the quality of education. That is the information I wanted to give you.

MR MALINGA: Madam Speaker, I appreciate the concern of my honourable colleague. I happened to visit Kitgum District and Chua County particularly, represented by hon. Okello-Okello. I visited Namukora and Omiya Anyima sub-counties. In these sub-counties, you have a number of school-going children but the government programme of USE is not there, and USE came in at the time when the North was relatively peaceful. I thought that this should have taken precedence. The ministry should have taken more interest in this place that had wars, but most of the sub-counties are empty and the programmes are not running. The private schools are not there and even the government schools are absent.

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Geraldine Bitamazire): Thank you very much for giving way. I believe at the end of this discussion we shall get some time to clarify on some of these issues, but I want at this stage to give some information. 

We are looking at the country together but we are saying there are some groups and communities that are disadvantaged and therefore the focus should start with the disadvantaged. If Members of Parliament can take their daughters to Buddo, Gayaza and Namagunga, stay there and pay your half a million every term, but let us focus on the rural remote schools where we have started. (Applause) 

Secondly, in the North Government has been paying fees for students whose parents are in camps for three years now. I can bring the figures per school per year.

Thirdly, under the USE programme, in the northern region we are paying money even for accommodation, so that these students who cannot commute to school and are already in boarding schools can get some subsidy to meet their accommodation costs. We have put that affirmative programme in place for the northern region only. Therefore, it is not true that Government has not done anything. 

Right now when you go to the North, there are some schools which were constructed with Government money but because of the problems which have been there, they are empty. The Government is implementing the resettlement schemes and we are monitoring closely, identifying those schools where the children have gone back and we shall post teachers to revitalise the programmes in those schools. So, Madam Speaker, I do not want the members to get misinformed that nothing is being done in the northern region in the education service. Thank you.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Madam Speaker, I would like to wind up.

MR ADOLF MWESIGE:  Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I would like to give additional information. On top of the facilities that the Ministry of Education is extending to the North, the Office of the Prime Minister under the NUSAF programme has been constructing and equipping schools in the North. (Applause) And under the successor programme to NUSAF, PRDP, we are going to continue constructing more schools specifically for Northern Uganda and not any other region. (Applause) So, it is not fair for my elder brother, hon. Okello-Okello, to assert that this Government has neglected Northern Uganda. It is not correct at all. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Madam Speaker, I thank the hon. Members for the information. I never said that Government has done nothing. My point is that, a Government policy should be applied uniformly. Do not exempt some schools from USE. And now in the North, the schools are being instructed not to demand money from the parents while they are demanding here. So, it puts the other side at a very big disadvantage. “One policy for one country” that is what I am saying. Do not apply policies selectively.
 
My second last point is on nation building. Madam Speaker, nation building is a collective responsibility of all Ugandans. All of us must work together to build this nation. And in particular –(Interruption)

MR WAMBUZI: Madam Speaker, I have been listening faithfully to my senior brother. Really, is hon. Okello-Okello in order to stand in this House and demand that everything should be taken uniformly when he knows that the North seriously needs affirmative action? Is he really in order to suggest that everything should be taken just like that when there is a calamity somewhere which needs affirmative action? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the North requires special and exclusive attention. (Laughter)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Madam Speaker, I think our level of understanding is different - (Laughter) - because that is not what I said. I was talking about nation building. We must work together to build this country; particularly the government should appear to be working together.  

Over the last ten months, some statements attributed to the President do not augur well for teamwork. For example, in November last year, at a retreat of ministers and permanent secretaries, the President made a statement that these people were sleeping all day long and doing nothing. (Laughter)  And, Madam Speaker, this became an entertainment on our television screens for weeks. Again in April this year, the President was reported to have said that these people go and eat his meat and chicken, drink his milk -(Laughter)- without understanding anything. (Laughter) I am very happy I am not one of the ministers. I am very grateful to God because in Africa you cannot talk about somebody eating your food. (Laughter) That person will never eat your food again. (Laughter) But now what goes on in the minds of ministers when they go there next time and they are chewing this thing again? (Laughter) The President must be a teamwork builder –(Interruption)

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. The matter before this House is a very important thing that concerns this country. When hon. Okello-Okello started speaking to us he said that in his culture there is something that comes once in a year and it is a delicacy. The matter before this House is a very important issue of the State of the Nation Address. Is hon. Okello-Okello in order to divert the attention of Members and make this a national theatre entertainment when we are focused on issues of national importance and discussing issues that affect this country? 

These issues that he is referring to were reported by the media and this kind of sensational talk has not even been substantiated unless hon. Okello-Okello can present before this House evidence that actually these were said by the President. But the matter before this House is really very important. Is he in order to divert the attention of Members from the most important issue of discussing the State of the Nation Address? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think he was discussing how the ministers operate when they are doing the government programmes. So, we should take this on a light note and not too seriously. Please conclude.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you for the ruling, Madam Speaker. My last point. We have a law in this country entitled the National Honours and Awards Act, 2001. Under this law, a committee of nine people is supposed to advise the President on who should be awarded our honours. I am wondering whether this committee is in place. Because what happened recently when the President had a road tour of East Africa shows that apparently there is no committee. We are not supposed to pocket these insignias and drive around with them pinning them on everybody we visit. (Laughter)   That should not be the case. The committee must sit and advise the President on who should receive these honours and they should come and receive them from here. We cannot go all over the world distributing these things. (Laughter)

I would like to wind up by saying that we have a multitude of presidential advisers who have failed to deliver. My advice is that, we should dismiss all of them. They are living like birds for nothing. They are not advising the President properly. They should be sent home. The main advisers to the President in any Government are Cabinet ministers and nobody else. The Cabinet ministers are supposed to advise the head of Government properly; that is their first job and not any other persons driving big cars, reading newspapers and earning money at the end of the month. Thank you. (Laughter)

4.35
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Honourable members, in my understanding, the State of the Nation Address serves two purposes: One is to express the state in which the nation is at the junction of the two financial years - the one which is getting out and that one coming in so that we can have a planned path to move properly into the next financial year. With this understanding of mine, and the understanding with the reading that I made here, the state of Uganda now is not like the one that the President has portrayed in this document. These are the reasons:  

When you look at the concerns of Uganda throughout the two decades particularly of the rule of President Museveni, the major concern of Uganda is having peace and national stability.  Peace and national stability go hand in hand with observance of human rights. That is respect for human rights. I looked through this document and I did not find anywhere the President is talking about respect or abuse of human rights. So, you can see the difference between the Uganda in reality and the Uganda in the theory presented here.  

Among many other things that are still fresh in our memories are things like the invention of the courts by the so-called “black mambas” and the strike of the judiciary. Not only that, we also have the “Kibooko” squads. Not only that, here is a report I photocopied from the Uganda Human Rights Commission. It was also in the newspapers where the horrific nature of abuses of human rights of the citizens of Uganda by different players in the field of abuse of rights, including the state, are being numerated. It has been recorded that fines demanded for the compensation of those whose rights have been abused and paid have amounted to Shs 1.1 billion for the last 10 years and out of this, Shs 954 million were awarded against the Attorney General. This means that these may be fines against abuses of human rights of the citizens of Uganda by agents of the state. Is this a matter that the President is not to talk about? Is it increasing or decreasing -(Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam speaker, is hon. Fungaroo from Obongi County in order to tell this House lies that the President did not talk about human rights when on pages 5, 6 and 7 we have constitutionalism and rule of law and where the President says that Chapter 4 of the Constitution is to elaborate on the protection and promotion of fundamental and other human rights and freedoms. So, along those lines, is hon. Fungaroo in order to deceive the whole House that the President never mentioned something to do with human rights?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. The human rights were mentioned in the statement.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the ruling. But if the honourable member listened carefully to my presentation, my complaint is about comments made by the President of this republic about abuses of human rights by state agents. Where is it in this document? I will not ask the honourable member to withdraw his point of order.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister of Justice?

MR FUNGAROO: Just give me some little time as I present this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, information from the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.

MR FREDDIE RUHINDI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I thank hon. Fungaroo for giving way for this clarification. I would like to know what his benchmark or yardstick for measuring abuse of human rights is because my understanding is that, the fact that the state has got in place machinery to address wrongs committed on victims and those victims have a chance of going to courts of law for redress means that the state is actually addressing abuses of human rights.  There were regimes in this country, and we know them, where such victims of wrongs would never see the courts of law; would never see institutions which would address such wrongs like the Human Rights Commission, the IGG and many others. So, may I know what his yardstick then is in assessing excesses of human rights by the state?

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much. When you fall sick and you go to the hospital, the purpose of giving you medicine is to make you recover from the illness to stop you from dying. The interventions that the organs of the state you have referred to have done towards abuses of human rights in my understanding could be aimed at stopping not post-mortem. But look at this worrying situation. Abuses of human rights are going ahead; money paid is considered as if money is collected from the people and given. The Government does not feel the pain. This is my concern.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Just in relation to the clarification the Attorney-General was seeking, I think the point which this Parliament should take serious concern of is the fact that impudence - you see people running with sticks, leaving the police station into the streets of Uganda to beat up other people. The police station should be one of the most secure places in this country. But if people can run with sticks from inside the police station to beat people in the streets of Kampala, this is impunity and impudence. So, it is like someone saying, “I will kill you and compensate with a cow.” So, they will say let us beat them in town, we shall settle the issue of the law later. I think this is a grave concern hon. Fungaroo is raising.

Another clear example is the PRA suspects who were released by the High Court but they are still in prison to date in different courts in the country and the prisons are being run by state agencies. So, Bwana Attorney-General, the concern of hon. Fungaroo is impunity and impudence with which the state will use one hand to violate human rights and the other hand to compensate it after three/four/ five years when the political issues they wanted to address have been done using illegal militias.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you brother for this information. Now, the other concern of Uganda -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Fungaroo, the microphone is working really. (Laughter) 

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The other concern of Uganda is to bridge the gap between the North and the South. Whereas you and me living in Kampala are preparing to receive the Queen in the CHOGM, our concern as people of Northern Uganda is not for CHOGM, it is not to receive the Queen, but a successful conclusion of the peace talks in Juba and a return of Gen. Joseph Kony back home. In other words, we are preparing to welcome Kony home not the Queen to Uganda.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, I am intrigued by the way hon. Fungaroo is addressing this House. Uganda is one country; we all belong to Uganda and work for this country; we want to change our country. Is hon. Fungaroo in order to impute that he is the only one concerned about the North? I am part of the North and he is aware. He is imputing that there is some kind of divide between the North and the South; and that people who live in Kampala like him are only worried about the Queen and people who live in the North are worried about Kony and that they are looking forward to receiving Kony. Is he in order to impute this kind of naming and framing divisive thinking that is not part of this honourable House that is discussing important issues? 

If there are issues of development that have been mentioned in this House, we are addressing them as we have talked about affirmative action. Is he in order to impute this kind of language that is trying to create this kind of division.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we should not stigmatise any part of this country. I do not know whether a census has been taken in the North for them to say that they are not part of CHOGM but are only waiting for Kony. Nobody has taken that census. All of us are part of Uganda; the CHOGM visit is a visit for Uganda. Do not pursue that line anymore.

MR FUNGAROO: This is a preamble to one thing –(Interruption)

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much, hon. Fungaroo, for giving me an opportunity to give you information. I hear people demanding that hon. Fungaroo withdraws his statement but the way I understood him and the information I want to give to this House is that, he was talking of priorities. He has told you the truth. The priority in Northern Uganda, if you are to understand them, is to let Kony end his rebellion and go home to integrate into the society nothing else. The division between the south and the North can be seen with our naked eyes. I went to Karamoja and found naked people.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kibanzanga, you really got excited but you are imputing that a priority is being given to CHOGM and not to the ending of the war in the North? Is that true really? Because you are saying that you are talking about priorities and that for the people of the North, it is the end of the war and for here it is CHOGM. Should the government have said let us first finish CHOGM and then we end the war. Please do not create those impressions. Both items are running concurrently. The CHOGM is running and the talks are also running.

MR FUNGAROO: I said this because when you look at the –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do not pursue that line anymore. Proceed to another point and wind up.

MR FUNGAROO: The point I am trying to say here is that, there are certain things that need to be done in order to succeed with the peace talks and with the development of Northern Uganda. One area is the manner in which we talk about the stage where we are now as far as the peace talks are concerned. My honourable colleagues, it is very dangerous to me to give a message to Joseph Kony that, “You have been chased away. You prove that you have not been chased away.”

Two, we want on a basis of understanding negotiation. We do not want him to argue that – (Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, is it procedurally right when you rule on a point of order and a Member persists on the same point? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Fungaroo, I advised you to proceed to another point and the final one.

MR FUNGAROO: We have been in an economy of relief aid. We would like to transit to development. And when you consider the section about economy, page 17, and you come to page 20 where the President talked about Bujagali and Karuma Dam construction, I have concerns in the area of emphasis being given more on Bujagali. So far, the work on Bujagali like negotiations have been concluded and it has been stated here that the work has started. Karuma is still in talks. In my opinion, given the advantages of Karuma over Bujagali, it would have been easier to start from there for the following reasons:

One, power from Karuma would mean creating the infrastructure for economic development for investors to set up industries that side and also encourage economic development from that side. We have already had a dam for the past many years in the south.

Two, according to the studies that have been carried out, there is a document here, which I lay on the Table for you to refer to on the areas I am going to mention. On the issue of cost, it is cheaper to construct Karuma than Bujagali. According to the research carried out and the report published by the World Bank, UEB, and those who are concerned with the construction, Karuma would take three years whereas this one of Bujagali is going to take much longer. In a way, Karuma would rescue you and me from these shortages of power. It is more of a first aid for several reasons. 

Environmentally, the construction of Karuma Power Dam is more friendly than the one of Bujagali because the technology going to be used there does not include the creation of a lake behind a dam, which means less displacement of people from Karuma than from Bujagali. 

I, therefore, want to say that although it is a known fact that Uganda belongs to all of us, the understanding of Uganda that we have seems to be different from that as known to those who have not crossed Karuma, those who have not known Uganda beyond Karuma, and those who depend on knowledge read from the books as far as Northern Uganda is concerned. Thank you.

4.55
MR DAVID EBONG (Independent, Maruzi County, Apac): Madam Speaker, thank you for giving me this opportunity to add my voice on what other Members have said in respect of the motion on the State of the Nation Address.  His Excellency the President alluded to the challenges of consolidating democracy in this country.  Democracy, which is a desired ideal, has continued to elude many leaders and people of this country in terms of practices and understanding it as a concept. 

Globally, the rule of law, democratic practices, transparency and accountability are really the major explanation why certain countries are characterised as developed and others as under-developed.  

It is true that Uganda has taken on the right path of development, but I think the slow pace at which development is taking place in Uganda can be explained by the limited practice of democratic principles and sometimes the omissions in recognising the importance of respect of human rights and the rule of law.  

Democracy as a desired principle is about selflessness, it is about tolerance.  But you can see that even in our Parliament here, people are very intolerant to each other’s opinion. One time I visited South Africa as part of the Ugandan delegation, but I will tell you those people were quite quick to observe that we, Ugandans, are very intolerant. So, this is the understanding and practice of democracy. Therefore, I think it is incumbent upon this Parliament –(Interruption)

MS MUNYIRA: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I am just wondering why the honourable member holding the Floor can stand up and say that Ugandans are intolerant when actually even here in the House, many times the opposition has lashed so many terrible things about we people on the government side and we have tolerated it; we have taken it up with humility? Is he really in order to say that Ugandans are intolerant?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ebong, on what do you base the statement that Ugandans are intolerant?

MR EBONG: Madam Speaker, I was only alluding to the statement by those South Africans that related to high level of democratic practices because if you look at the history of South Africa, you will indeed believe that they are very tolerant people. Considering the hostile relationship that existed between the Blacks and Whites in South Africa, if today the two races can live side by side with each other in peace and harmony, then there are several reasons –[Mr Achia Remigio: “Point of information”]- I am so informed on this subject matter, so information is not allowed.  

To expand further, if you say that democracy is a way of life that aims at bringing people together for common goal, regardless of the political, age, and religion inclination, then why can we not come out with comprehensive strategies that will deepen the understanding and practices of democracy affirmative levels in schools, in clubs, community groups, in local governments and so on. This is a very pertinent issue. You may not pay very critical attention to it but for me I think Uganda, as a country, badly needs to deepen the practices of democracy.

Madam Speaker, the government of Uganda has taken a lot of affirmative action to empower the people of Northern Uganda. In Northern Uganda, according to the IGG Integrity Survey Report of 2003, the functionality of local governments in Northern Uganda leaves a lot to be desired. In other words, local governments in Northern Uganda are dysfunctional, probably not functional at all. 

However, I want to point out that dysfunctionality of the local governments is not only affecting Northern Uganda; it is a problem that has affected all local governments countrywide. This is so bad because it limits the   empowerment not only of the very poor people of Northern Uganda but also of all the local governments in Uganda. From that IGG Integrity Survey Report, Apac District in 2003 was the third most corrupt district in Uganda; Lira was fourth; Gulu was fifth; Kitgum was seventh, not forgetting Sembabule, which was by then the least corrupt in the country.

So, my question is, why do we not have a comprehensive strategy by the Ministry of Local Government to address these issues of dysfunctionality in Northern Uganda? This strategy would save the people of Northern Uganda from corruption through which poverty action funds allocated to empower them have been lost. 

On the surface, we people of Apac, can say that we are very happy because Government provided Shs 14 billion as a priority move to empower the local people. However, the story behind it is that, the officials are so tagged to these funds that the chances of having the poor benefit from this fund is something unthinkable of. For example, out of 72 classroom blocks supported, only two have been completed since NUSAF started its first phase. Out of 36 teachers’ houses, only one has been completed; and out of the many roads supported –(Interruption)

MR KIBANZANGA: Madam Speaker, I want a clarification from hon. Ebong, on who is really administering these funds at Apac District? Is it the local Government or the centre? This is very important because he has said that a lot of funds have been squandered. So, who exactly is responsible?

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, I want to thank the honourable for giving way. The second clarification I want to seek from him is, as a Member of Parliament representing that area, when he sees things not moving the way they should, does he wait for the State of the Nation Address debate to report?  

MR EBONG: Madam Speaker, whether it is the responsibility of the district local Government or not, this authority does not operate in isolation of central Government. I think that is an issue of who is responsible.  

When it comes to waiting to report it in the debate on the State of the Nation Address, I think that is not true. I have made a written elaborate report on this matter to the Office of the Prime Minister. I also did discuss in person with the minister concerned. I did discuss it in person with the Prime Minister of this country himself. The Prime Minister told me, “We are going to ensure phase II is better because we are going to take every mitigating measures to ensure that it works properly.”

However, this is something I have always contested.  If phase I failed, why do I have hope in phase II when even the culprits of phase I are still walking freely? So, we need a proactive action by this Parliament and the government of Uganda in handling this issue. Nobody should even complain because first of all, most of the people I am talking of to have embezzled the said funds are my people. So, if I am telling Government to go and arrest them because I do not enforce laws myself, then why can Government not just listen and act? 

My concern is action on the part of Government. I think this will reflect the will that many people always talk of. So, if we talk and Government does not act, is it a conspiracy to keep the people of Northern Uganda poorer and poorer?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, but try to wind up.

MR EBONG: So, I think these issues are quite eminent and there could be more to come. From the survey done by UNDP, only two percent of cases in Northern Uganda are reaching the courts of law. This is because the people of Northern Uganda have lost confidence in the justice system. This has come about because there is a total breakdown in the justice system yet justice and poverty, or injustice and poverty have got a bi-directional relationship. 

So, if you focus on ensuring that there is justice in Northern Uganda, you would also in a way be directly fighting poverty. I think these are issues, we as leaders, should stand on the Floor of this House and speak them out as they are so that the authorities are compelled to act. That is my information. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have finished? Okay, Minister of Justice.

5.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I appreciate the concerns raised by the honourable member of Parliament. However, I would like to say that access to justice in Uganda and anywhere in the world depends on so many factors. These include availability of resources, manpower and availability of many other factors. 

We all know the problems and the challenges that our people in Northern Uganda have been facing. When the honourable member talks of lack of access to transitional justice he is not being fair because in any case, the concept of transitional justice to be applied in Northern Uganda is even still under study. We have instituted a study under the Justice, Law and Order Sector on how to implement the mato-oput system of dispensing justice, which is more or less similar to what is applied in Rwanda under the Gacaca courts. Nearly the same system has been applied in Sierra Leone and so on. 

Just recently, we opened a regional office in Gulu. My sister Betty was present and she actually represented most of the MPs from Northern Uganda; she was there and she can speak for herself. About four judges, two based in Gulu and the other two to help with the case backlog, have been stationed in Gulu. We are also opening more magisterial areas particularly in the North to ensure that access to justice is facilitated. 

Therefore, I want to say that honourable members of Parliament from the North should, one, as the other honourable said here, be patient. Two, if they lack information on certain matters, they should access some of our offices to get better information rather than coming here and portraying a very dangerous and alarmist attitude. This kind of debate sends very bad signals to the public.

MR REAGAN OKUMU: Madam Speaker, I want to give further information that actually in Northern Uganda, there are a number of districts that do not even have magistrates courts and magistrates. Pader is one of them, Amuru is another and this has been on for five years now. If you look at the level of facilitation of the Police in Northern Uganda, including Gulu itself, you find that an entire police station sometimes may not even have a vehicle. This is the concern of Members. Our argument is that, while some sectors of the justice system are being facilitated, the others should not be forgotten. I think we should understand this and take it in good faith. 

Yes, recently judges were sent to the North to handle case backlogs. But that is at that level of the high court. What is Government doing in areas where the magistrates are not there, the police are not facilitated, the DPCs cannot reach out their number and resources are not enough? Remember all these undermine the entire justice system and therefore the rule of law. 

5.13
MS SUZAN NAMPIJJA (CP, Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity —(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please use only seven minutes.

MS NAMPIJJA: Madam Speaker, turning to page 31 of the President’s speech, as a shadow minister, I do not think that the President showed sufficient concern about the rights and freedoms of workers as laid down in the Constitution of Uganda and the UN Bill of Rights. 

Madam Speaker, my constituents want to know what Government has done to stop the existing exploitation of workers in Asian-based industries. Secondly, they also want to know what Government has done to stop the exploitation of workers in Lugazi Sugar Corporation where Government owns 52 percent of the shares. 

The other concern relates to what Government has done to set the minimum wage. This is important because if you go Lugazi industry right now, you will be surprised by the way workers are treated. They are exploited; they work under unsafe, unhealthy and unsatisfactory conditions. Government should do something about that. Therefore, it is important that our Government sets the minimum wage because all the other UN member states have already done that. 

Madam Speaker, I want to comment on the sale of Government parastatals. As you are aware, Government has sold off many parastatals: Uganda Commercial Bank, for example, was sold; Uganda Airlines was disposed of; UEB was also sold off and many others. I want to say that this is the source of this disorganisation in the employment sector.

Turning to page 13, I want to disagree with the President when he says that we shall have peace in Northern Uganda with or without peace talks. The President should be the key peacemaker because he is supposed to be a key peace lover in the country. He went ahead to make contradictory statements to the effect that even if ICC pardons Kony, Uganda would open up fresh cases. From such statements, does the President really love to see peace in Uganda? Is he committed to seeing peace return to Northern Uganda?

MS BEATRICE ANYWAR: Thank you, honourable colleague for giving way. Madam Speaker, the peace that my colleague is talking about is very pertinent to the people of the North. Peace talks is the only thing that we are holding on. It is the only hope, which we think will enable our people to go back to their homes. Therefore, any speech or action, which can deter that process of peace talks for the people of the North, is salt in the wound. So, we should still call on all peace loving Ugandans including our dear President to really talk and act, and work for peace so that people in the North can have some relief.  Thank you.

MS NAMPIJJA: Thank you, my colleague. Despite the alarming situation in the North, the President has been sweet-talking us for the last 20 years. At one time he said that within six months Kony would be no more. At another time he said he would finish Kony in one year. None of these promises matured. So, I am appealing to our President to get committed to peace.  

Madam Speaker, I would like to contest the President’s remarks on page 49, analysing the politics of Uganda between 1962 and 1966. I think the President is forgetting soon because I remember in the last State of the Nation Address he praised the nation’s economic success by relating it to that of Singapore and Malaysia. I think that is attributed to a federal system of governance. You remember that that time it was the economic peak of the nation. (Interruption)

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. In 1962, Uganda was just getting independence from the British. I think it was the end of colonialism and the beginning of Uganda; it was not the peak of federalism. That is the information I wanted to give to the honourable member. 

MS NAMPIJJA: Thank you. There was a transitional period when Ben Kiwanuka was the Prime Minister of Uganda. Although I was not yet born, I remember very well because I read a lot by the way. 

Madam Speaker, that was a period when Uganda’s income per capita was the highest in sub Saharan Africa with the exception of the White dominated South Africa. It was the same period when we had the social service infrastructure, which could have been the best in East Africa.  My honourable colleagues over there, how old are you? (Laughter) 

I am amazed to hear the President urging Ugandans to support East African Federation. We would all like to support the East African Federation, but I think it would be better if Uganda first adopts a federal system of governance before we federate as East Africa.  Madam Speaker, if Uganda adopts a federal system of governance it will encourage regional unity in the country and keep our people together as they build regional markets. This will enable them to compete with other bigger East African Federation markets.  

I am convinced that if Uganda adopts a federal system of governance, it will not in any way interfere with the objectives of the East African Federation. It will instead groom and build the regional markets that will feed the bigger East African economic union- (Interjections)- no, this time, Madam Speaker, I am not taking any information because I winding up and let me ask honourable members to turn to pages 38 to 42.  

Madam Speaker, I am directed by the people I represent and my party to strongly oppose the use of DDT. DDT (Dichloro –Diphenyl –Trichloroethane) is for indoor spraying. If DDT is safe why is Government proposing to spray it only in people’s houses and not spray in breeding places or outside? This clearly shows that it is not safe at all. DDT was globally banned 40 years ago due to its persistence, accumulation, and assimilation in the environment.  

Madam Speaker, DDT is a notorious chemical –(Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, is it really in order for hon. Nampijja, the woman, to disagree with the indoors spraying of DDT when the Leader of Opposition the other day was appreciating and was saying let us go ahead and use it?  Is she in order to disagree with the Leader of Opposition when she is in the Opposition?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, do you have a different position from that of the Leader of the Opposition? If so, please let the House know of it because it was stated here that the Opposition supports DDT spraying.

MS NAMPIJJA: Madam Speaker, I am directed by the people I represent and my party (the Conservative Party). I just want the honourable colleague to listen very carefully because as MPs we want to restrain Government from spraying people’s houses.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, we have to respect our institution. I want to thank the honourable member for giving way. However, yesterday the Leader of the Opposition said that we are supposed to respect our leaders even on the decisions they take. Does it not look funny for hon. Nampijja to insist that she has been directed by her party and her people? Does that insinuate that the statement we received yesterday from the Leader of the Opposition was a one-man’s decision? If so, then it is very bad because you are sending a very bad signal. So, I appeal to you to withdraw that part of your statement before you sort it with your Leader of Opposition.  I thank you.

MR WADRI: I think it is proper that we set the records of Parliament right. The Leader of the Opposition made an official reply to the State of the Nation Address yesterday. For those Members of Parliament who were present yesterday, the information and the opinion on the use of DDT as expressed by the Leader of the Opposition is very live in our heads. He professionally admitted that there is nothing wrong with the use of DDT. However, he went further to say that it is also our responsibility as Members of the opposition to represent the views of the few who do not support the use of DDT. If you have the copy of that statement please, refer to the appropriate page so that we can have records set right. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let hon. Nampijja wind up and we move to somebody else. Please, let DDT alone.

MS NAMPIJJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I wind up, I want to repeat that our Leader of Opposition said that if we have reasons we could support it. What I know, everybody here represents views of the people who he has to consult. Please, you go and consult your people and hear what they say about the spray of DDT.

Madam Speaker, the –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nampijja, those are very strong instructions from your constituency. What is their advice? Does the government leave the mosquitoes to bite the people of Rubaga? What are your people instructing you to say on the issue of Malaria?

MS NAMPIJJA: My people told me that since Uganda is a civilised nation, it can fight Malaria in a civilised manner without subjecting toxic related to DDT to them. I think you remember very well that Global Fund money was embezzled by top Government officials; that money was meant to address Malaria. Where is that money? Up to now Government has never accounted for that money. Where is the money, which was meant to fight Malaria?
 
As a country, we can adopt a public awareness mechanism. We can go across the villages and sensitise people on how they should protect themselves from Malaria and mosquitoes. What is wrong with that? 

They also told me that the government proposal to spray DDT would negate the Stockholm Convention, it would negate the Biodiversity Protocol and it would negate the Environmental Statute, 1995. It would negate the Bamako Protocol – (Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, hon. Nampijja, for giving way. It is true that at some point DDT was banned in the 1960s because of a publication by an environmentalist Rachael Kaison, but 10 years later she wrote a publication rescinding her earlier thoughts. And it is now agreed under the Stockholm Convention that came into place in 2004 that DDT can be used for public health measures and a number of countries in Africa and other continents, South Africa and many others are using DDT. There is evidence that once it is used it can clear Malaria. So, it is not true that those conventions you are quoting are actually against the use of DDT. So I want to advise that the people of Rubaga South can invite us technocrats to educate them about DDT. Therefore, the civilised thinking is that DDT can be used to fight Malaria, contrary to what you are telling us.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up.

MS NAMPIJJA: Thank you, hon. Baryomunsi. However, my colleague is not well informed. South Africa is not in the tropics. That is the first point. There is no Malaria in South Africa. Please, you go and make further research, consult those people who are responsible to give you enough information -(Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: I am sorry to rise on a point of order to distract her speech. But I am a highly qualified medical doctor, who has worked in several areas including the Southern part of Africa. I want to say it is true there is Malaria in South Africa. Actually DDT has been used in South Africa. In 1996, it was withdrawn and cases of Malaria triple in areas like Natal Province and in 2000/01 it was reintroduced. Is she in order to misinform this House that there is no Malaria in South Africa when actually you can get this information on the Internet?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. In addition to that, this House in the Seventh Parliament sent a delegation to South Africa specifically on this issue because there was a disagreement as to whether South Africa does in fact use DDT. That delegation comprised of many Members including Ken the man. (Laughter) I am the one who composed it myself. They came back and confirmed us that there is Malaria in South Africa and that they do use DDT to spray. It is a report of this House. Please wind up.

MS NAMPIJJA: Let me wind up, Madam Speaker. According to WHO and the Stockholm Convention, it is very clear that a country may use DDT for indoor spraying when there are no local available alternatives in that country. But we have alternatives. Why don’t you supply nets? Where is the Global Fund money, which was meant for Malaria?

The point is, I have mobilised the people I represent who are supposed to defend themselves according to the Constitution. We shall find a way of defending ourselves. But we shall not allow the government to spray DDT. (Laughter)

5.31
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the President for his State of the Nation Address to which we have been given an opportunity to respond. The catchword of Government currently as a policy is “Bonna Bagaggawale”. My people find this difficult to say but I always explain that it means all of us should become rich. I do not know whether it is only the rich to become richer or all of us to become rich. The country is all focussed to how all of us can kugaggawala, more so my people who have been in the camps for the last 20 or so years and therefore they are in their poverty. 

The President highlighted that it is important to link the farmers and the big business people to the internal, regional and international markets for whatever is being produced. He mentioned the Madhavanis and the Methas as big investors who need to be helped quickly to connect to those markets. We would also like to have the Okellos, the Mukasas and the Mukwasis get an opportunity to be hooked to the internal, regional and international markets. 

Unfortunately, Madam Speaker and honourable members, in my district which is looking towards “kugaggawala”, the network to connect us to those markets like the roads, are in terrible state. Actually the whole district of Kitgum has no tarmac road. I do not know how my district will be networked or connected to other national or regional markets for that matter and therefore we would want this policy to embrace the road network and tarmac for Kitgum District.

As we look forward to transporting, probably when peace comes and we settle back and try to produce the produce we can make out of there, we have a connection and that is Achwa Bridge. Fortunately, Madam speaker, when you visited our region in Pader District you crossed that terrible bridge and I am sure honourable members who have travelled to the North through Achwa Bridge which connects Kitgum, Pader and Gulu and the rest of Uganda, have seen that it is in a threatening state.

The sides of the bridge are just bare. The bridge even has timber, which is cracking. Madam Speaker and honourable members, if it is your first time to go to the North across that bridge you will first make a sign of the cross if you are a Christian before you cross. Therefore, in order to also enable our region to “kugaggawala” or access the said markets, with your permission, Madam Speaker, I would like to lay photographs of this bridge on the Table for Members who have not reached there to look at it as we are advocating for a quick construction of this bridge.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. Madam Speaker, from a distance, when I looked at the state of the bridge on the pictures that were being laid on the Table, I thought the situation in that area requires urgent attention. I would like to seek clarification from my honourable colleague as to whether she has cared to provide this information to the technical Ministry of Works and Transport, which would expeditiously handle the process other than laying it on the Floor of the House, where it might take some time to be considered? I know right now the ministry is undertaking a lot of programmes and this should be one of the priorities.

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, I thank my colleague for seeking that clarification. It is not the first time I am talking about Achwa Bridge on the Floor of Parliament. I have persistently asked the minister to take consideration of this bridge. I have consulted the minister personally and he kept on promising that he would look into that. But the burden of the matter honourable colleagues is that it is a rainy season and the –(Interruption)

Mr Simon Ejua: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I do appreciate with concern the sad situation she is raising about her constituency. One thing I want to tell honourable members is that, the bridges and the roads have been a major point of concern for everybody and it affects the whole country. The other time there was a bridge, which was shown from West Nile. When I followed up I found the newspapers had brought an old picture, which was actually – there is a bridge on Koboko road.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Koboko?

MR EJUA: Actually intervention was already done and yet an old picture was shown. If this photograph was showing a date that is really recent, I will honestly agree. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of State for Works, I drove on that bridge on our way from Pader. It is exactly what is shown there.

MR EJUA: Madam Speaker, I just want to say that the minister is going to make an elaborate statement on the bridges and the roads and even on the transport itself on Tuesday. The matter has been taken up. I will take it to the ministry and I am sure a prompt response will be delivered. Thank you.

MR REAGAN OKUMU: Madam Speaker, I would like to give additional clarification maybe for the benefit of the minister. This bridge borders my constituency and that of hon. Otto Odonga. It is on the Gulu - Kitgum highway, which road belongs to Ministry of Works and Transport. It is not under Local Government. 

Concerns were raised when NURP I earmarked that road for construction but unfortunately the money meant for construction of that road excluded the bridge and that was very unfortunate. After NURP I, people were assured that that bridge would be considered later in other Government programmes. But if you remember since the last time we had NURP I which the minister can crosscheck - because all these studies are always carried by the Ministry of Works and Transport wherever this construction begins and there has been a lot of concern. Last year, the Minister of State, hon. Byabagambi, actually assured me outside here - because I wanted to come and raise it on the Floor of the House - that Ministry of Works and Transport had taken over that and they were going to work on it. 

So, it is quite unfortunate for a minister to come and even try to dispute a picture which the Rt hon. Speaker – because the Speaker has just travelled there, I think less than two weeks ago. She saw how dilapidated and dangerous it is to travel on that bridge. So, it is really the reality. The bridge is in a bad state. It was actually destroyed in 1979 when the Tanzanians were moving. There was a local militia, which destroyed that bridge with a hope of assisting the Tanzanian forces cut off the Amin forces who were fleeing. So, since then it has not been repaired. 

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, I had restrained myself, but if this issue is not clarified on the Floor of this House we shall be doing a lot of injustice to the people we represent in this country. The honourable minister who is responsible for the roads in this country has just made a specific pronouncement that he would like to get a photograph with a date in order to know the state of roads, which are his jurisdiction. Although faintly mentioned, this does not augur well for the people we represent. I am sure it is unfair for the ministry he represents in this House. 

I would like to find out from the honourable minister whether it is a policy of Government that that is how we are going to be conducting Government business that whoever has a problem must bring an updated picture or there is a state of affairs in the ministries which should provide information to the ministers using the offices or the organs of Government. I just wanted to seek clarification so that we can move on and build the nation together for our people. 

MR EJUA: Thank you, hon. Dombo. I think I was simply putting it right to the House that at times we need comprehensive information for faster reaction. I thank you, Madam Speaker. (Laughter)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I hope the minister will take up this as soon as possible. I thank him for the commitment that very soon the bridge will be made. 

On page 8, the President addressed himself on the issue of Mabira and he said that he had chaired a meeting where they discussed the issue of Mabira. The issue of Mabira has been very controversial and the people of Uganda are waiting for a full and clear pronouncement by the government. The Save Mabira Crusade is under pressure from the public for the way forward as the government keeps quiet over the issue. 

The President did not make it clear that the issue of Mabira has been put to rest. More so, that the give away is no longer going to be so. Two weeks ago, the minister concerned was requested to make that assurance to the House and to the public. But up to now the issue of Mabira is still hanging in the air. We would like the government to quickly come up with a full and clear position over Mabira give away. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up.

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, in the Observer of 12th July, there was a big headline about big shots grabbing the forests for growing of maize and beans. This has raised a lot of concern and I also read in the Sunday Monitor of 8th that there are good herbs in Mabira and other forests, which can treat impotence. We should consider our forests, which we value very much and the big shots are cutting them down. I would like the minister concerned to let this House and Ugandans out there know what her ministry has done to refrain the big shots from turning our forests into gardens of maize and beans.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I would like to refer Members to page 23 where the President at least gave us the smile of our petroleum discovery as a country. Poverty has been biting and we hope that soon or later it should be history. However, the oil exploitation venture is still hanging and yet it seems a lot of activities are going to happen very fast. 

We were in a workshop with NEMA and Members raised a lot of issues. As we look towards the oil exploitation as a country, we do not have the oil policy in place. We would like Government to come up with an oil policy and table it in this House so that as one of our mandates as members of Parliament, in Article 244 of the Constitution, we can make laws to govern the oil exploitation; so that there is already a set path for how we can kugagawala out of our oil exploitation. Otherwise, if we let it go and yet the President is saying, start, start, start,” we are going to have a problem as a Government. Therefore, we call on Government to quickly bring oil policy to the House to guide the exploitation of oil. 

This should also be the case in relation to how we can mitigate and conserve the biodiversity because that is very important. As much as oil is a source of wealth, it has its lifespan, but the natural resource is a great source of wealth and if well managed it can sustain a country for a long time. Therefore, we cannot over look the mitigation of the conservation of biodiversity in relation to oil exploitation. I hope that very soon, before the government goes ahead to start exploiting this oil and putting it to use, we shall have the opportunity as Parliament to guide the process. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.50
MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker for this opportunity to contribute to the debate on the State of the Nation Address given to us by the President. I wish to dwell mainly on one issue concerning constitutionalism, the rule of law and good governance. 

In the President’s State of the Nation Address there was a lot of emphasis placed on this vital point. Somebody who does not know the history of Uganda may assume that before the 1995 Constitution came into place Uganda had no Constitution. The reason I dwell on this point is that under Legal Notice No.1 of 1986, there was a Constitution and the Constitution in place was the 1967 Constitution. The legal notice did not suspend Chapter 3 of that Constitution when some sections of the Constitution were suspended. Chapter 3 in the 1967 Constitution provided for the basic human rights of the people, which are the bedrock on which democracy stands. 

However, in the 1967 Constitution, there was a very important phrase, which is missing in the 1995 Constitution. At the beginning of the fundamental rights and freedoms, there is a phrase that states, “No person shall be hindered in his right and freedom in the enjoyment of the various rights.” The importance of that phrase would mean that had we still had that provision in the Constitution, this issue of having referendums on fundamental rights like the right of association would not have been possible. This is because to deny me my right of association without my consent was something that the Constitution prohibited. 

In the 1995 Constitution we do not have that safeguard. So, when the President talks about constitutionalism, he should be aware that when the Movement system was imposed on Ugandans there was a law that should have protected our fundamental rights and freedoms, but in this particular provision it was not so. The President -(Interjection)

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I thank, hon. Akena, for giving way. Although I stood up on a point of information, it is perhaps both information and clarification. We should start from the basis. I did not quite get- unless he quotes for us specifically that particular provision in the 1967 Constitution opening the Bill of Rights. I want to see how different it is from the one we have in Article 20 (1) of our Constitution, which states that, “Fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual are inherent and not granted by the state.” 

Clause 2 states that, “The rights and freedoms of the individual and groups enshrined in this Chapter shall be respected, upheld and promoted by all organs and agencies of Government and by all persons.” So, I want to see how different that one of 1967 is from this particular one.

MR AKENA:  In Chapter 3 of the 1967 Constitution, Article 18 (1), it begins with the phrase, “Except with his own consent, no person shall be hindered in the enjoyment of his freedom.” So it does not matter if 30 million Ugandans say that they do not want multiparties. If I want to associate with members of my own party, except with my consent, I should not be denied this right. The Movement system came into existence while ignoring the provision of this article- Can I continue please? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you taking the point of clarification? 

MR AKENA: Let me take it.
MR MUGAMBE: Thank you, honourable member for giving way. The clarification I want to get is, which Constitution is he reading? Is it the Uganda Constitution of 1967, or the UPC Constitution? This is where I need some clarification. (Laughter)

MR AKENA: Madam Speaker that provision exists at the beginning of the rights and freedoms in the 1967 Constitution under Chapter 3. It is quoted here in a UPC document but you can go to the library; I was there this morning and the 1967 Constitution is there. (Interjection)

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I submit, with all due respect, that the current provision in this Constitution is even more elaborate and goes beyond. The one in the 1967 Constitution is insisting that a person has an unhindered right to the enjoyment of his or her rights. This one says those rights of the individual are inherent and even goes beyond and says that they are not granted by the state, cannot be taken away by the state and are therefore inherent. 

The problem we normally have is to read certain provisions of the law in isolation. Provisions of the Constitution or any other law must be read within the entire context of the Constitution; somewhere you find limitations and qualifications and you cannot simply come out with one provision and read it in isolation of others. Please, my position is that although this is a general statement there are always general provisions and there are also exceptions to the general provisions. So please, read further.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Chief Whip of the FDC.

MR WADRI:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  Hon. Freddie Ruhindi of Nakawa is a person whom I always respect more so in his profession. The fact that he is even from the Attorney-General’s Chamber makes me duty bound to recognise him in that right.  I entirely agree with him in as far as Article 20 of the Constitution is concerned. However, the point, which I am informing him on is that, yes, you should not read a provision of the Constitution without consultation with other laws. What you have actually read has been watered down by other Acts of Parliament. Consider the Police Act. How freely do I enjoy my rights if on the other side you are saying that in order for me to enjoy those rights, I must seek permission from the police? Where are we?  

I think this Article 20 differs very divergently from what the honourable member is quoting. It is only unfortunate that, that provision of 1967 Constitution was not married in totality to the 1995 Constitution.  Those rights which we were supposed to be enjoying are not enjoyable as put in the Constitution, because right now if I went out and I wanted to demonstrate or I wanted to have a rally in Kampala, I would be asked to first get permission from the Police under the Police Act.  That is where our hands are tied and that is the point which the honourable member is citing.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know what direction you want to go. We had the Movement and we had a referendum and then we went multi-party; all that is water under the bridge. Now, I do not know why we are going back there? Why don’t you talk about contemporary issues and find contemporary solutions?

MR AKENA:  Madam Speaker, the reason we are going back there is that in the President’s State of the Nation Address, he said that it was a deliberate, sober- I forget the other word- move. The 20 years some of us were denied our right, which should have been with our consent. The reason I disagree with what the President put in the State of the Nation Address is that because when you look at the document entitled “The NRM Revolution”, which for essential purposes can serve as the Constitution of the NRM written in some bush in Luweero, the aims of the revolution, aim No.1 and No.2 is the establishment, by force if necessary, of a one party popular democracy in Uganda under the NRM.  So, whether we call it the Movement system or whether we call it individual merit, the essential purpose was put clearly in black and white; the establishment of a one party regime.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon Akena, what is that document you are reading?  What is the title? Who is the author? When is it dated?

MR AKENA: I will lay it on Table. It was written in some bush in Luweero but I do not know the date and it is entitled “The NRM Revolution.”

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, is it really in order for us to drive in reverse gear when it was just in 2005 that we moved away from the Movement system and we are now under the multi-party dispensation? Hon. Akena is here on the ticket of the UPC. Is it really in order to begin driving us in political reverse gear when in actual sense we are under the multi-party system?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Akena, address the Constitution as it stands now and how it hinders you.  These things of the revolution- I do not know who wrote that thing; I do not know even whether we should allow it and I do not know where it came from. Address the problems you are encountering so that the government can handle them in the existing framework because those things do not form part of the Hansard of this House.

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, my understanding is that hon. Akena is trying to put history in its right context, that Uganda is not just beginning now; constitutionalism is not just beginning now.  The practice has been on since before.  I thought that is what my colleague hon. Akena is just trying to say to us, and it is important that as a country, even in the Hansard, we put right the history of this country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Where in his statement did the President say that constitutionalism has just started in this State of the Nation Address? Show me where the President said that constitutionalism has just started. That is what I want you to clarify.

MR AKENA: Madam Speaker, he did not specifically mention that constitutionalism has just started, but there is no reference to any constitutionalism although in the first paragraph he is talking about multi-partyism between 1962 and 1966. The implication there is that multi-partyism ended in 1966.

 The inference of what has been happening- there is a point on, I think page 9, where His Excellency the President was says that- we now have in the Constitution that since the rights are not absolute and you need to also – it is in the enjoyment of the rights of freedoms described in this Chapter IV Article 43: “….No person shall prejudice the fundamental or other human rights and freedoms of others or the public interest.  

So the point, which I was going to touch on, was that also in the 1967 Constitution, we did have a similar provision. So, to quote King Solomon, there is nothing new under the sun. In Article 8(5) of the 1967 Constitution, it is stated that, “In the enjoyment of the rights and freedoms referred to in clause two of this article, no person shall prejudice the rights and freedoms of others or the public interest.” There is no fundamental difference in what was and what is pertaining now.

MS MUNYIRA: Madam Speaker, is it really in order for a Member to keep referring to a constitution that was repealed while he is trying to direct the country? The Constitution of 1967 was repealed and the people of Uganda came up with a Constitution, which they amended in 1995. That very Constitution was again amended in 2005 and I thought that is the one that we are basing our debates on or running this country. Is it really in order for a Member to keep utilising a constitution that was long repealed?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, honourable member, I have advised you for the second time to focus on bottlenecks in the Constitution that are disturbing you and how you want the government to address them. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, as the mover of the motion, I have been reluctant to come in on the previous member’s submission. But I think the point to note here is that the member is trying to point out the apparent inconsistencies between the fundamental rights and freedoms, and at the same time those rights are being curtailed by other acts that we have in the country. 

I will imagine that the import of the honourable member holding the Floor is to see how can we enjoy our rights and freedoms in an unfettered manner. Can we reconcile the provisions of the Constitution together with those the Police Act, among others, so that it does not cause pain for members holding rallies in their constituencies and for members assembling and gathering?  I think that is what we should have in place so that the rights are enjoyed and we curve a common understanding between both sides of the House and move on.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I think that is what I have been saying, that what are the issues that are now curtailing you and how do you want to be assisted? Please focus on that so that you can operate well.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I am provoked once again to take the microphone.  Hon. Ssekikubo, the mover of the motion, has said something that may send wrong signals to this House.  I was very reluctant to respond to hon. Kassiano Wadri’s observations thinking that it may go unnoticed but the mover of the motion came up and noticed it and recognised it. (Laughter)  But let me say this, any law, which is in conflict with the Constitution, is null and void to the extent of its inconsistency or of its conflict – I think that is Article 203 of our Constitution; we all know this. It is up to the person who feels aggrieved or who knows that a particular law is in conflict with the Constitution to challenge it. The Constitutional Court of recent, as you know, has nullified many provisions of the law as being inconsistent with the Constitution. So, before that is done, the law, which you pass here because this is the Parliament, if you pass a law and it is unchallenged, then it is applicable. 

Let me get to this point of demonstration. I do not have the Police Act here but I know, I have read section 35, which give powers to the Police to determine how, for instance, a demonstration or a rally, should be held. I am sure that hon. Atim and hon. Kassiano Wadri know that provision very well. There is also a fundamental provision in the Constitution, that is Article 212, which talks about functions of the Uganda Police Force and it says, “The functions of the Uganda Police Force shall include the following: (a) To protect life and property, (b) To preserve law and order, (c) To prevent and detect crime
(d) To cooperate with the civilian authority and other security organs established under this Constitution and with the population generally. “ 

When it says, to protect life and property, that is fundamental. You may say that any other law is inconsistent but you must also bring it in harmony with this. The Police have the overall power and responsibility to protect the life and property of the people in this country. So, to this extent, the Police can say, do not hold this demonstration here; do not do this and this because it is going to cause a problem. These are clear provisions of the law.

MR WADRI: We have attentively listened to the known professor of law, hon. Fred Ruhindi, MP Nakawa. from the two constitutional provisions that he has read. One will first admit that those provisions conflict and contradict each other. We know how difficult and how expensive it is in this country to pursue legislation through a litigation process. I am one of those in this Parliament proud to associate myself with the effects and attempts personally taken to bring us to this system where multipartism operates. It is on record that six of us very successfully challenged the hitherto Movement system, which infringed on our rights. This was in the High Court. Of course it was not an easy exercise. It ate and made a lot of holes in our pockets as individuals. 

Now that the learned Attorney-General knows very well that there are inconsistencies in the Constitution and yet there could have been a much more cheaper means of reconciling these provisions, why should he throw the burden onto individual Ugandans or to people who are raising it when actually Government would have done it much better. Because if a Backbencher in this Parliament rose up and tried to bring an amendment on provisions that conflict with each other, another Article 93 will catch up with him to say, please, you as a Backbencher you have no authority to bring to this Parliament a process of amendment, which is going to impinge on the consolidated fund. Why does Government, which is in position, not assist us Ugandans to marry these conflicting forces instead of throwing it to us? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Wadri, you have stolen hon. Akena’s Floor. Attorney-General, do you still want to say something more on this matter?

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, the government has not conceded, not at any one time here that there is a conflict between the Police Act and the Constitution. We have not. If it is hon. Kassiano Wadri who says that there is a conflict, take up necessary actions to remedy that conflict. We do not see, and we have not talked about any conflict whatsoever between Article 212 and the relevant provisions of the Police Act. 

MR MUGENI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and the speaker on the Floor. The way I understood the honourable’s point was that the Constitution of 1967 provided that if you are going to deny me my rights, you need to get permission from me. The Constitution of 1995, as amended, Article 43, says, if you are going to enjoy your rights they must not prejudice the enjoyment of another person’s rights. This means that if you are going to be limited on the enjoyment of your rights, the guiding principle is, are you affecting another person’s rights, like ownership of property, are you denying him? He has a right to own property, and if the enjoyment of your rights is going to do any harm on the right of the other person to own property then you get denied. So, you do not have to be asked. What has to be asked is whether what you are going to do is going to prejudice or affect another person’s rights. 

MR AKENA: Thank you honourable for that information. Honourable member, I read Article 85 of the 1967 Constitution, which provided the same as Article 43 of the 1995 Constitution. Let me move to another point because the point I was trying to develop is what has been generated from he debate that we members of the opposition basically criticise a lot without possibly offering a way forward. The reason is based on the history, we have been denied any other opportunity to do anything apart from criticise; we are not allowed to organise; we are not allowed to recruit. So, even in the President’s State of the Nation Address, he mentioned that the problems in NRM, which resulted in independence was the hurried nature on which the process was done. In our particular case we have spent 20 years, so we also have a much further distance to go while the NRM was operating unhindered for 20 years. 

On some of these issues of things, which have occurred before, in 1994 the UPC presented a position paper. This was during the 1994 Constituent Assembly elections. Some of the composers of this document were arrested but there is one interesting provision, which is here, speaking on the youth, where the UPC was proposing that youth should be accorded free and compulsory primary and secondary education. 
The reason why I am raising this is that there are times where ideas are brought like UPE, USE and when we criticise the method that is being used to implement it, we are accused of being saboteurs. Yet if you look at this document of 1994, we had the idea long before the Movement or NRM was thinking of implementing it.  
So when we come to criticising, and on the delivery of issues, concerning matters like health, we have gone through this process, we thought about it. When we talk about providing health, it is not just providing a building; it is staffing, equipping and making sure that staff are adequately taken care of in order to improve the lives of the people of Uganda. So as UPC, this is not something new. In this new opportunity of multipartism, we hope we will be given more freedom to organise and to be able to be an effective force or an effective voice to articulate the aspirations of the people. 
My concern in the State of the Nation Address is that the issue of funding came about, but it is interesting that the NRM, after being in Government for 21 years, one year from not being state funded, is now looking at the issue of funding. Us as UPC have suffered for 20 years being denied any opportunity. The laws, which have been put, were even to restrict the little, which could have been provided. So, it is interesting that this is being considered, but I hope in the consideration of this funding, it will be at a level, which will improve the capacity to deepen the debate and the issues so that we can deliver a better package to the people of Uganda. Thank you.
6.21
MR JOHNSON MALINGA (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Madam Speaker, I would like to express my gratitude because my polished colleague, hon. Ssekikubo, moved this motion. It reminded me of my meeting with Mzee Tiberio Okeny when he was telling me about Mato-Oput. This was a very perfect demonstration of how Mato-Oput can work. I would like only –(Interruptions)

MR SSEKIKUBO: I rise on a point of order. I have heard very well my colleague hon. Malinga insinuating to the fact that by moving the motion, I have been mato-oputed, -(Laughter)- whereas I have never been in anyway hostile, inconsistent or in anyway against my party. Is the honourable member therefore in order to insinuate to this House that I have been reconciled and mato-oputed in that extent?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Malinga, you know I am not familiar with the battles here. Can you explain how he has been mato-oputed?

MR MALINGA: Madam Speaker, I have very many things in common with hon. Ssekikubo and he very well understands what I am talking about and I think to avoid the terminology of rebels, this is one way we could solve the problem of rebels even in parties. (Laughter)

I would like to support this motion and I would like to talk on only three issues. Issue No.1, Bonna Bagaggawale.  This is a very good programme on paper. This is a programme that earned NRM a majority of the votes, and this is the programme, which will determine how many votes NRM is going to get in 2011. I want to state three challenges that are facing this programme. One of them is timing, the other is the opaqueness of the programme and the third one is the skewedness of the attitude of some members. One year down the road, people of Kapelebyong are yet to see what this programme is about.  

Three years are left for the NRM to make use of this programme because the fourth year is a year of evaluation. There is no policy yet on this programme. We were expecting that the minister should have brought the policy on Bonna Bagaggawale in this House so that members of this august House will help explain to the community how this programme is going to be implemented and how they are going to benefit from it.  

MR PETER LOKERIS: Thank you honourable member for giving way. It is true the policy on Bonna Bagaggawale, Prosperity-for-All, has not been brought into this House yet. It is being finalised in Cabinet and by next month it should be here. The fact that we are left with three years to implement it, it should energise all of us to make sure that this programme is implemented. I am grateful that you stated that it is a very good programme and that we should all own it because it is meant to improve the lives and welfare of our people. So when it comes, please let us embrace it. I want to assure you that within the next one month, it will be in this House. Thank you. 

MR MALINGA: Madam Speaker, I like owning property, but I want to own what I understand. Afande Salim Saleh is at the vanguard of this programme. I do not remember being with him in this House in the recent past and I thought his being here would help us to understand what goes on. Of course, he is from the Vice-President’s office. I know that the Vice-President’s office is handling the rice scheme. (Laughter) My advice is, speed up this programme. 

I used to mobilise a lot of votes for NRM and this is one of the challenges we had - delayed programmes. Speed up this programme, be transparent and support those programmes that already exist

Madam Speaker, hon. Beti Kamya was providing an opportunity for a demonstration. She provided room for Afande Salim Saleh and the ministry to experiment how this thing works but because of mob spirit, he was stopped.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Malinga, how would I have provided space for experimentation without knowing how to do it?  

MR MALINGA: Madam Speaker, already money has been distributed in Bujjenje, what are you using?

 THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know.


MR MALINGA: Even in Luweero, which policy is being used?  –(Interruptions)

MS BINTU:  Thank you very much hon. Mallinga for giving way. The information I want to give hon. Mallinga after hearing his explanation as if he means that Bonna Bagaggawale is just waiting for some money from hon. Salim Saleh to be given to the people. But Bonna Bagaggawale according to my understanding is a big programme that has got so many components that embrace it. Its output is to get a family, which has got something that it earns and lives on.  

The programmes of: NAADS, Bonna Basome in primary and secondary schools and Bonna Bagemwe are some of those which are part of, “the Prosperity for All programmes”. So when you say that you do not see hon. Salim Saleh; Salim Saleh is just handling the part of micro-finance and other groups are handling the other parts. So that is the information I wanted to give you. Thank you. 

MR MALLINGA: Madam Speaker, you can see the trouble. We are seeing Bonna Bagaggawale the way the blind people saw the elephant. (Laughter)  The one who touched the tusk explained it differently; the one who touched the nose knows it differently; the one who held the tail, knows Bonna Bagaggawale differently. (Laughter).  That is why I am perfectly saying bring the policy here so that we understand what it is and move together as a parliament and as a country. (Applause)

The other issue, Madam Speaker is on corruption; I have two questions: One, where is this thing called corruption? And two, how can we help the President to fight this animal called corruption? In my opinion, the animal is everywhere. It is everywhere like UPC; it is in local Government; it is in Parliament; it is in the churches; people are attempting to pass the Holy Spirit through electric machines. (Interruption) 

 MR OKELLO-OKELLO:  Madam Speaker, I thank hon. Mallinga for giving way.  UPC has actually done a lot for this country. It was everywhere positively. Now is hon. Mallinga in order to compare this deadly thing called corruption with UPC, a great party that brought independence to us all? (Laughter)  Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, fortunately UPC is not everywhere. So you are not in trouble at all.

MR MALLINGA: You see, Madam Speaker, the question was: “Where is it?”  And not: “How does it compare?” Anyway, it is the responsibility of all of us to help the President and the government to fight corruption for the benefit of Ugandans. 

 Madam Speaker, in Government circles, the biggest area where corruption is practiced is in the tendering process. You look at all these scandals; if you looked at this Northern Uganda scandal of the resettlement of IDPs, you will find that the problem was in the procurement process.  

So, Madam Speaker, how do we assist the President to address this issue? I was in Asilo one day and I wanted to buy fish; some old woman said, “No, do not buy this one; if you look at its head, it is not a good fish.” Let us begin with the heads of ministries and departments. If a minister is lazy or corrupt, let us not be sectarian in this process. 

 I see very many good young brains that can run ministries even in the NRM. I can name some of them for you. I know this is the preserve of the President but if you had people like Banyenzaki, Dr Baryomunsi - you look at- they can run ministries very well. Instead of calling them rebels, assign them responsibility. (Applause) Tell me what Dr Lyomoki cannot do? We should be balanced and this should not be a victimisation process. A corrupt person is corrupt! Remove that corrupt person. 

But Madam Speaker, allow me just two minutes to say something on education. The Government is doing a very good job in this sector and I must appreciate our minister for doing the good job she is doing.  But I would like the Ministry of Finance to help the Ministry of Education to address the issue of polytechnics. We have a challenge by the donors; they are not very interested in this programme as far as I know.  But the Ministry of Education should do what they are doing in the secondary school sector. Where the communities have built a polytechnic, the ministry should be able to grant aid. For instance, for us in Kapelebyong we built the Arrow Polytechnic in Achoa and if we were grant aided, we would do a very good job. Maybe we could recover the lost NRM votes in that place and –(Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and the hon. Member for giving way. Now in line with what hon. Malinga is saying on the polytechnics, indeed over 49 private polytechnics were taken on, there are students who are learning and the government is paying money for them. So they have started the public/private partnership. But the other option, of course I entirely agree with you – [An. hon. Member: “Achoa”] The one of Achoa? But I think that is another question. The hon. Member can talk to the powers that be in order for it to be on board. 

MR MALINGA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman of the committee. On the curriculum reform, Madam Speaker, I would like to appreciate the President’s concern but we have one element lacking, the element of money. Many Ugandans are gambling because they go through the school system without understanding money. We do not have many people who are financially intelligent in this country. I would like to appeal that the Curriculum Development Centre should be helped to design a curriculum that involves money so that we understand it; how we get it; how we spend it and the responsibility over money. 

MR NSUBUGA WILLIAM:  Thank you, Rt hon. Speaker and hon. Mallinga. Just a few seconds ago, hon. Mallinga was telling this august House that there is a lot of corruption and corruption also involves money. Now he is telling us that there is need to reform the education curriculum such that people should be taught how to handle money. (Interjection) yes, financial figures. I think the problem is not that, the problem should be - we should reform our education curriculum to make sure that issues of corruption are actually taught right from nursery school and even the public should reject the corrupt rather than praising them.  
  
MR MALLINGA: Madam Speaker, I am a teacher. I went through a teacher training programme for ten years. I became a deputy headmaster and that is where I started seeing the issues of money coming my way. What my colleague is talking about is very well handled under religion and under ethics in higher institutions of learning, corruption is properly handled; but also if you bump into money at your old age without understanding it, it is the cause of this corruption.
On university education, I want to thank the President for appreciating that at least there is a university in each region of this country. In 2001, the people of Teso gave President Museveni 73 percent; in 2006, it came down to about 16 percent; in 2011, it can go back to 73 percent or come down to 3 percent, why? The voting pattern was a way to tell the President: “You are not listening to us.” And you know I am the only survivor of the NRM MPs who were in this House in the last Parliament. (Laughter)  So, I stand here to advise that one of the issues that brought that pattern of voting was the empty promise of a university in the Teso region, which was not fulfilled.  And if it is fulfilled, it will help to raise the -(Interruption)

MRS BITAMAZIRE:  Thank you very much, for giving way. I think Ugandans have got a strategic plan for the education of this country and many of you have read the government White Paper on Education. You would realise that all these universities we are now establishing were agreed on by the government of Uganda as far as 1992. We are now scaling out the plans for education, which were made by the government at that time to establish universities and other programmes in the country. 

You would recall- I would like to inform the Members that the education plan, which we had been running on was established in 1962 that is at independence. It was not until 1989 that another commission was appointed to draw another strategic plan for the education of this country. So, this is the second one after the one of 1962. That plan is talking about the four traditional regions of the country; one in the central, of course, Makerere is there, the West, Mbarara is there, the North, Gulu is taking off quite well and now we are completing the cycle with the one in the Eastern region. 

I have seen the statement in one of the papers by the Leader of the Opposition saying that it was just a political expediency.  But, I want to refer Members to the development of education in this country; the government White Paper on Education and then see the strategic plan and see how these universities are being established. 

But, coming back to Busitema, Busitema is a multi-campus university. It is going to cover several institutions in the entire region. Then we shall be bringing on board institutions by institutions and that is likely to cover quite a number of areas in that area including Teso.  So, what I would advise the colleagues is that we cannot just gamble with education; we shall get where other countries have got. But if we have an agreed strategic plan and there are reasons for changing it, those reasons should be discussed here. But if we just say we cannot go quite well here- that is why Busitema unlike other universities so far is a multi-purpose university. It is going to have faculties in different parts of the Eastern region so that there is access by different people in that region. I thought I would give that information. Madam Speaker, thank you.

MR REAGAN OKUMU: Madam Speaker, I just want to give additional information to the honourable member because I respect the Minister and I know what she is trying to do for this country. She is really focussed and that is why it should not be based on anything but, it should be based on good planning so that in the long run we can have good results. 

The information I want to give to my colleague is that education alone will not earn votes; university education alone will not earn votes. Gulu was given a university but the President scored much below what he had got, for example, in 2001.  So, university alone even if it is established in Teso will not earn votes for NRM. But there is a lot more that needs to be done broadly speaking in the various sectors. Thank you.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Madam Speaker, hon. Malinga has made a fundamental statement here that if all the presidential promises are fulfilled, come 2011, President Museveni’s votes will go back to 73 per cent, but if they are not fulfilled, the votes may go to 3 per cent. I am not aware that the President has declared that come 2011 he is going to stand again. (Laughter) Now, I am seeking clarification from hon. Malinga if he has got that information, can he formerly inform this House? 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, the President presented the State of the Nation Address and I did not hear him insinuating at the activities and problems of Government in relations to vote catching. The President was coming up as a statesman giving his vision and stating his programmes to the country. Madam Speaker, is the hon. Member in order to insinuate that the President’s address was aiming at vote catching? Was he fishing for votes? Was it anyway a campaign period? I thought the President was acting in his own right and capacity as a statesman and the leader of the country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think, honourable Malinga, who used to be in NRM was only lamenting about the reasons why NRM did not win in Teso. I think that is what it is really. Please conclude. 

MR MALINGA: Madam Speaker, I thank you for exonerating me from my very good friend.  Honourable minister, I have read the 1989 White Paper, the Kajubi Report, and my understanding is that it is a very good strategic plan. But, I do not know what happens with my President sometimes when something happens and he is very happy, he can make any wild promise and put aside the strategic plan. If that was the plan, then the President should have not stood up to say we are going to put up a university here because it is the plan. 

Let me wind up with what honourable Okello-Okello has said. I would like to quote what President Museveni said, “As we move on, let us all work together for a better Uganda today and tomorrow. Our motherland is our treasure.” Indeed, Uganda is our treasure for the human resource; for the natural resources; for all the commissions we have. As we privatise this commission, let us think about the present and the future. As we get these monies from the privatisation process, let us invest it for the good of our nation. 

Hon. Okello-Okello is right to say the President has not in anyway stated that he is going to stand in 2011. I understand my President very well. I have not belonged to any other party yet and if you read the papers third term started in Kyakwazi; those of hon. Kakooza picked it up and I think the fourth term is picking.  But, I would like to appeal to President Museveni that he has provided a very good environment, a very good Uganda for today and it is within his jurisdiction to prepare Uganda for a better future. What Uganda has never had opportunity to have can be provided by him.

Uganda has never had the opportunity to have a peaceful succession, and it is within the powers of President Museveni to give this opportunity and he will earn the respect of the Ugandans of today and the Ugandans to come.

6.47
MR JOHN ODIT (UPC, Erute County, South, Lira):  Madam Speaker, my comments will be very brief. Over the last 46 years, we, the members of UPC were in Government twice and in opposition twice, including this particular Parliament. In 1961, we were in opposition - that is a statement of fact and Milton Obote was the Leader of the Opposition. 

Now, we are again in opposition, and under a gentleman’s arrangement, we are in a coalition, which is very rare. It is normally Government, which forms a coalition of parties. But this side is living in harmony although we belong to different political shades. So, we know how to manage Government and how it pains to lose it; we know how to be on the government side and the opposition side.

I must appreciate the President for discharging his Constitution duty, under Article 101 Clause (1), that he should prepare and present to this nation a State of the Nation Address. He has done that, and that being an example of respect of constitutionalism, we must appreciate it 

I will only make comments on the political scene as discussed by the President starting on page 2, and end up very briefly with education as we see it today. In 1958, the people of Lango missed to be represented in the LEGICO because they had a very weak person. So they had to look around for somebody who could articulate their position, and they looked for Milton Obote from Nairobi. Not because they wanted a Prime Minister or somebody that would lead this country, but we wanted the people of Lango to be effectively represented in this country. I am happy that part of his former constituency is the one I lead now. The constituency is now split into three; part of it is shared by my colleague from Moroto and hon. Daniel Omara Atubo. 

Three weeks ago, we buried its chairperson, who represented him during the LEGICO campaign and also in his campaign for the constituency in 1961. The fellow was born in 1916; he died and we buried him three weeks ago in my constituency. The reasons why we looked for him were four and he presented the case very effectively.

The first is because this is a political scene, which the President has been talking about –(Interruption)

MR MUGAMBE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There are records that show that Dr Milton Obote was not from Lango the first time he came to the LEGCO. Instead, he was from the workers of Jinja. So, I do not know why you are saying that the Langi looked for him.
MR ODIT:  I am a dictionary on how Milton Obote came to this House. He joined Uganda National Congress as a delegate from Jinja in 1952 after being invited by Ignatius Musazi; he was working in Jinja. But thereafter, he was transferred to Nairobi. It is from there that the people of Lango invited him back after a serious riot on land issues, which took place in 1956. He came a day after the riot had taken place. So, when he was invited, he moved around and consulted the people of Lango, and they believed that he would be an effective representative in the LEGCO. So, the gentleman who was there was withdrawn and they replaced him with Milton Obote in 1958. So that is precisely the background.

But why do I give this background? Because hon. Okello Okello has talked about the two kinds of Uganda in passing. Part of the country is marginalised and the other is adored. But this is historical; it is not new. When the people of Lango sent him, they wanted him to present four things, which they had on the agenda. 

The first was called the National Planning Commission. This commission was supposed to discuss and plan for the whole country. Unfortunately, the East and the North were not represented in this commission. And when he came here, he made the appeal, but a certain gentleman in the House rubbished him off. But he said that you do not need to plan for any part of the country where you are absent. 

Because the East and the North were not represented, it would not be possible for their views and positions to be fully reflected in the national programme. And so he demanded for it, and he gave an example when that Mzungu was claiming that that was nonsense. He said, “Look here, the governor lives in Entebbe, you may fly with a small plan from Entebbe to Lira, or from Kololo to Lira. And there, you meet a district commission who is a Mzungu like you, and after discussing with him in his office, you fly back claiming that you have been to Lango -” 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, please, summarise your time is running out.

MR ODIT: Yes, I am summarising. So that was the demand – effective representation of all regions in national planning. Secondly, he demanded for roads. Good roads had stopped in Soroti, and toward the Northern part it had stopped in Bombo. 

Three, he demanded for a ginnery for cotton ginning and the colonial Government had made a condition that for Lango to get a ginnery, they must be able to produce 29,000 bales consecutively for two year. And when he complained that the people of Toro, who were producing less than 5,000 bales, were given a ginnery –(Interruption)

MR GAGAWALA: I agree with what hon. Odit is saying. I would like to emphasise the fact that actually the people of Ankole had refused to grow cotton. Whenever they were given seeds they would roast them then tell the Mzungu, the district commissioner, that your seeds do not grow. The people of Lango had also been very resistant initially, but when they agreed to cross over to Kamuli to be trained on how to grow cotton. (Laughter) Yes, and I think you owe us a lot because Kamuli was at that time the centre of learning. That is the information I wanted to give you.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Odit, please conclude.

MR ODIT: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Indeed that is a fact. Finally, he said that they wanted schools, but Lango at that time had no single secondary school. None of the four demands by the people of Lango were complied with, till he came to power in 1962, when he gave a very good engineer to replace a Muzungu as a commissioner for works. When he did that, we got our road from Bombo to Gulu commissioned in 1969, after it had been tarmacked. Then in 1971, we had another section of the road from Kamdini to Lira. After all this, the country was at least joined up for the first time.

Thirdly, he made sure that the engineer was given responsibility to join West Nile to the rest of the country. West Nile at that time had no accessibility. So, the engineer had the responsibility to have a railway line and a bridge constructed at Parkwack to join West Nile to the rest of the country, which he did.

MR MUGAMBE: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way and thank you, Madam Speaker. I recall that during those times there was a central planning unit, which used to draw out five-years’ development plans. Yes, even before the whites came; actually they took over from that unit. However, from your statement it seems the planning was being done in people’s offices. Are you saying there was no organised planning? I want to understand the mechanisms under which these proposals were being done? Was it through the National Planning Unit; was it just sitting on table? I want to get a clarification on that.
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Odit, where is this debate ending? Who has said that the late Dr Obote was not in Parliament? I do not know where you are going. He was in Parliament and the records of the Hansard show that he was a Prime Minister.

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, we are debating the State of the Nation Address and my duty as a UPC representative is to present our case as a background to where we are now. The planning that hon. Mugambe is talking about is what I referred to earlier as a planning commission. The problem was that this commission concentrated its work in central and not in North and Eastern Uganda; the two regions were not represented. That is why there was disparity in resource sharing. These issues of outrage came as a result of our independence. 

Madam Speaker, I would therefore like to say that- before I conclude- I implore Government to think about the question of education. I am saying this because in the span of four years after independence, we got four secondary schools one of which was a girls’ school. As I speak, these schools are old; they are dilapidated though three of the four are in my constituency. 

My other appeal to Government is to include among other things, the rehabilitation and renovation in our vocabulary. Government should not destroy history because we need to continue. Like the President said, new people come, make a contribution and leave the scene for the next generation. That is how we build the nation.

I want to conclude by saying that in the course of preparing the plan for USE, Madam Minister for education should include in her programme the plan to rehabilitate those old schools. That is very important. Otherwise, we shall lose out and we will have no legacy and history to be proud of. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, I have noted the members who have not yet spoken. I know that there are still a few on this side, but we have done enough today. We will start from there tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. promptly to enable us conclude the debate. House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.03 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 26 July 2007 at 2.00 p.m.)

