



Thursday, 23 July 2020


Parliament met at 2.40 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. First, I will amend the Order Paper to permit the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development to respond to a question raised on the issue of Guangzhou Dongsong Energy Group in Tororo.

Secondly, honourable members, as far back as the Eighth Parliament, this House resolved that the Uganda Land Commission law should be enacted. It has been a demand of this House for some time. Indeed, when we were approving the Cabinet in 2016, one of the issues we raised with the incoming minister, hon. Betty Amongi, was to ensure that the Uganda Land Commission Act is brought as quickly as possible to streamline operations of the Uganda Land Commission. 

I have been informed that the Bill was ready in 2017 and a certificate of financial implication was issued by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. However, the Bill has not been brought to this House. Therefore, I would like the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to explain to us on Tuesday why that Bill has not come despite it having passed the necessary requirements. 

I will now have just a few matters of national interest. Can I invite hon. Centenary?

2.43
MR FRANCO CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The reason I am here is to remind Government and the country at large that, as you are aware, disastrous rains hit Kasese badly. 

I appreciate the efforts put in by Government to come to the rescue of the people of Kasese. However, we have a big challenge; the Ministry of Works and Transport sent equipment to Kasese, which included bulldozers and excavators, but we do not have fuel to run those machines. 

As I speak, River Nyamwamba has flooded and is almost reaching the ground level, and water has drained into people’s homes. We have over 160 households in Kanyangeya Parish that are seated in water and they have started collapsing. The chairmen of the Local Councils I (LCs I) tried to mobilised pumps to pump out that water but it is still a big problem.

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that Government should expeditiously provide fuel to enable the excavators de-silt that river, especially around the areas where the communities are living, so that water is redirected into its right channel. Otherwise, we are going to have so many homeless people and an outbreak of diseases. The second rainy season is coming in August and it is just by the doorstep. I would like to request that Government really comes to our rescue as fast as it can before we head for disaster. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister in charge of natural resources is required to urgently work on the situation in the Kasese area, to ensure that the effects of the flooding of River Nyamwamba are handled so that the people are able to use their facilities.

Can we ask the Minister of Works and Transport to support the minister in charge of natural resources to handle that issue urgently and give us an update by Thursday next week because this is now a matter of life and death.

2.45
MR MICHAEL TUSIIME (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am here to raise a matter of national importance in regard to the continued blockage of Uganda’s dairy products to access the East African market, especially Kenya. 

Way back in 2019, the Kenya Dairy Board introduced an import permit system that required dairy exporters to Kenya to regulate the amount and quantities of the items they export to Kenya. Since this year began, there has been a tremendous decrease in the amounts of permits issued. Actually, three months ago, almost no permit was issued. This has impacted heavily on the investors in the dairy sector, milk sellers and farmers.

Madam Speaker, it should come to the notice of this House that in 2019, Ugandan dairy exports worldwide were worth about US$ 160 million. In Kenya alone, our export was worth about US$ 130 million. That means that the biggest market for the dairy products of Uganda is Kenya. 

This idea of regulating exporters of milk and dairy products to Kenya is also against the spirit of free movement of goods that is guaranteed under the East African Community Protocol. Right now, some of these factories that deal in dairy products, especially in my constituency, have started a partial closedown that has led to unemployment. They are laying off quite a number of staff and of course this affects their livelihood and the entire sector.

Madam Speaker, my prayers are: 
    1. That the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives together with the Minister of East African Community Affairs come to inform the House and the country about the remedies that should be put in place to save this sector.

    2. Government of Uganda should intervene expeditiously to engage the Kenyan authorities to find a logical solution to save this sector that employs about one million people.

Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is interesting that this matter has been in the public domain for some months but we have not heard the Government position. Also, within the East African Community, these are non-tax barriers to trade. 

Therefore, we would like to ask the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to come and advise the country. It is now dairy but today I saw sugar and the other day it was sugarcane. I do not know what we are going to be able to export to Kenya. 

The Minister for East African Community Affairs should come and update us on our cooperation with that country and the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives should tell us what they are going to do to unblock export of dairy products from Uganda to Kenya. Can they come back to us on Tuesday next week.

2.49
MR PAUL AKAMBA (Independent, Busiki County, Namutumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last week, when we were going to Mbulamuti to attend a function with other Members of Parliament, we decided to use Kayunga Road. However, we were surprised that the ferry that had been removed from Mbulamuti in March has not yet been replaced. We then decided to use the old Jinja-Kamuli Road that was constructed by the colonialists. 

Madam Speaker, this road starts from Kimaka and goes through Buwenda, Nankandulo, Mbulamuti up to Kamuli and Bukungu. That is to Lake Kyoga. When we took that road, after Nankandulo we found that the road was terribly impassable. The residents, out of disappointment, had decided to plant maize and sweet potatoes in the road. So, we could not go to Mbulamuti using that road. We were forced to go back to Jinja again and use the current Kamuli Road up to Mbulamuti. 

Madam Speaker, because of all this, we reached when the function had ended. The residents were so angry at Government and the moment they realised that we were Members of Parliament, they became angry at us too. They even wanted to lynch us, saying that this road has been a presidential pledge for the last 20 years. They even brought us evidence that in 2015, His Excellency the President promised the leaders of Busoga that the road was going to be tarmacked from Kimaka up to Mbulamuti, Kamuli and Bukungu. I also vividly remember that in 2017, when His Excellency the President was addressing a rally in Budondo, he reiterated the same thing, that this road would be tarmacked. 

Up to now, however, this is the situation we are in. It is not any different from the situation in Namutumba, on the road from Nabumali to Butaleja, Busolwe and Budumba. The dual bridge that the motor vehicles and the train share is about to collapse. For the last 20 years, that road has equally been a promise and we are in a situation - (Interjections)- I will take information from Butaleja.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, senior cadre.

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. With dismay, I would like to give information that as I talk now, there is a boda boda rider who fell off the bridge at Budumba. However, because some of our people know how to swim, that person was able to survive. 

Therefore, the information I would like to give my brother here is that the situation is very bad. Now that the Minister of Works and Transport is here, adorned in very good yellow attire, I think we should get a “yellow” answer now. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR AKAMBA: Madam Speaker, I was with hon. Kisa on that journey and he is seeking to give information. Please, allow me to take information from him.

MR KISA: Thank you very much, my colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that aside from that road, reaching Mbulamuti has become a very serious problem. 

During one of my rallies in Luuka South, His Excellency the President seriously pledged to construct the road from Iganga - from Walugogo via Luuka to Kamuli. That was a very serious pledge that was made in your presence, Madam Speaker, but up to now, nothing has been mentioned about that commitment. 

What hon. Akamba is talking about is a very pertinent issue. The Government of Uganda, the National Resistance Movement Government, must consider areas that were in the manifesto. These areas must be taken into account so that we access all the areas in the country. Thank you.

MR OKUPA: I just want to confirm that the pledge has been outstanding for a very long time. Actually, it does not only stop at Bukungu. From Kimaka, you connect to Kamuli, then to Bukungu and the ferry was to connect from Bukungu to Kagwara, from Kagwara to Serere, Ngora, Kumi, and from Serere to Soroti. That was the promise in 2011 and 2015. 

Hon. Bagiire here was a minister of state for works at the time and he knows about these roads. That is the promise that has been lying idle for a very long time, right from the time he was in that ministry. My colleagues in the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, we do not know what the people from the places where the road is supposed to pass have done to be lied to for 20 years and beyond. 

The additional thing which they had promised to do was to connect from Nakasongola to Bbaale, Kamuli and then continue. That is how that road was supposed to continue but up to today, we are having problems; we are seeing nothing. 

The loan requests are brought here but we do not see that road emerge. If you looked at the great north road, from Jinja up to Kaberemaido, on the left side of that road, there are only two tarmac roads; only two! What crime have the people of that area committed? This is a very serious matter. We need that matter resolved.

MR AKAMBA: Thank you for the information. Madam Speaker, my prayers are that Government should expedite the fulfilling of their pledge to tarmac Kimaka-Mbulamuti-Bukungu Road. The people are suffering and very soon leaders will not be allowed to even step in those places. Imagine, a road has been turned into a garden. They are soon going to demand for seedlings – (Laughter) – and agricultural extension workers. 

I pray that this road is worked on expeditiously. I also pray that the pledge of Nabumali-Butaleja-Busolwe-Namutumba Road is honoured. I so pray.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member. Happily, I see the Minister of Works and Transport here. 

However, I think it is very unfortunate that a road which runs through the districts of Jinja, Kamuli, Buyende has been in the plan for over 30 years. Thirty years, and we are here! 

By the way, minister, my home is in that area but I no longer go there because I cannot explain why the road has not been done. So, what answers do you have for us?

2.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Ms Joy Kabatsi): Madam Speaker, the President is worried about these roads – (Laughter) – and as we talk, a meeting is going on because they have to address him on Saturday, 25 July about these roads. They have to justify and give clear reasons why some roads have been done and some have not been done, and immediately work on those that have to be done. The meeting is on Saturday with the President about these roads.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we want a report from that meeting on Tuesday about when the roads will actually be done; not about “thinking”, but when they will actually be done. That is what we want to hear. We do not want to hear any more promises. Hon. Nsereko, you have two minutes.

3.00
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This afternoon, I would like to present a petition for and on behalf of the people of Kampala and Uganda as well, who are united under the umbrella of the United Textile Manufacturers and Traders Association. I request that you allow me to go through a little synopsis and then do my prayers. 

On 1 July 2020, this august House passed the budget and the tax code and in effect, we increased the taxes on textile fabrics as raw materials that are used in designing and manufacturing clothes from $0.5 to $5 per square metre. We further made an alteration to change the unit scale in which the measurement for tax rates are done from metres to kilogrammes. Therefore, you have to measure a cloth in kilogrammes, not metres. In effect, the import duty on a 20-foot container spiked from Shs 45 million to Shs 400 million. The taxes on a 40-foot container spiked from Shs 70 million to Shs 1.2 billion.

Aware that by the time we undertook these measures, the traders had made orders for these materials - Honourable members, these are the examples of the materials we are talking about and I will lay them on the Table. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, in protection of certain industries, convinced this House that these materials are made in Uganda. Actually, they all import these materials and they are not manufactured in Uganda. 

In effect, we might end up having our people walking naked because they can longer afford to not only import finished goods, but also import the materials. The materials that are used to make curtains and bedsheets in small cottage industries outside there are the materials whose taxes were hiked. In lieu, definitely –(Interruption) 

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Thank you, hon. Nsereko. You have made a very big statement that we could have made a mistake by trying to protect industries that do not exist. 

I would like to get clarification. Is it true that Government brought a law here that increased taxes, with a plan to protect local industries, when in actual sense they are themselves importers?

MR NSEREKO: You are speaking the right thing but the issue I am talking about here is that there is no manufacturer of chiffon, polyester, silk and other materials like this in Uganda. These are the raw materials for manufacturing the clothes that we wear. This Parliament was duped into increasing the taxes in the name of protecting the local manufacturers of textiles whereas in actual sense, the local manufacturers of textiles only deal partly in cotton but not chiffon and other types of materials.

Madam Speaker, as a result, over 40,000 people directly working in these small cottage – We can do a site visit and go downtown and see them. These are people who were actually partially trained by this Government through the skilling programme on how to tailor and produce clothes. At the end of the day, as a result of this tax intervention, they can no longer afford the cost of the materials. 

Those that had imported afore passing this tax can no longer clear their goods because this tax has become uncertain. At the time they imported, the taxes were at Shs 40 million per container but the taxes are now at Shs 400 million. Honourable members, with the COVID-19 pandemic that we have, the loans that these people had and the rent arrears looming on their necks, I think we are going to kill the very industry that we want to develop in form of Buy Uganda Build Uganda.

Madam Speaker, as I wind up my justification, I would like to say that this tax was not only not certain, killing the very cannons of taxation, the tax is also not equitable. We thought we were going to protect manufacturers and actually, these very same people are our local producers and designers. They all rely on these materials to produce coats, sweaters, school uniforms and all other things –

THE SPEAKER: What are your prayers?

MR NSEREKO: The prayers of my people, Madam Speaker, are that aware that the industry employs youth, women, people with disability and the elderly, they seek intervention from this august House to prevail over the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come up with exemptions that will help protect their jobs. They request to be exempted from this import duty or we have it reviewed in Parliament so as to protect their jobs. They so pray, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Where has the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development gone to? Did you hear the complaint over the tax?

3.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I heard the issue raised by hon. Nsereko, in brief saying we could have imposed a tax claiming to cure one situation when actually we were protecting a group of people. Since it is a petition, we can look at it and come back to give an answer on Tuesday.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nsereko, can you submit the petition to the minister?

MR BAHATI: It has come at the right time when we are actually processing some Bills with the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We can correct this situation if that is what happened. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. One set of the petition should be sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the second one to the minister so that they can have a convergence of ideas on the same.

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are raising critical issues and when you look at the ministers, some of them are concentrating on their phones and some are really trying to peruse through the submissions they are supposed to make. However, the Leader of Government Business is not here. I do not know whether we are proceeding well. 

You remember last time, the Minister of Works and Transport said that she would come here on behalf of Government. I do not know on whose behalf she was talking the other time. May we know clearly who is here on behalf of Government? They may come and say “I am speaking only on my behalf”. May I know who the Leader of Government Business today is? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can I know who is taking charge of Government business this afternoon?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, Government is well represented and I am in charge this afternoon. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Hon. Masika, the matter you want to raise was already raised by hon. Watuwa and answered. Hon. Abott, your issue is a constituency matter; just write to the Minister of Health. Hon. Franca Akello, your issue is also constituency related; write to the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. Let us hear from hon. Mbwatekamwa.

3.10
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The matter I am raising relates to the police. 

Our police have stayed in a power blackout in most of the barracks in Uganda. You remember, two months ago I raised the same matter here and informed Parliament that electricity had been cut off in most of the barracks. The police can hardly access power now. Nsambya Police Barracks has had a power blackout for the last two months, without any reason. 

Madam Speaker, our police officers do not have representatives in Parliament. I do not know whether this is why they are being marginalised – (Interjections) – Okay, they are represented by most of us, which is why I am raising this point.

Currently, our children are benefiting –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, that matter was raised and we are expecting a response. It is actually on the Order Paper. Hon. Kibalya raised it. Can we go to hon. Basalirwa. Hon. Basalirwa, use only two minutes.

3.12
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri County, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the abduction of a journalist working for BABA FM in Jinja. This journalist is called Ddamulira Twahir. 

Prior to his abduction, he had received numerous calls threatening him for giving a lot of attention and space to Opposition personalities on that radio. Yesterday, at about 9.00 p.m., he was picked from Bugembe by unknown people. As of now, his whereabouts are unknown. 

It is my humble prayer that the Minister of Internal Affairs investigates this matter. It is a travesty for the state to be at the forefront of abducting its own citizens; it is just unheard of. This matter should be investigated. If indeed Ddamulira Twahir has committed any crime, he should be subjected to the due process of the law. Also, the media should be protected, especially at this point in time, when everyone is claiming that we going scientific, with the media being a critical player in the electoral process. I so pray.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I want to ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to examine the issues relating to Ddamulira Twahir and give us an update by Wednesday next week, since it is an issue of human rights.

I would like to also appeal to all actors that we agreed to go the multi-party route and “multi” means many parties, so we should conduct ourselves in such a way that we are able to accommodate one another. Let people listen to each other and make their choices. 

3.14
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter, which is beyond national importance; it is at international level. 

The Prime Minister of India visited this country and addressed the Parliament of Uganda and the nation. In his communication and gift award, he said that India would build a convention centre in Jinja. This information came from him because of the historical importance of Jinja to the Indian community.

Parliament discussed that issue and the people of Jinja provided land, as part of their contribution from the community in Uganda. However, it has now come to my notice that mafia are changing this pledge and gift, which the Prime Minister of India offered to the people of Jinja, and are now taking it to Entebbe – (Interjection)- I have information. 

Madam Speaker, Government halted all land transactions during the COVID-19 pandemic lockdown. However, the same Government went ahead to subdivide and survey the land. Why did Government stop people from surveying land yet they are doing the same? I would like to lay on the Table a letter from the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development signed by Arthur Akanga, a staff surveyor, calling upon other ministries to send their representatives to be present at the subdividing of the land.

My prayers are that - since hon. Bahati is trying to communicate to the Prime Minister – the Prime Minister should come and respond to this matter. We are not dealing with a simple matter. What if the Prime Minister of India cancels this offer? I, therefore, pray that Government tells the people of Uganda whether they only hate things - (Interruption)  

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Waluswaka. Madam Speaker, during preparations for the Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference, I was part of a team that went to assess works at the source of the Nile. Even after that, in February or March we went back to Jinja. 

I am surprised because we found a wall being built around the place that is supposed to house the convention centre that the Prime Minister of India promised. If Government reached that level, how come they are transferring the construction of that facility to Entebbe? Who is doing this, yet when we were there, we were told the wall was being built for the said convention centre? Who has changed this?

Madam Speaker, we also appropriated money for the development of the source of the Nile, about Shs 2 billion. However, what we found was that they put up a solar system, similar to what Nasser Sebaggala, the former Mayor of Kampala, put on Entebbe Road, but which never worked. People are complaining that the solar poles are weak. The Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities should explain this.

I think the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities should also explain the issue of the convention centre. In fact, this House already directed the honourable Prof. Kamuntu, while he was the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, not to shift the convention centre from the source of Nile to another place.

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Speaker, since the matter is of international concern, let me take information from hon. Sebaggala.

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Waluswaka for giving way.
	
Madam Speaker, I sit on the Committee of Foreign Affairs and we have now and again been asking the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to update us on the progress of that donation from the Prime Minister of India. 

Madam Speaker, the information we are getting is very scanty. We were told that because the Government delayed to implement what was donated, – our side was supposed to provide land – we must now start a new chapter of requesting for that donation to be brought back on board. As we speak, they are saying we never showed interest and they are now done with what they promised. Madam Speaker, this is a very great concern.

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from hon. Wamanga-Wamai, a former diplomat, and then I will come back to hon. Waluswaka.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Uganda is a member of the United Nations and the Commonwealth where India is. When the Prime Minister came here, he visited the source of the Nile. The source of the Nile has a history and that is why he committed himself to building the Mahatma Ghandi Convention Centre there and not in any other place. It is therefore very wrong for the country to come and divert the pledge made by the Prime Minister of India, a very powerful country, to another place. 

This shames Uganda as a country. An individual in this country can make Uganda to be ridiculed. The Indian Government must be wondering what is going on because this was a particular area where they wanted the convention centre to be built. The source of the Nile is very famous and that is a place that attracts tourists.

It is very wrong, Madam Speaker, that the country sits here and diverts the convention centre to Entebbe. We must go back – if action has been taken - to change it back to where the Prime Minister of India made the offer. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, history repeats itself. One day, when I was in a city called Gujarat, the Secretary-General of the ruling party of India, whose name I forgot, reminded the delegation from Uganda that the donation that was given to us by the Prime Minister of India is the biggest gift that India is proud of. This is because they are remembering the remains of Mahatma Ghandi that were poured at the source of the Nile. 

Madam Speaker, I have a request to our Government that whenever projects begin, especially those where there are land issues, they should be resolved quickly. I do not know why Government has taken long to settle these land issues. 

In addition to the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development should come and tell this House why the cartels – The issue of land in Jinja is a result of cartels. Why are cartels failing this wonderful project that is in the memory of not only eastern Uganda but the whole country?

At the same time, the ministers should tell the country why there is a lot of infighting between the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. The Ministry of Internal Affairs deploys security personnel and the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development fights them. The fact is that these two ministries are fighting themselves. I do not know whether they will end in heaven or hell. 

THE SPEAKER: What are they fighting over? Are they fighting over the convention centre? 

MR ABALA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you so much. I would like the whole world to know that the Prime Minister of India was in our Parliament on 25 July 2018. I would like to quote one statement he made. He said, “In our efforts, we will be driven by your priorities. We will keep our doors open and ease trade with Africa. We will deal in digital evolution to improve devolution.”

Madam Speaker, I am not going to read more of the statement. What is important here is: I do not know whether what the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development has done is a priority. What they have done is an injustice to this country. I am happy this friend of mine has come up with this information. It is important that the minister comes here to tell us why they are operating double standards, which are against the development of this country. Thank you.

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Speaker, I am not saying the ministers are incompetent but this pledge was made by the Prime Minister of India. I think the Prime Minister of Uganda should come here – It is good hon. Bahati said he is coming. I hope he will not be told to come because of this issue. He should come and explain why the Government has totally refused to implement the decisions of this House. 

Secondly, we reiterate that the project be done in Jinja and not any other place because the person who donated it knew that there was Entebbe; he came through Entebbe and left through Entebbe but he said the project should be in Jinja. 

Those are my prayers. I would like to lay on the Table the letter from Arthur Akanga from the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, who was instructed to survey the land during the lockdown, against the COVID-19 guidelines. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Waluswaka. Honourable members, this is a very serious issue. The Prime Minister of India spoke to the whole of Africa from this Parliament. All the aid to Africa was pronounced from Kampala, here in our Parliament, and he was clear that the Mahatma Ghandi Convention Centre would be in Jinja. How can anyone try to create a new source of the Nile in Entebbe? The source of the Nile is in Jinja, which is in Busoga. 

I would also like to remind the State about the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy, No. XII, which states:

“(i) The State shall adopt an integrated and coordinated planning approach.

(ii) The State shall take necessary measures to bring about balanced development of the different areas of Uganda and between the rural and urban areas.”

Is removing the convention centre from Jinja and taking it to Entebbe part of this integrated planning? In February, when the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development came, she was evasive about what was happening on this issue. I think the people of Uganda deserve to know what is happening.

The Prime Minister should come next week and inform the people of Uganda that the Mahatma Ghandi Convention Centre is going to be constructed in Entebbe and not at the source of the Nile where the Prime Minister wanted it to be. On Tuesday, we want information on that matter from the Government. 

Hon. Avur, did you have something burning? Please, present it quickly then we shall go back to the items on the Order Paper. I will also amend the Order Paper to allow the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to respond to an issue of the sugarcane crisis in Busoga Region.

MS AVUR: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I rise on a procedural matter. On several occasions, you gave me the opportunity to raise issues concerning floods that have destroyed the livelihoods of the people of Pakwach and many other parts of this country. 

I did not only mention homesteads that have been demolished, crops that have been destroyed but I also mentioned that the impact of the rising water is so imminent on the people of Pakwach such that it has resulted into illness in the form of skin diseases. This started in a few villages but it has spread to other villages along the Nile. 

Madam Speaker, my prayers were very clear and you ordered that the Ministry of Health should go to Pakwach and investigate the skin diseases - the cause and what could be done. As I stand here, nothing has been done at all. Our people have not got any support yet. 

I appreciate Government’s support in terms of relief to many Ugandans but the people of Pakwach are still waiting for the Ministry of Health officials and support from Office of the Prime Minister as well as the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. Some of the worms that we think are coming as a result of the rising water are even destroying the crops. The people are threatened and are scared to consume especially cassava flour because the worms attack and destroy the cassava.

My prayer is that Government moves very fast and tries to intervene. We thought that coronavirus was a Chinese thing but here we are with it today. The skin disease may seem to be a Pakwach thing but may spread elsewhere. 

I also pray that this Parliament sends the Committee on Water and Environment to Pakwach to see for themselves the level of destruction. It is beyond the 200 metres and beyond what the law requires.

I was talking to the Minister of State for Water and Environment this afternoon. She said that there is a lot of water being released from Jinja; it is not rainfall. Our people are immensely suffering. I pray.

The Speaker: Honourable members, this is a serious issue and it has been recurrent on the Floor of this House. First, we shall ask our Committee on Natural Resources – Does the Minister of Internal Affairs have an answer? You are welcome.

3.31
The minister OF internal affairs (Gen. Jeje Odongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Colleagues, the matter raised by the honourable member is a pertinent one. 

I would like to take this opportunity to inform you that one of the reasons I came late is because I have just been in a meeting on this matter. Government insists that we are finalising a plan to respond to the issue of persons affected by the rising levels of water countrywide. Therefore, the plan is in place. It is being finalised and action is to be taken soon.

The Speaker: Thank you. The Ministry of Health was supposed to address the impact on the skin. It is said that there is a new disease arising from that situation.

Gen. Odongo: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I said, a plan is being finalised. It is not only going to be a question of movement but it will also address the effects of the rise of water levels on human beings like food, housing and health. It is a comprehensive plan.

The Speaker: Thank you. When you have completed, please let us know. 

We are now supposed to go to item No.3 but yesterday, we asked our committee to look at a few areas of difficulty, so we shall go to item No.4.

MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION OF THE PUBLIC PROCUREMENT AND DISPOSAL OF PUBLIC ASSETS (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2020 THAT WAS RETURNED BY H.E. THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

3.32    
The Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (Amendment) Bill, 2020” as returned by the President on 9 July 2020 be reconsidered by this House. 

I hereby lay on the Table a copy of the Bill as passed by this House and also the letter of His Excellency the President as you previously read to this House. I beg to move.

The Speaker: Honourable members, the Bill and letter are referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and report back.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE FIELD VISIT REPORT ON THE PERFORMANCE OF NEWLY CREATED ADMINISTRATIVE UNITS (DISTRICTS)

The Speaker: Honourable members, on Tuesday, the Chairperson of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government presented here a report and we said we would find time for discussion. You are now free to comment.

Mr nandala-mafabi: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The procedural issue I am raising is that the chairperson just laid the papers on the Table but he did not read the report. I had thought that the chairperson –

The Speaker: Can the chairperson give the highlights quickly?

3.34
The Chairperson, Committee on Public Service and Local Government (Mr Godfrey Onzima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As hon. Nandala-Mafabi has said, these reports were just laid on the Table of Parliament. They were not read, so I would like to highlight some few areas, which I think are serious issues.

This report was to assess the performance of newly created administrative units, see their opportunities and challenges they face. I would like to proceed to observations, findings and recommendations; that is page 5.

1. Sharing of Assets
Section 188 of the Local Governments Act provides that when a new administrative unit is breaking away from a major one, they are supposed to share the assets and liabilities. However, it was reported that most times when the new administrative units break away, they either go with nothing or if they go with some items like vehicles and motorcycles, the ones they go with are those that break down or are in bad mechanical condition.

Therefore, we provide in the recommendation that when new administrative units are created, during the time of separation the Ministry of Local Government should ensure supervision of the sharing of these assets to avoid situations where most of them go without anything.

2. Lack of Fairness and Equity in Payment of Salaries of Public Servants 
This emanated from the pay enhancement plan. Government had moved ahead to ensure that this was supposed to be implemented in a phased manner and would go on for a period of five years. However, some employees are being considered but many that would have come in the subsequent years have not been considered. This has caused a lot of problems. Therefore, we also feel that Government should honour its promise.



3. Critical Staffing Gaps in Local Governments
Most of the districts we went to had serious problems with staffing levels. Most of the areas that were affected included heads of departments, town clerks, subcounty and parish chiefs.

In some areas, there are people who have been acting and some of them have acted beyond the provisions of the law. According to the law, one is supposed to act for only six months. However, some of them have acted for more than 10 years without being appointed or confirmed. Therefore, we feel that the Ministry of Public Service should move in line with the law.

4. Automation and Modernisation of Management Systems of Government to Enhance Administrative Processes to More Efficient Service Friendly Processes
According to the National Development Plan II, Government undertook automation of Government processes, which was enshrined in the E-governance initiative. The challenge we realised on the ground was that this was not being done in every district. Some of the districts had serious challenges with issues to do with Integrated Personnel and Payroll Systems (IPPS) and Integrated Financial Management Systems (IFMIS). Some had to go to other districts for this service or sometimes travel up to Kampala.

This is a challenge. Government should ensure that when a new innovation is put in place, there should be preparation of the ground for every area in the country such that all the local governments benefit and should not face these kinds of challenges. 

Operationalisation of Town Councils and Sub Counties 
We realised there were a lot of challenges. Government has failed to give money to fully operationalise some of these town councils and sub counties. However, the Electoral Commission has gone ahead to organise interim elections in these administrative units, yet these political leaders are hanging without any administrative support. 

The challenge here is that the mother sub counties and town councils have considered these as already independent entities that should manage without support from them. Therefore, this has led to neglect in terms of service delivery; they have been left outside. 

Secondly, there are also cases where monies have been sent as start-up funds but because there is no town clerk, sub county chief or accounts assistant, these monies are being misused. There are also a number of other problems. 

Therefore, we felt that if Government cannot fully operationalise all these sub counties and town councils – when we looked at the money, which is over Shs 200 billion, we, as a committee, came up with recommendations that Government should go and institute at least three persons; it could be a town clerk, a sub county chief, an office assistant and also an accounts assistant so that they are in place. 

This is because the issue to do with the development fund is based on population. If that is adopted, it will require around Shs 50 billion. We also advise Government to look into that because much as these new administrative units and political leaders are there, there are no staff. Of course, if we look at all this, it affects everybody. 



Retention of funds meant for local government services at the Centre: 
Madam Speaker, this was a very serious challenge. We were not happy with this practice in most of the districts we visited. For example, on the money meant for construction of one kilometre, if given to local governments, construction of one kilometre of a road will cost Shs 25 million. However, for most of the roads constructed by the Centre, on behalf of local governments, one kilometre costs around Shs 43 million, which is almost twice the cost a local government will incur. 

Construction of two classroom blocks by districts will cost Shs 106 million. Meanwhile the one from the Centre would cost Shs 240 million. Therefore, they said, to them, this is a lot of money that would have resulted into a number of constructions. 

Secondly, there is the issue of ownership. Some of the roads constructed lack maintenance because they are looked at as the Central Government roads. Therefore, our recommendation is that all the monies meant for local government activities be taken directly to the local governments. 

Improvement of coordination and strengthening of deepening the centralisation, I will leave that and go straight to coordination of inspections.
One other major challenge we realised was inspection, which was done in a fragmented manner. The districts complained that each time they receive inspectors, in a week, they may have different inspectors for different departments. They had said that the Minister of Local Government could go ahead and streamline inspections so that the inspections are coordinated from one central point. There could also be a specific period given for the different inspectors to do their inspection at once. 

Challenges in Budget Execution
They said that sometimes, they return a lot of money to the Consolidated Fund due to delays in clearance from the Ministry of Public Service and the Solicitor-General in processes of procurement. They urged us to present this and suggest the reviewing of the procurement process, which normally delays their executions. 

I think the issue of enhancement of salaries was talked about. 

Madam Speaker, I, therefore, would like to beg the House to adopt this report. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Can we have some comments? 

3.45
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the report of the committee. I agree that looking at the new districts and administrative units, most of us have seen what happens there. 

On the staffing, I would like to use the example of the Department of Education. You find that the district education officer or the district inspector of schools, as mentioned in the report, earns a smaller salary than the head teacher. How do you supervise this person who earns more than you? What happens now is that when the district education officer or the inspector comes and you have got UPE, he asks for “kitu kidogo.” 

I think there is need for the ministry to consider a review of this. One cannot call himself a boss when he is supervising somebody who earns more than him. It will be a compromise. 

The other issue is the acting. We have gone to districts – I think at one time, we were in Buliisa, where you have one CDO running all the development programmes; he runs for the sub county, health, education and is also in charge of Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. That is one man and there are no deputy CDOs in those districts. I think that is a critical issue. 

Even the issue of the District Service Commission in some of the districts is not available. Therefore, they will tell you that they do not have a District Service Commission and they cannot conduct interviews to employ the required staff.
 
Madam Speaker, when we create these districts, we need to think of all the infrastructure and not just politics. This is because the political heads will be there but you find a district with no district hospital or school and you find the local people are not concerned about the projects, like Seed Secondary Schools, going on. People claim it is a ministry issue or an issue of UNRA. 

Why did we come up with decentralisation if we are not taking care of the local governments? Local governments have become redundant. I think we need to review the policy of decentralisation. If we think that the Central Government should take over, then, let the people know, other than calling them local governments when they do not have any authority. 

I would like to beg that, as the report has indicated, most of the ownership of projects – projects are dying. You find a project in a bush and the local government team tells you that they are not responsible and were not given any guidelines. Some of our people that go from Kampala here go to supervise and ignore the local government. 
I met a chairman in one of districts, whom I am not going to mention, who said he does not know how the Seed Secondary Schools operate and what happens to them but they are just seeing buildings. He also said that people always come and even when the contractor has left the site, they do not have an answer. 

Therefore, I think we need to be coordinated, as Government. Otherwise, we are wasting a lot of money. As the chairperson has said, what you would use in the district is much cheaper than what you have weighed - someone moving to a district and getting allowances and also using a lot of money. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to beg that we review the decentralisation policy and give people power. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, on the Seed Secondary Schools, the contracts are issued from Kampala. The leaders just see contractors coming to start work.

3.48
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On page 8 of the report, the committee notes that there were some start-up funds, which were given to some administrative units but these monies were misused because there were no accounting officers. My question is, why would monies be released to these administrative units if there were no accounting officers? Was it intentional by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development? Is it some kind of connivance for the misuse of this money?

Honourable Chairperson, how do we recover this money - because you acknowledged that it was misused? Therefore, how do we recover the money to be used for the right purpose?

Secondly, as I move in my communities, I notice that it is true that the new sub counties have electoral structures in place but the finances are not available. I appeal to this House that we avail the Shs 230.9 billion to operationalise the 352 town councils and 364 sub counties countrywide. When we traverse our communities, the caretakers or the voters in these areas wish that the new executive units be operationalised.
 
Madam Speaker, on the double cost of doing work like the constructions that the committee quoted, for instance, they talked of a kilometre at the centre being constructed at a cost of Shs 43 million compared to Shs 25 million at the local government. Honourable Chairperson, I would like to find out what reason you established for the variance. Why would we have the local governments doing it at a cheaper price and it doubles when it is done by the Centre? Is it because of the distance? What reasons did you find out for the double costs in construction if the work is done by the Centre? 

Finally, on the issue of the ex-gratia or the allowance that is given to the local councils I and II, when we move in the communities, they request that this allowance be scaled up because it is Shs 120,000 and that means that they are earning Shs 10,000 per month. It is their request that the allowance be scaled up. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I do not know whether the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development or the Minister of Public Service, what some districts do, they aggregate it and then tax it. 

3.51
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. Starting a new district is quite challenging and I would like to use the example of Amudat District. When we were curved out of Nakapiripirit District, they only gave us one old vehicle, which same vehicle had also been given to Nakapiripirit District by Moroto District when it was curved out of Moroto. 

I used to be in the education office that time and whenever we would use this vehicle, it normally broke down on the way and we would abandon it in the bush and walk back to the district headquarters. 

Issues of monitoring schools, health facilities or projects in the district was a very big problem. There is also the problem of office space in the new districts. During our time, about eight staff would crowd in one office; furniture was a problem and computers were also a problem. Therefore, preparing reports, budgets and work plans was problematic; yet, all these facilities are needed if people are to perform their expected duties.

The issue of staffing is a very big problem. If not addressed, we would be deceiving ourselves because people double roles in the new districts. For example, in my district, that time, a CDO would also double as clerk to council and you can guess what type of services you expect from an officer who is over worked.

Madam Speaker, there is need for Government to provide these new districts with start-up capital. Already, it is there on page 8, which hon. Khainza talked about. However, the issue of accountability of these funds is a big problem. I sit on the Committee on Public Accounts and many of the entities complain about this integrated financial management system. Therefore, with these start-up funds provided to the new districts, there is need to help them so that they are able to account for the funds given to them.

Finally, the Ministry of Local Government should give support supervision to these new districts. They need guidance if we are to expect service delivery. I thank you.

3.55
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You are aware that Kassanda is a new district that was split from Mubende. The issue of sharing assets is a very big one. Kassanda District was given an old grader, which has spent all the money. It is repaired and after three days, the grader breaks down. It came at a time when we had just acquired road units.

On many occasions, I have come to you about this matter of road units in the new districts. It is a critical matter, which we desire that the Ministry of Works and Transport addresses very quickly because some of the districts have money lying on their accounts and they do not have graders. The Ministry of Works and Transport tells them to go and borrow a grader and that is quite challenging. 

At the time of formation, Kassanda District took over the space for Kassanda Sub County, and Kassanda Sub County was asked to construct new headquarters. However, the money provided to Kassanda Sub County to construct new headquarters was insufficient. To date, Kassanda Sub County has no headquarter, yet it is a sub county that was displaced by the district.

Madam Speaker, as the Ministry of Local Government works out all these, these are things that can be budgeted for well, so that the money allocated for start-up is put into consideration.

We have three town councils created in Kassanda Sub County. The sub counties are already functional without any budget and now the Electoral Commission has worsened the situation by preparing elections of sub county chairpersons and the rest of the leaders for those sub counties without money.

This is a matter that needs to be addressed by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development together with the Ministry of Local Government immediately. This is a new financial year; we are going into elections and we are going to have leaders, who cannot perform their duties.

Madam Speaker, the start-up funds need to be monitored by the Ministry of Local Government so that this money is not just left for people to use as they wish and much of it is being stolen; there is evidence to that.

THE SPEAKER: Aren’t your two minutes up?

MR NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, let me finish with the issue of roads.

THE SPEAKER: No, your two minutes are up.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, on the issue of roads, I would like to disagree with the committee. The roads local governments make, mostly, they do bush clearing. However, the roads made by the Ministry of Works and Transport - for instance, we have two sets of 10-kilometre stretches that have been done by the Ministry of Works and Transport in Kalwana and the other in Kassanda Sub County. When you compare the two roads, the quality is very different. Unless the committee says that local government should be given money – (Member timed out.)

3.59
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FCD, Woman Representative, Agago): Madam Speaker, I will address myself to the issue of the newly created town councils and sub counties.

THE SPEAKER: But you have undressed, hon. Akello. (Laughter) Please, put on your mask.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your guidance. The matter I would like to address myself to regards the newly created town councils and sub counties. 

In Agago District alone, we have six newly created sub counties and four town councils. These units have been operating for the last two years without any funding. Moreover, they were launched officially. The Electoral Commission has also conducted some interim elections that put in place leadership to care-take of these units. 

These sub counties have been excluded from the budget of the current taskforce addressing the issues of COVID-19. It is very unfortunate that the interim caretakers in office are not being facilitated at all. 

I would, therefore, like to request and reiterate the point of the committee that the ministry looks into this seriously and expeditiously tries to address it. I will propose to amend one of the recommendations of the committee at the end of my submission. 

Secondly, I used the example of Agago District. It is not one of the newly created districts. Whereas Agago District is now 10 years old, we do not have a district hospital nor do we have a health centre IV facility yet there are two constituencies. The policy states that each constituency should have a health centre IV. If Agago District does not have any of these facilities, it is possible that the whole country is suffering from the same. 

Finally, I would like to propose an amendment to the committee recommendation that the Ministry of Local Government comes up with a supplementary budget within this financial year so that the ministry of finance and operationalises all the newly created sub counties and town councils. 

We created these sub counties and town councils in this Parliament. Therefore, this Parliament and Government must provide the money to operationalise all these sub counties and town councils. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Alum, hon. Ochen and hon. Basalirwa. Can we keep it to two minutes each?

4.03
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Please, allow me to add my voice to hon. Franca Akello’s. The committee looked at only the newly created districts but my district was created a very long time ago, in 2006. However, we still find a problem with some of the town councils and some of the sub counties, which are not attended to by the Ministry of Local Government or the Central Government. This causes a very big problem to the people working at the local governments, including the local councils and some of the critical staff at the lower level.

I join hon. Akello to say that as a Parliament, we pronounce ourselves on this issue not only to create vacancies for political leaders but also for the technical personnel. 

For us to extend services to the grassroots, we need to come up with a budget. It is good that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is represented here. At the end of it all, we need money for these newly created sub counties and town councils. 
Secondly, Madam Speaker, allow me to mention something on the issue of the projects by the Centre and by the local government. I would like to start with roads. Most of the local governments have more kilometres to cover than the Centre. A case in point is Oyam District. Most of our roads are supposed to be worked on by the local government but the amount of money, which we are given, is very little compared to the money, which is given to the Centre. 

These roads go a long way to help the community people and we need to find a way of making sure that the local governments are strengthened. 

Another example is the health centres. We have health centres – (Member timed out.)

4.05
MR JULIUS OCHEN (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Kapelebyong): Madam Speaker, today is a very important day for the people of this country when Parliament takes time to look at issues affecting local governments. If we are to address what is affecting local governments, issue number one that this Parliament should look into is the issue of reviewing the decentralisation policy. 

I remember immediately after the Constituent Assembly debate, this country was given an option to try decentralisation. There was the understanding that in case decentralisation did not work, the country would revert to the centre. Indeed, Madam Speaker, all that is happening on the ground, whether infrastructure or staffing gaps on the ground, the Central Government has not been in position to give resources that are commensurate to the local government to deliver services on the ground. That is the major problem and yet a lot of money remains at the Centre.

The new administrative units can only survive and function if the Central Government releases resources that can enable them to function well. 

The second issue that I would like to bring here is that of resources that the Centre gets from the World Bank. For instance, we have a project of secondary schools that the Government poured a lot of money into and local governments were not allowed to get close. It is over 10 years and they are standing incomplete. These projects are all over the country and local governments are suffering with students, laboratories are not complete and nobody from the Ministry of Education and Sports is coming out to explain what happened to the money that was injected into secondary education.  

In Amuria District, before Kapelebyong was split from it, we had a gap of 447 primary school teachers, yet when auditors come – the audit report that the Parliamentary committee looked at, the auditor said most local governments have failed to meet the minimum standards to operationalise primary schools all over the country.

The health centres are facing similar problems.

Madam Speaker, the ministry should come here to explain the required minimum – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Let us have hon. Basalirwa, hon. Galiwango, hon. Mukitale, hon. Baba and hon. Aogon – (Members rose_) – There is another paper on local government. Maybe I will see you on the next one. You know we have very many.

4.09
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the committee for their report. On the issue of sharing property, the Local Governments Act is very clear: the new and old establishments are supposed to share property equally. 

Unfortunately, usually, when there is a new establishment being created, there is no inventory and the minister does not take it upon himself or herself to ensure that there is an inventory. What happens is that the decision on what to give away is made by the old establishment and this is where the problem has been. 

As part of the recommendation, the committee would advise that before the sharing of property is undertaken, a proper inventory is made to ascertain what is available and it is on the basis of that inventory that property will be shared. 

Madam Speaker, if that is not done, we will continue with this idea of old establishments determining which kind of vehicles to give away and in most cases, they give away old ones. In the case of any equipment, it is the old that is given. Unless that is done, we will continue to have the problem of unequal distribution of property. (Member timed out.)

4.10
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Committee on Public Service and Local Government. Even as we continue waiting for the comprehensive national dialogue, the Seventh Parliament, in its wisdom, provided a cure for the dysfunctionality of devolution under decentralisation in Article 178 of the Constitution when they provided for regional governments. 

Indeed, COVID-19 has reminded us that you require functional regional referral hospitals. The floods have just reminded us that we need regional engineering brigades so that if Buliisa is flooding, at a regional level, the nine Bunyoro districts can use the regional tier arrangement to address the problem. 

This is constitutional. You know areas like Busoga, Bunyoro and others are already deemed to have formed regional governments. I think we should have implemented that yesterday, as a solution.

The second proposal, is on the issue of procurements. Regional governments would do procurements for Seed Secondary Schools of Busoga, Lango and Bukedi. Why should Kampala do a procurement for Buliisa without giving us the necessary arrangement? All these questions of equal opportunities could be addressed under regional tier governments.

The other question that my neighbour from Pakwach has just been reporting is that when the water flooded Jinja from Lake Victoria – and Semiliki and Rwenzori – the gateway is Buliisa. Ten years ago, we made this country a planning area, through the Physical Planning Act. 

Madam Speaker, we voted money here through a World Bank loan for town councils, 10 years ago. The physical plan for Wanseko-Butiaba is there, yet these areas are flooding and now, we have a problem of relocating people - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute for hon. Mukitale.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, we can now have regional cities – and by the way, the regional cities were also supposed to be part of the regional governments, under Article 178. We should then make it a must that these town councils – the Tenth Parliament would have made a very big mistake if the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development does not finance all the town councils. 

The Physical Planning Act, making the whole country a planning area, is not possible if you do not have the technical people and the financing of these areas. We also need to consolidate land for production elsewhere and land for settlement of the people somewhere. 

Again, COVID-19 has reminded us that we have not been financing the land sector in physical planning, settlement and housing and that is why zero distancing is even a problem.
Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.14
MS CONNIE NAKAYENZE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for the good report. My major area of concern is on page 9, where the retention of funds meant for local governments is at the Centre. 

In the third paragraph, it is learnt that most of the projects that are planned by the local governments are at the lower costs and the ones at the Centre are at higher costs. Even then, the kind of work done from the Centre is substandard.

Is it a deliberate move by some of these technical officers to do substandard work? For example, most of the school buildings are cracked and, in some cases, the older schools are stronger than the newly constructed ones. Is this value for money and yet the Centre still retains the money? We really need to get an answer on why the money is retained yet the work done is substandard.

Madam Speaker, when we look at the infrastructure, it is quite unfortunate that you can get to a new district and wonder where the district headquarter is when you are within the district headquarters. You go to a town council and wonder whether it is some kind of slum. There is money that could be disbursed for the development of these town councils. 

If they have not done any studies, let them not create these districts if they know they are not going to do it because it is a shame – (Member timed out.)

4.14
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have one main issue to raise. I know for a fact that under the Public Finance Management Act, unspent money at the end of the financial year, should be returned to the Consolidated Fund. We agreed on that and it is in the law. 

However, Government must look at this very seriously now because of the dilapidating effects this is causing to local governments. You are a new district, entity or town council, you are given money for the financial year and as you are yet setting up on your feet, the year ends and you are obliged to return the money to the Consolidated Fund. Is the Government really trying to help these entities to set themselves up or punish them?

I appeal to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and to Government to reconsider this policy. At least, let us extend the refund of this money up to, say, September to allow local entities to complete the schools, health centres or rural roads within those months. 

Madam Speaker, this is a matter of concern to many local governments and actually, the issue cuts across ministries, departments and agencies. Money unspent at the end of the financial year must be returned, when there are plans and activities, which are still being undertaken and needed time to complete yet, they are cut off and obliged to return the money. (Member timed out.)

4.18
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report.

On the operationalisation of these new administrative units, the timeline is very confusing. In my constituency, I have four new sub counties; two of them have been captured by the Electoral Commission, where elections are going to take place in the forthcoming general elections. The other two are not captured yet the district has posted there skeleton technical staff, who are already working. The sub counties are purportedly to be operational. 

However, when it comes to elections, the Electoral Commission has not captured these new town councils. I wonder if we have these new town councils; those that have not been captured – in Paya Sub County, I have two new sub counties. One is called Sere and the other is Nawire. Those that have been captured are Katajula and Soni. The question I am raising is, if these administrative units have not been captured by the Electoral Commission, how are we going to conduct elections in these sub counties? 

Secondly, on the issue of implementation of programmes directed by the centre, which has been raised by the committee, I think there is need to evaluate the performance of the decentralisation system because there is a lot of frustration. Most of the money sent directly to the districts is not effectively utilised to provide services to the community. For example, the water sector. You realise that whereas the Ministry of Water and Environment takes water and repairs the boreholes, the districts do not repair boreholes. It has now become the responsibility of the members of Parliament to take care of - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know, there is a practice that the money is released in May, just before the end of the financial year and the local governments have no time to use it; so, it must come back.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, when hon. Waluswaka rose, he asked who is in charge and hon. Bahati assumed powers of being the Leader of Government Business. The matters we are discussing are very pertinent. Just when we started the debate, hon. Bahati disappeared. I thought he was going for nature’s call but now, we do not see him. I saw his books being picked. He has actually gone.
Secondly, Madam Speaker, we do not see the Minister of Local Government.

THE SPEAKER: No. She is available.

MR OKUPA: Okay. On the issue of finances, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development - like the issue you raised, Madam Speaker – hon. Bahati was the acting Leader of Government Business and he should have been here to pick those issues.

THE SPEAKER: May I know who is taking charge of the Government side now? Ministry of Internal Affairs -

4.21
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Jeje Odongo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank hon. Okupa for raising this matter.

I thought it was only logical to say that the eldest takes charge. I am the most senior minister here.

THE SPEAKER: So, you will be accountable for what has happened today.  

4.21
MR HILLARY LOKWANG (NRM, Ik County, Kaabong): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank the committee for the report. However, the local governments are crippling and gambling. 

When you see the state of roads – yesterday, I sent pictures of roads in Ik County. You cannot access Ik County, now. The roads have turned into rivers and gullies. Trees have fallen on the roads. In fact, these roads have never been graded for the last 20 years. You can imagine, for the last 20 financial years, we have been approving a lot of money but nothing goes to Ik.

The issue of budget cuts – sometimes, money is taken back to the Centre and yet it is released late, which makes local governments work under pressure. The money is returned and even sometimes, it disappears in air.

On the issue of the road equipment, Government gave road equipment but in Karamoja Sub Region, the centre is in Gulu, which is over stretched. Karamoja Sub Region needs equipment like bulldozers. We borrow from Gulu and even Mbale borrows from Gulu. This is also a challenge.

The other issue is the state of health. In Kaabong District, there is no ambulance. My car is all we have, which runs the whole district. Otherwise, there is no ambulance in Kaabong District. Even the one given by - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Since you represent the minority, conclude in one minute. 

MR LOKWANG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the issue of coding of schools – I have four community schools and two Government aided schools.

We have been writing letters to the ministry. In fact, these schools only stop at primary three. Children move 40 Kilometres, to look for schools that have up to primary five, six and seven. Some of these schools do not even have houses for teachers. You find two teachers sharing one room. It is, indeed, very sad. I hope the Ministry of Local Government will improve its services. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, you recall that some time back, I had instructed that the areas especially where the minorities like the Ik, Batwa and the others are should be having a special report on education, health and all services. Now, you can see the regional office of that area - Acholi, West Nile and others is in Gulu. That is really a serious issue. 

4.25
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, there is no doubt in my mind that the decentralisation policy needs to be urgently reviewed. The districts, sub counties, municipalities and town councils are economically stranded because they do not have the financial muscle to move forward.
    
In Kumi today, at the Health Centre IV, a building, which was put in place for a theatre has taken 12 years without funding to procure equipment. The mothers are suffering. We transport them to Mbale and Soroti all the time. What is Government doing about this?

Secondly, on the issue of sharing the national cake, in terms of procurement, everything to do with Operation Wealth Creation and NAADS, the inputs are transported from Kampala to Kumi yet, we have people who can supply them. Why do we have such a thing, in Uganda, if we are under decentralisation?

Madam Speaker, people are talking about automation; they brought what they call Integrated Financial Management Systems. However, when we used to work in the local government, I think we were quicker than the automation we are talking about now. What is wrong with these current systems of Government? We must do something about this. Let decentralisation not be cosmetic in nature. We cannot accept that.

The road that runs between Kumi and Ngora is in a dilapidated state yet this is a Central Government road. What is wrong? Push the money to Kumi and see whether we shall fail to work on those roads. (Member timed out.)

4.27
MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report.

My main concern is to request the team from the Ministry of Local Government to always go on the ground. In Otuke, for example, the roof of the main administration building, where the RDC office is located, is about to collapse. When it rains, there is a leakage. The wall itself has cracks. Then, you wonder how the engineer was chosen. Sometimes, it looks as if the engineer was just picked from the streets. We normally use the words, “he never went to school” to describe him. So, you wonder how such a thing could happen in our country.

In the new sub counties, instead of putting six or eight rooms in the new administration buildings for the LC3 offices, you find the engineer has only built a half of the total rooms. People are sharing rooms. The new sub counties, which were created some years back still have meetings under the mango trees. The meetings seem like negotiations for a traditional marriage and not for Government officials. 

So, the Ministry of Local Government should always send people to the ground. I think they have forgotten. You see, when you are seated in Kampala here, you may not know that things on the ground are not looking good. It does not sound well.

Madam Speaker, this country is very blessed. The way I look at it, we have a lot more money than any other country on this planet. We are very blessed but we use money in the wrong way. Thank you very much. 

4.30
MS C.D. OKETAYOT LOWILA (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Madam Speaker, I join my colleagues to thank the committee for the report. I would like to note that the challenges highlighted in the committee report are not limited to the newly created districts. Take, for instance, Pader District, which was curved out of Kitgum District in 2000; it will be 20 years old in December this year. However, it has no district hospital. The district has never had a substantively appointed District Health Officer, District Education Officer and Chief Finance Officer. 

We all agree that we need these administrative units to take services closer to our people because the population keeps growing day and night. I would like to, however, agree with my colleagues and emphasise the issue of having a comprehensive review of the decentralisation policy. As I said, these issues are not limited to the newly created districts. There are many challenges that our people are experiencing that we cannot exhaust in this debate. We recommend that we go ahead to review the decentralisation policy. (Member timed out.)

4.32
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for the good report. 

Local governments are bleeding financially. The most challenging issue is the money. I do not know whether this is done deliberately by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The ministry switches off the system by 26 June every year. Money is sent a week to 26 June and the local governments are expected to spend it within one week, which is practically impossible. 

This creates disservice to our people. Some of the projects, which are very critical, have now been taken back to the Central Government. On issues to do with procurements, they are only given orders: “This one is from Central Government; do not touch it”. These are some of the projects in the districts that are not completed to-date. 

There is need for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to redesign the way it remits money to these local governments. For example, some of these local governments commit money to certain projects but before they complete them, the financial year has come to an end and the finance ministry has taken back the money. Where does this money go if in the new financial year, they are not reimbursed? We need to ask the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to review this policy.

Otherwise, the local governments are struggling and the biggest problem is that the way the ministry operates does not favour – (Member timed out.)

4.34
MR EDWARD OTTO (Independent, Agago County, Agago): Madam Speaker, allow me add my voice to those thanking the committee for a good report. With respect to health, in Agago, I would like to be specific that we are operating as a district with a Health Centre III. We have had a theatre for over 10 years, which has not been operationalised to upgrade the health centre to a Health Centre IV. Part of the money has been put in but the theatre is not operational. 

Madam Speaker, Lapirin Health Centre, for over three years, has failed to perform because of poor management. The oversight work by the District Council is made difficult because of the problem of the 20 per cent of locally raised revenue. It is very difficult in these remote areas to try to get money to even make the district councils operate. 

I attended a District Council meeting on 30 April and there were many problems with the District Council to the extent that many people have said that they do not want to serve in the next Council because of the problems they are facing. 

In respect to education, Agago used to be a leader in Acholi Sub Region in education but it is now in a sorry state. We are always now amongst the last districts because education has now been commercialised. If there is no intervention with some sort of special funds for the hard-to-reach places like Agago, which is almost in Karamoja and it is very far from Gulu, it is going to be very difficult for us to make the progress that we desire.

I know people have talked about the roads. In addition to that, most of these headquarters do not even have plastic chairs. The members of Parliament have to provide them. There are no rooms for the District Council members to sit. Water is a very big problem because we actually border Karamoja; we are the last district before you – 

My prayer is that Government should bring some projects and factories to the districts. Otherwise, if you compare these rural districts to Kampala City Council and other municipalities, you will realise we are really doing badly. We need money for many of these things to work. 

Obviously, a supplementary budget needs to be brought before we go into elections. There should be a specific timeline; maybe in two weeks. We should not leave this hanging because we are in a very sorry state. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.37
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (Independent, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I join my colleagues in thanking the committee for the report and the recommendations. 

I would like to agree with the committee on all the recommendations and my submission is just for emphasis. The committee talked about the start-up capital that is usually given to the newly created districts. Kween District is nearly 10 years but we have never received this start-up capital. We have tried to follow up but there is nothing forthcoming. I would like to ask Government that this fund should not be given discriminatively. Please, give funds to the districts equally. 

Secondly, I would like to talk about the road equipment that we have. We are grateful that we have the equipment but we do not have funds to manage it. We have issues that are peculiar to specific areas like mine. Sebei is mountainous and we do not have murram to use on these roads. 

However, the funding is minimal. It has remained constant coupled with what the committee is talking about, the Community Agriculture Infrastructure Improvement Programme (CAIIP) roads, which were opened. They have been abandoned. 

Madam Speaker, when you go to Sebei, you cannot move. We are now being castigated left and right that the members of Parliament are not doing anything; that they are not lobbying for funds. I would like to ask Government to take up this matter and give us more funds so that we can continue working on these roads. 

On the issue of the newly created sub-counties and town councils, I would like to - (Member timed out.) 

4.39
MR FRANCIS GONAHASA (FDC, Kabweri County, Kibuku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have been lamenting. I think that is the right word to use. Many years ago, we had a Constitution, which detailed how new structures should be made. I remember when Bukedi District, where I come from, was being divided into Kibuku and Budaka, we questioned what the guideline of the Constitution was. 

Unfortunately, the creation of all these structures has become very political and until we go back to the basics - you do not just create administrative structures when you do not have the means to support them. 

We have got districts, which have been in existence for the last 20 years but there is nothing. I remember about two years ago, I said in this House that if it is part of the constitutional obligation of Government to create a sub county and give it a Seed Secondary School and a health centre III, let it be.

However, we are now just creating structures everywhere and this is going to be the problem. There is communication that we are looking at about another 14 new counties and maybe another 42 units. We should look at ourselves as a nation; we are the leaders. We should give ourselves the time to make good what we have already created. For example, we passed seven cities the other day. I do not know whether we are able to even set them up as cities. 

Therefore, the challenge is to us and especially Cabinet. Cabinet has already approved another 14. Honestly, Cabinet passes things and brings them to us. We all stand here and say, “Aye” when today, we have been saying it cannot work. Let us do the best we can – (Member timed out.)

4.42
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here to thank the committee for the good report and also to state the fact that Buhweju is another hard-to-reach and hard-to-stay area. 

Unfortunately, when road equipment is being given out, I think the responsible ministry does not look at which area they send the equipment. Consider Kasese or Buhweju, which are very difficult to reach and they are given the same equipment like the flat areas. Subsequently, it becomes very difficult to manage the equipment in hilly areas. 

Secondly, the CAIIP roads that were opened then - like somebody said - are now impassable. The district cannot manage them because it is very difficult for them. They do not have the fuel. 

Finally, the sub counties that were created in Buhweju, Buhunga, Kyahenda, Rubengye and the town councils - Nyakashaka and Nyakaziba - are not financed. The local Governments are suffering. Therefore, the responsible ministries need to come out now and not the other day and we see how to help our people. Otherwise, it is not a matter of creating administrative units for purposes of people thinking, “We were given a district, town council or sub county,” when we cannot maintain them. 

The basis should be for services to get nearer to the people but currently, there are districts without services. They end up looking at members of Parliament. People think it is the members of Parliament who have failed to perform or lobby yet, it is the ministries that are failing us. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.44
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank Government for the six town councils, which they extended to my constituency and these are: Ibanda-kyanya, Mubuku, Maliba, Rugendabala- Kikongo, Kitswamba, and Kabatunda-Kirabaho. I am still pushing for three more, namely Katoke in Bugoye Sub County, Kithoma in Buhuhira Sub County and Kyatoka-Kamwani in Bwesumba Sub County. 

First of all, my argument is that Government must work out a mechanism of making these local governments self-sustaining. Most of these areas do not have access to power but once power is extended to a number of areas, there is usually a stimulus of small-scale industries or medium scale enterprises, coffee processing plants and maybe, milling machines coming up. All these could help such areas especially the upcoming town councils and sub counties to be able to collect taxes. 

The main challenge that I have seen in our operations is that we are thinking too much in making sure that the funds go to Government and yet – (Member timed out.)

4.46 
MS JANE AVUR (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the committee for the good report. 

Allow me to speak on two challenges that the local governments are facing in implementation of the different Government programmes. In particular, I would like to make reference to the Women Fund and the Youth Livelihood Fund. These two are loan schemes to the less privileged who are very important Ugandans. There is no doubt that women are the drivers of the economy today given our position in production, especially the rural woman. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to agree with a colleague who said that there is a lot of centralisation of some of the programmes although they are initiated and implemented at district level. You cannot believe that a sub county may submit about 45 women groups to the district and the district approves about 26. That is what they will send to the Centre – for instance, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. However, you wonder because these are the technical people on the ground. On return of these files, a sub county may have one group of women. This creates a lot of problems for us, the politicians as well as the technical team. 

If these funds are meant to empower our women, who are working very hard to contribute to the production output in this country, why would a ministry then decide to give only one group when the technical people in the – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: You know we are discussing the newly created administrative units. Please, conclude. 

MS AVUR: Madam Speaker, I had the opportunity to meet some few youth leaders. They are calling upon Government and asking us leaders to stop blaming them. They embraced the Youth Livelihood Fund but the criteria are very tedious and demanding that they cannot access these loans. Even when they get them, the amounts are not really what can change and turn around the lives of the youth in the shortest time possible. 

My appeal to Government and all of us leaders here is that there is need to review the local government arrangement, especially the implementation of some of these programmes. I thank you. 

4.49 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERALS) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the committee for the good report. 

I would also like to note that the challenge that we have had is that the Ministry of Local Government sometimes creates administrative units without visiting the ground. This is because we have had instances – in my district, I have 15 new sub counties and town councils but you find that in creating these sub counties - now, one new sub county is in the middle and the other one surrounds the new ones. Therefore, to move from one parish to another, you have to go through another sub county. I think, in future, that is one area that has to also be looked at while creating these administrative units. 

Madam Speaker, the Local Government Act gives express authority to the Minister of Local Government to create sub counties and town councils without coming to Parliament. Even Cabinet, for instance, can also create them because that is their mandate. This is why we are haggling with the issue of funding because there was no certificate of financial implications given when these new sub counties and town councils were created. 

I hope that the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, who is new, can move very fast because we have already raised this issue. It has been discussed in Cabinet and I hope he can quickly bring that amendment so that this does not happen again in future. 

Secondly, the issue of staffing in these new districts is a big challenge. How can somebody act for 10 years? It is terrible. We have also had a challenge attracting some of the key staff in certain districts. 

The other bigger challenge is that there have been deliberate efforts by some districts not to recruit people who are not from their districts. If they advertise and they do not have their sons and daughters – we experienced this when I was in the Ministry of Health. If they do not have their sons and daughters, they will not take on anybody. Therefore, they were waiting for their sons and daughters to graduate so that they can take up these jobs. This is why, at some point, we had even proposed that we have a regional District Service Commission to avoid this challenge of tribalism that is cropping up. 

Lastly, I hope we can note that Members are lamenting here on the costs of these administrative units but the decisions are made here. For us, as the Executive, we can pass things but when we bring them here, you are expected, as Parliament, to scrutinise and say, “No” to where you are supposed to. Do not just say “yes” because it has come from us. 

Members are here lamenting over some of the administrative units that were created. For instance, now, at least the committee has guided us that we need Shs 50 billion to have these new town councils and sub counties operationalised. Shall we go ahead and create other new administrative units without addressing this challenge that was already before us? 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. I hope that we can critically look at these issues as we debate. 

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whose this one is but I recently discovered, in my district, that a certain person had acted for 15 years and because I always saw him, I thought he was substantive. When I found out and I told them to advertise, there was resistance. You can imagine. Those were 15 years of acting. I do not know who supervises this. Is it hon. Karubanga? Things are not going well in some places. 

4.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Ms Joy Kabatsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The point I would like to bring is exactly what you have said. These people at the local governments employ whoever they want to employ; even those without proper qualifications. 

There are certain professionals at the district level that have to be respected; for example, the medical doctors, veterinary doctors, engineers. There is no supervision from the Centre. Once they employ someone at the local government, it is forever. There is no change. Veterinary doctors have been there for 20 years. Doctors employ their own people and if the district cannot get their own engineer, they will not employ a qualified person. There is no supervision from the ministries so that we know that the right things are being done. 

The roads that are being constructed in districts are horrible. Engineers are not qualified and the money they are given to use on these roads is not enough. The councillors and the chairpersons sit and decide how much should go to the roads, for example Shs 6 million and they share the rest. There are areas that we need to look at that need supervision, especially the professionals. 

4.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr David Karubanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good report. 

I just would like to make remarks on some of the issues that pertain to the Ministry of Public Service from the report. They have raised the issue of lack of support from the Ministry of Public Service in relation to the functions that the ministry supervises. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to say that where we stand as a Ministry of Public Service, we have tried our level best. When we came in, for example, on the payroll management, there were several ghosts. As a ministry, we have done the cleaning of the payroll and even given the local governments the powers to manage the payrolls.

Although we have given them the powers, we acknowledge that they still have challenges where they need support from the Ministry of Public Service. Our ministry has officers dedicated to every district. Every district knows the contact person in case of challenges where they need support. 

It is true that we still have integrity issues in the management of the payroll. First of all, the payroll is managed by three ministries; the votes prepare, the Ministry of Public Service verifies and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development pays - (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Please, make your presentation. 

MR KARUBANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I know the time is limited but I wanted to give that background. In this kind of arrangement, we wanted to have controls. It is not by accident but we wanted to have controls given the past history we have had, where some of the officers are in Luzira. 

Therefore, we are trying to address this by having a seamless system, which is the Human Capital Management System, which will automate all the activities in relation to the payroll management. 

Madam Speaker, there has been the issue of dropping of names from the payroll. It has been reported that since 2018, some names have not been put back on the payroll. As I said, the ministry underwent a verification exercise and the names, which were not clear, for example, people who added their father’s names without swearing affidavits, without matching what is on the NIRA database and our database for payroll; the doubted names were all submitted to the Inspectorate of Government for verification. 

Indeed, the ghosts were too many and where there are staff who feel that they were removed from the payroll, this communication has been made clear to all votes - not only local governments - and those staff have been forwarded to the IGG for verification. All these were done in the name of having a clean payroll of our workers. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to end here but the Ministry of Public Service offers full support to the Ministry of Local Government in areas where they need technical support. I thank you. 

5.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Jenipher Namuyangu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good job done. What is stated in that report are facts; I agree with the proposal by colleagues that we need to review the decentralisation policy. 

On the issue of start-up funds to the town councils, it is true that majority of the town councils have now been given Shs 50 million each as part of the Shs 100 million as start-up funds. This money has been used for renovation of the structures where they have put offices, they have used it for buying furniture, stationery and some computers and the money is finished. 

On the lack of accounting officers, it is not true because the Chief Administrative Officers are still the accounting officers in these areas. We guided them to deploy some skeleton staff in these town councils, which they have done. The only hurdle, which is very critical, is lack of operational funds and money for wages. 

Madam Speaker, I engaged hon. Bahati and he promised that on Tuesday next week, he will come and give a report as to how they are progressing as the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in terms of funding these administrative units. He will also comment on the issue of taxing the allowances for councillors. 

On the new districts not sharing assets like vehicles, among others, the ministry normally guides. Before a district commences, we guide according to the laws of Uganda; the Local Government Act and the Constitution to ensure that they divide these items or the assets. However, I would also like to put it on record that some of the districts almost have nothing to share. For example, if they have one road unit, how are they going to share? Some of the districts do not have vehicles. For the whole of this term, we managed to procure a vehicle for only the Chairman LCV. The rest of the vehicles are departmental vehicles, for instance, for education and production. How can they share? 

I would like to propose that as Government, our way forward is to give money to the new administrative units like districts, which we have done in some cases. For example, in Financial Year 2018/2019, we gave every district that came on board Shs 1 billion as start-up. Bunyangabu completed their administrative block but when you go to Kikuube, there is almost nothing. This also calls for transparency among the leaders; those who are supposed to be duty bearers. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to conclude by thanking you and the committee again and say that these administrative units are given basing on the requests from the districts. The ministry or Government do not go and create without requests being generated right from the sub counties, approved by the districts and submitted to the ministry. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, just one question; where you have displaced a sub county and made it a town council, how do you provide for the old sub county to get structures? 

MS NAMUYANGU: Madam Speaker, our proposal is that we look for funds and provide for these sub counties to construct new offices just like we are doing now for the districts that have been displaced by the cities. I would like you to give me an opportunity to answer hon. Francis Gonahasa, who wondered whether we are able to support the seven cities. I would like to say that yes, we are able because we are a Government. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, we have taken a lot of time on the issues of local government; a matter of interest for everybody in this House. Can I invite the chairperson to present the next report very quickly on pension payroll management? 

I want to put the question that the report on the field visit on performance of newly created administrative units be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.


MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE FIELD VISIT REPORTS ON PERFORMANCE OF SALARY AND PENSION PAYROLL MANAGEMENT IN LOCAL GOVERNMENTS 

5.06
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Godfrey Onzima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since Members have the copy of the report on their iPads, I am just going to highlight some few areas. This decision to go and carryout an oversight to assess performance of pension payroll and salary payroll, was initiated by some Ugandans petitioning Parliament. When we interacted with them, the issues they raised were so pertinent that we felt we should try to do a kind of a case study in some of the districts. 

Madam Speaker, one of the challenges we realised – I am going to observations and findings:
    1) There was a problem of poor feedback and information flow between the district officials and retirees. Many of the retirees whom we interacted with were not aware of the requirements for them to submit and come up with a complete file to be submitted.
    2) We, therefore, feel that there should be a sensitisation for those who are about to retire so that they are aware of what they are supposed to do. 

    3) There was also the issue of deletion or dropping of names from the payroll. Madam Speaker, this was a rampant case. For instance, in Otuke and Namayingo, the Chief Administrative Officer said that she was not aware of how these names were dropping off the payroll and pension. Some of the beneficiaries of the pension said that their names would disappear for about six months and then reappear but without any explanation. 

    4) The use of the wage shortfall. The major explanation we got for the wage shortfall on the ground was that there are some members of staff who are recruited at the Centre and sent to the districts but without budgetary support. This often presents these challenges. We, therefore, feel that recruitment of such staff from the Centre should be done in full consultation with the districts. 

    5) There was the issue of overpayment and underpayment. In the case of overpayment, there were people earning more than triple of their expected salaries. This, needless to say, causes shortages for the remaining members of staff. 

According to the chief administrative officers, these are errors in data capture but sometimes when these errors are committed, it takes a long time for the ministry to get them corrected, thereby causing a lot of problems for the district. We feel that this should be taken into consideration. 

    6) In the efficiency of processing the payroll, this was majorly raised on the side of teachers. The number of people who are supposed to work on the pension for teachers in the Ministry of Education and Sports are very few. This makes it significantly difficult, to the extent that sometimes officers wait a whole week without being helped. 

The committee requests that that area should be revisited and more people recruited. 

    7) The other challenge is the bureaucracy in processing the pension payments. The explanation we got from the principal human resources officers in these areas was that although pension is being decentralised, a lot of issues, like verification, are still done at the centre by the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

    8) This verification goes through to 12 stages. In this case, that delays the process and many times, the rightful beneficiaries get the impression that it is the district at fault. This decentralisation should therefore look into streamlining the process of verification to reduce the required time. 

    9) There was a big challenge of the irregular deduction of loan repayments. Many of the districts we went to reported that many times, there are hefty loans deductions made beyond 50 per cent of the staff’s salary. 

Once salary is deducted beyond 50 per cent, Madam Speaker, people’s names disappear from the payroll. The accounting officers expressed concern that normally the coding of these deductions is done by an external consulting firm called, “Payroll Consult Africa.” These deductions are made without the knowledge of the accounting officers. 

We also felt, as a committee, that that area must be looked into. All loan deductions must be made with the full knowledge of, and in consultation with the accounting officers, mostly because the issue of names disappearing from the payroll stems from this. 

    10) Poor network and delays in the IPPS and IFMIS implementation. I think this was captured in the previous report. We recorded this in Bukwo, Otuke, Namayingo and Mbale. In the case of Mbale, however, they say that they have to go to other districts to access these services. In places like Bukwo, they can spend the entire week on the way. This affects the service delivery.  

Government must, therefore, establish the required infrastructure in these districts so that all of them benefit. 

    11) Some people who retired before the decentralisation have failed to access the payroll up to today. Those who retired around 2005 are failing to access their files. Some officials reported that when they come to Ministry of Public Service, they are only shown heaps of files to search for their names. 

Our recommendation in this case is that the Ministry of Public Service and the districts concerned should work and establish processes that ensure that all these files are identified and taken back to their districts so that they can work on the pensions of their people. 

    12) The inadequate budget for pension, gratuity and salaries. Madam speaker, it appears that Government does not have a clear record of how many people are supposed to retire in a given period of time so as to properly plan. We feel that Government must generate a database to ensure that it is aware and can plan for the people scheduled for retirement so that money is availed to them. 

    13) The issue of unknown names, that is, ghost names, which had appeared on some pension payrolls in some districts. Some districts reported that there were names that had appeared in their payrolls for pension but they do not know where the names are coming from. Sometimes there are efforts made to correct these anomalies but they are not entirely effective. 

We recommended and advised these districts to work with the Ministry of Public Service and ensure that the issues are resolved. 

    14) Madam speaker, we noted the issue of solicitation of bribes. Many of the people we invited to come and testify about their issues, particularly the retirees, testified with tears. They shared that when they went to some of these districts, they were asked to promise a particular percentage of how much the staff members are to get from their gratuity or pension. Those who fail to do so find it very difficult to access their benefits. 

We advised that after the decentralisation, the Ministry of Local Government should go and interface with these retirees and help them. 

    15) The issue of forgeries, forged appointments, promotions and access to the government payroll was reported in many districts. We recommended that Government should undertake regular validation exercises to weed out such elements who engage in such acts. 

Unexplained deductions; Madam Speaker, many districts reported that there are deductions made by the Central Bank of Uganda on the money sent to the district accounts. These deductions have also not been explained. 

We also recommended that if those deductions are legal, then the ministry of finance should come forward and explain them to the beneficiary districts. 

The issue of non-payment of salaries was noticed. This was reported mostly on the side of teachers and health workers. Sometimes, they go two to three months without being paid. Our recommendation is that money meant for those categories of people should be paid in full and on time. 

The issue of lack of technology and infrastructure was already raised. 

Madam Speaker, those were the highlights that I thought I could bring to the notice of the Members. I, therefore, take this chance to beg that the House adopts the committee’s report. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, again, the Committee on Public Service and Local Government. Thank you for responding to the petitions. That has been an area of poor performance but you have lifted our spirits. Let us have two comments and the minister in charge of Public Service will come, if he has something. 

5.18
DR KEEFA KIWANUKA (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is a good report but it is about two years old. The visit was in September 2018 and some of the things being reported now may have been corrected or implemented. They may have got better or worse. I wonder how we can deal with that. I do not know –

THE SPEAKER: The people responsible will tell us whether they have acted or not.



5.19
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this report that highlights a number of issues. Most of our people have been suffering with this issue of gratuity and accessing their pensions. In most cases, the issues seem to be more with the Ministry of Public Service than local governments. The districts process everything and provide what is required but when people come here, that is where there is a problem. 

This issue of solicitation, which the committee has raised, is a big problem. The Ministry of Public Service needs to come clean on this. It appears there are people with whom they work. Actually, most of the claimants get just a fraction of their gratuity. If you do not go through these agents, you will never get your gratuity. What happens is that when you go to Public Service, they refer you to some people who are actually agents who process gratuity for claimants. 

At the end of the day, if somebody, for instance, is entitled to a certain amount of money, these agents force these people to commit a certain percentage to them in order for them to have their gratuity processed. This is a big challenge to most of these claimants from our places. 

At the end of the day, the complaints are channelled to Members of Parliament. They seem to imply that we are not helping them to access their gratuity. We have raised this issue here over and again. It appears the Ministry of Public Service – (Member timed out.)

5.21
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the mistake we are making is that we are only looking at money and forgetting about another resource, which is human resource. 

How do these districts perform, for instance that person in charge of gratuity? They wait for a release. When the release is about to reach the district, everybody is around. As soon as they get the release and it is over, they also go away, like the release. Therefore, the problem is the Ministry of Public Service; they are not monitoring the performance of their staff. That is why even those in charge of pension – the human resource at the district – demand money from the poor teachers, agricultural officers and others, who have retired.

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Public Service should come out seriously to deal with the staff at district level. 

Secondly, it looks like if you have been recruited by the District Service Commission, you die at the district. Why should I serve at the district and when there are jobs at the Centre, I am subjected to another interview? I would imagine that if I am at a district service commission and there is an interview in another place, I should be either promoted to go and work at the Centre or wherever. 

Madam Speaker, there is need to review the connection between the district service commission recruitment and Public Service recruitment. This is a real demotivator; if you are at a district, you will never become a permanent secretary. You will die there, maybe as an agricultural officer or education officer or whatever the case is.

Madam Speaker, the Uganda Public Service Standing Orders, 2010 are very clear about performance. They talk about performance agreements and appraisals – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute for hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, an appraisal depends on what you have done. If somebody is in charge of processing the gratuity of a person and by the end of the week, he has not processed anybody’s file, such a person must be sacked because at appraisals, you must make what we call a “term sheet”: what has he done in a week, a month and the year?

The Public Service Standing Orders, 2010 must be enforced to the letter because that is the only way human resource will be used, one, to avoid corruption. If you have somebody’s file and you do not process it, a question will be asked; why didn’t you process it? There must also be a system where you log in. If I have brought my document today, I must get an answer maybe within one week or two weeks. 

Finally, why is it that the system of pension is not matching? When somebody retires, they say you must bring your documents afresh. If I have been on the payroll, the moment I leave that payroll of active Civil Servants, I should immediately access the payroll for pension – (Member timed out.)

5.24
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is a problem with the pension scheme. If I recall well, we have had almost six serious scams and it is a very fertile ground for corruption. What is causing all these is that, the moment somebody renders his service and leaves, he becomes very vulnerable. He does not have any more power to begin to demand for what they have. This is totally unfair.

I have got a million calls from people in my constituency. Since 2005 when they retired, they have never got their pension, yet the system in Public Service is automatic. Once you are recruited, you know when you are supposed to retire. We do not know why it takes local governments years to perfect this system.

Madam Speaker, if you look at how the districts are operating in line with the headquarters in Kampala, many public servants who have retired have suffered. They come to Kampala and take three or four months staying in Kampala here, trying to have their names put on the list of those who are supposed to benefit. 

All these burdens are on us. I am in Kampala and an old man will come and say, “I have nowhere to sleep. I have nowhere to eat.” When they go to Public Service, it is terrible – moving from one desk to another. They keep asking them for kitu kidogo. These are poor people. They have retired and they have given their service to the Government but they are suffering – (Member timed out.)

5.27
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (Independent, District Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you Madam Speaker. My issue concerns pensioners. Of course, we have all suffered and I would like to thank colleagues, for the additions they made. 

Personally, I have equally suffered with the people who come. There are offices that I have been going to in the Ministry of Public Service but you wonder; we have records in the systems and the records show clearly when a person is supposed to retire. I thought it should be automatic. I would like to call upon the Government to make it automatic. After service, these people do not need to struggle to get their benefits. 

The issue that I would like to raise and I will use the example of my place is the loans that civil servants get. Madam Speaker, we have a policy that when you borrow, at least half of your salary should be deducted. In my area, people get loans from the bank, which deducts half of their salary, then they get several codes from different institutions. On top of that, they go to money lenders. This really affects the service delivery of these people. 

My district has been named among the worst performing districts, especially in education. I laboured to find out why but I realised that our people have a lot of loans. They barely earn Shs 20,000. These people eventually become demoralised. I would like to, therefore, find out from the Government what they can do. Are they putting in place a policy that when a person gets a loan, the deductions should be half of their salary? 

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Public Service – 

5.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr David Karubanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee, once again, for this report.

I would like to touch the issue of the challenges we have, especially, which are perceived to be coming from the Ministry of Public Service. It was earlier said that we decentralised processing of the payroll and pension to the various votes. 

Madam Speaker, processing gratuity starts six months before retirement. Actually, the ministry has shortened the process. If all the documentation is clear, it does not even take more than two hours. We have done this demonstration in different votes. For example, within the police and some local governments, the process is shortened. However, we have issues of integrity. 

You realise that every district has a human resource officer, who is fully supervised by the district. It has an accounting officer who is supervised by the Centre but these challenges still continue. Therefore, I would like to inform colleagues that as a ministry, our role is limited but what we have seen come up are issues of integrity, as you have heard, where some officers request for percentages on the gratuity. The issue of integrity is a big problem. 

As I said, on the issue of the ‘ghosts’, we have tried to clear the payroll. Before we operationalise the new system of HCM, we would like to inform you that the issue of verification by the Ministry of Public Service will continue. It has, otherwise, helped us to address the issue of forgeries and ghosts. 

Of course, we have some challenges in some districts of the links of connection. However, as a ministry, we have the 10th of every month as the cut-off date for submission and verification. This is aimed at ensuring that by the 28th of every month, salaries are paid and this has been done by the minister. However, where we have issues of dropping off, it has been mainly because of some human interventions, especially in the verifications. We have tried to address this by bringing the date nearer to 10th. 

Madam Speaker, the issue of deductions, which has been brought on the Floor that there deductions done by private companies; this issue was addressed. As a ministry, we had challenges, especially where we had too many deductions codes. 

The bankers’ association makes a Memorandum of Understanding with the borrower and this deduction is initiated by the accounting officer. So, we do not want it to be perceived as if it is the ministry. Ours was that we had too many deduction codes, you would find about 20 deductions borrowing from different areas. We, therefore, said all these should be consolidated and done with full consent of the borrower and the bank, under one umbrella organisation - the Uganda Bankers Association. That issue is being handled that way in order to address those multiple challenges. 

On the issue of failure to access – especially those who retired before decentralization, as I said, the Ministry of Public Service is there and transferred all the files. However, where a vote feels it has a challenge, our ministry has dedicated technical officers to help them. Madam Speaker, some of these cases arise as a result of the integrity associated with some of our officers. 

As I conclude, I would like to assure the House that the ministry is trying to address these issues. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development gave us funds to procure a system that will have seamless integration, where we shall have payments of workers without any human intervention, by accessing the records of the staff and relaying all the payments through the Integrated Financial Management System at the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

Madam Speaker, our ministry is committed and I can say that it is now in better position to handle staff matters than the era, where you used to hear a lot of stories. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Ministry of Local Government, do you have any comments? 

5.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Jenipher Namuyangu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Again, I would like to thank the committee for a good job done. 

There is a lot of improvement because the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development guided that all institutions including local governments should prioritise pensions and salaries. Actually, they should have the first call on the budget to avoid accumulation of arrears unless there are issues of failure to capture the data in time. Recently, I was looking at the districts that returned money towards the end of the financial year, the reason some of them gave for returning the pension money is that some people retired at the time the financial year was ending when the system was closed on 26 June.

So, we have worked closely with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Public Service to build capacities of the local governments. For example, we have organised workshops for the district service commissions, chief financial officers, chief administrative officers and town clerks to ensure that the issue of pensioners is taken as a priority.

We still have challenges of shortages of money, but I believe this is being addressed as our resource envelope improves. We are also taking on the issue of rewards and sanctions to the officers who deliberately, for example, delete names of pensioners. We have told them that they must take personal responsibility if they delete names because their demands are not met. We have also asked the accounting officers to be serious to ensure that the issues of corruption are fought.

Madam Speaker, there are a lot of improvements, and I would like to thank you for being very supportive regarding the issues of local governments. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let us go to Item 07. Thereafter, we shall have the statement on Dongsong. I see the Minister of Internal Affairs; he should give us the statement on Emmanuel Tegu. Then, the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives should also speak to us on the issue of sugarcane.

Honourable members, on the issue of the payroll, I put the question that this House adopts the field report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government.

(Question put and agreed to.)

RESPONSE ON THE RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (AMENDMENT OF THE 5TH SCHEDULE) STATUTORY INSTRUMENT NO. 73 OF 2020

5.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Jenipher Namuyangu): Madam Speaker, a report of the Sectoral Committee on Public Service and Local Government on Local Governments (Amendment of the 5th Schedule) Statutory Instrument No. 73 of 2020 was carefully studied after being presented by the committee here, and the matters that were raised therein have been addressed. We have responded to them, and the clarifications have been given. The purpose of this statement is to seek for parliamentary consideration and approval of the instrument. 

Briefly, the committee thought that we would widen the catchment and include trucks and motorcycles in the statutory instrument, but I would like to state here that this specific statutory instrument is focusing on PSV vehicles, specifically buses and taxis. There are other arrangements, for example, for motorcycles to do legal reforms and this committee is being chaired by the Minister for Security. The members of the committee include: 
    • Office of the President, 
    • Minister of Works and Transport, 
    • KCCA, and 
    • Minister of Local Government.
Therefore, this one will be brought under a different arrangement. Equally, trucks and lorries are to come under another law because we are still consulting.

On the issue of making people pay annually, again, it was agreed by the operators of buses and taxis and their owners that they prefer to pay the fees annually to avoid administrative costs that would accumulate if they were paying monthly.

The issue of charging the road user fees vis-à-vis the parking fees, again here, you are aware that the road-user fees are already accommodated under the fuel tax. That is why we are coming with the park user fees and not road-user fees. It is also true that many of the roads are not under the Ministry of Local Government, and equally, they are not under KCCA. Some are UNRA’s roads. So, we cannot charge the road-user fees.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of consultation, we consulted widely because you are aware that the operators of buses and taxis petitioned Parliament and the President. As a result, we engaged them. Most of what they demanded have been put in this statutory instrument. For example, they were paying Shs 200,000 per month; Shs 120,000 to KCCA and Shs 80,000 to the Ministry of Local Government. Now, we are saying they are going to pay Shs 80,000; that is, Shs 3,500 per day. We are only looking at 20 days in a month so that we leave out the ten days to cater for servicing the vehicles and if they want to do visits or rest. Those are already covered under that. 

There were also concerns on why we do not allow the sharing of money along all the local governments on the route chart. Again, for the buses, this is okay, but for the taxis, the operators felt we should allow them to choose the origin and the destination. This one is simpler for them in terms of sharing the money. You are also aware that if we leave these taxis just to move without the route chart, then they are bound to make mistakes. Many of them get accidents when they go to routes which they are not familiar with. So, they will definitely choose the routes which they want to ply. Those are the routes that will be captured in the database.

Madam Speaker, there was an issue of special hires. These ones will have their own designated areas. For example, I know that around National Theatre, there are taxis that park there. These definitely will be based on their own merits and so are the vehicles that operate online.

I would like to conclude by saying that the stickers are going to be given by the Transport Licencing Board and not the districts. This is again to minimise costs and also to prevent fake stickers. We want uniformity. That is why it is the Transport Licencing Board that will issue the stickers after somebody has paid for the park user fees and also the PSV licence.

Madam Speaker, we are requesting to address some of the legal issues at the time we will amend the Local Government Act. However, for now, we request imprisonment to be maintained if we are to strengthen enforcement. I have consulted the Attorney-General; he is in agreement that we should maintain that clause in the statutory instrument. 

I would like to conclude by requesting that the House approves Statutory Instrument Number 73 of 2020. I beg to submit.

The Speaker: Thank you. Honourable members, we had a lengthy debate after the report was presented. I put the question that the statutory instrument, as proposed, be adopted by this House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Statutory instrument Number 73 of 2020 adopted.


Response on the operations of Guangzhou Dongsong Energy Group Company Limited in Tororo

5.48
The minister of state for energy and mineral development (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Apollo Ofwono, the Member of Parliament for Tororo Municipality, on 21st of July, raised an issue of concern regarding operations of Guangzhou Dongsong Energy Group Company Limited. In particular, he indicated that staff were being laid off and that he did not know what was going on.

I would like to inform the House that Guangzhou Dongsong undertook exploration and discovered a number of mineral deposits namely: Iron ore, phosphates, Niobium, rare earth elements, among others.

The company embarked on mine development with a financing structure of 30 per cent equity and 70 per cent was supposed to be a loan. This particular complex was commissioned by His Excellency, the President and specifically the fertiliser plant, in October 2018.

The company received funding from the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China that had agreed to lend them up to $520 million with the first phase totalling to $240 million.

From the time of commissioning, the company has produced 50,000 tonnes of bio-organic fertiliser, which was distributed to tea, sugarcane and other commercial farms, for one planting season to test how effective it is.

The trial test was successful and commercial fertiliser production was expected to commence in January 2020. However, this was halted because of a court case that most of you must have read about in the newspapers.

The company is now locked in legal disputes. They have appealed against the decision that was issued by court and that case is still pending. This certainly, has hindered the operations of this mine. Court had even cancelled the mining lease and reinstated it with costs. The appeal is still on.

Therefore, whereas the commissioning of the steel plant, the sheet glass factory and slag cement plant was expected to commence on June 2019, the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China delayed to release funding for this steel plant because of these legal challenges that the company is facing.

In addition, the few operations that were going on at the factory were hampered because of this Coronavirus pandemic. Some of the Chinese that were based at this factory are still locked up in China and are unable to return.

Therefore, because of these many challenges, most of the staff had to be laid off. We hope that the court issues will be resolved soon. If the airport is reopened, the staff who are out of the country will get back and we hope that operations can resume. Thank you. 

The Speaker: Thank you very much, minister. Can I now invite the Minister of Internal Affairs on the issue of Emmanuel Tegu – (Mr Eitunganane rose) - on which issue?

Mr Eitunganane:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. The procedural issue I am raising is: I see the Attorney-General in the House and fully representing Government. 

The issue of Simon Peter Odongo has gone silent again yet we are getting pressure from the people. Now, it is generating a lot of issues. We, the Members of Parliament, are being accused of not doing much. 

Now that the Attorney-General is here, isn’t it procedurally right for him to give an explanation as to why Odongo has not been produced up to now?

There are a lot of worries. The family is in total chaos and they are calling us every now and then. Thank you.  

The Speaker: Let us first deal with the issue of Emmanuel Tegu. Let us have the Minister of Internal Affairs first.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE CIRCUMSTANCES SURROUNDING THE DEATH OF MR TEGU EMMANUEL, A STUDENT AT MAKERERE UNIVERSITY AT FACULTY OF VETERINARY MEDICINE
5.53
The Minister of internal affairs (Gen. Jeje Odongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker.

I would like to take this opportunity to make this statement to explain the circumstances surrounding the death of Mr Tegu Emmanuel, a student at Makerere University at Faculty of Veterinary Medicine. 

From the outset, I would like on behalf of Government and my own behalf, to express my utmost felt sympathies and condolence to the bereaved family, relatives and friends of the late Tegu Emmanuel, for their great loss. I pray that the Almighty grants them fortitude to overcome this tragedy. The death of Tegu is most regrettable. 

Madam Speaker, soon after the death of Mr Tegu, social media was awash with varying accounts of his unfortunate death. Those social media accounts generally alleged that Tegu had been killed by Local Defence Unit (LDUs) personnel and police officers at Makerere. 

Since this very unfortunate incident, which started on Saturday 27 June 2020, Police have carried out investigations. These investigations included, but not limited to, taking statements from witnesses, reviewing CCTV Footage and visiting the scene of crime.

The evidence so far gathered has led to the arrest and charging of four individuals to court. These are:
    1.  Oigu Charles,
    2. Nyeko Balam,
    3. Kakuru Johnson, and
    4. Sekitoleko moses.

The four were on the 07 July 2020 charged with murder and have been remanded to Sentema Government Prison.

I have attached a copy of the charge sheet. I may also take this opportunity to inform the House that this case was sanctioned by the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) and it is going to start trial on the 27th of this month?

Madam Speaker, since this is now a matter of court, I do not know how I should proceed because I am now told that the Auditor-General is here and there is something called the sub judice rule. If I now continue to give you details in relation to this incident, which I do have, will I not be providing material evidence that could affect the outcome of this case? 

I beg for your guidance, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, at the time we asked you for the statement, Government had been quiet about the death of Emmanuel Tegu. We wanted to know if you knew about it and what you are doing. This is what you have come to present to us and since you say that the hearing will begin on the 27th of this month, I think we shall not say more. Do not divulge the details. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the family wanted to know who these people are because the allegations were that it is the LDUs or police. However, the way the honourable minister has presented it, we cannot know whether it was the police or LDUs. Were these people part of the LDUs or police? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that will be answered in the court. Minister, we expect an update from you. At least let us know when they start so that the family can monitor.    

GEN. JEJE ODONGO: Say it again, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Since you said that the trial is about to begin, just keep us posted on the progress of the case. 

GEN. JEJE ODONGO: Sure. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. We have noted the statement. Can I invite the Attorney-General on the issue of Simon Peter Odong? 

5.59
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I remember, sometime last week, that this issue came up and I told Parliament that we, as a ministry, had got in touch with the Inspector General of Police (IGP). 

The latest I can tell this Parliament is that Simon Peter was charged in the General Court Martial and he is awaiting trial. I cannot go into the details because I was not prepared with a statement; it came as an abrupt question. 

However, the latest I can say is that in compliance with the law, whoever is detained should be produced in court within 48 hours. Simon Peter Odong was charged in a Court Martial and he is awaiting trial. If there is need for further and better particulars, you can give me time, in which case I can get in touch with the Court Martial, get details and make a better presentation. 

THE SPEAKER: Attorney-General, this is a matter that involves human rights and I think it should be properly recorded on the Hansard so – 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, this is a case of Simon Peter Odong that we raised here. He was arrested and shot on 5th May. On 26th June, the matter was in court and a ruling was made. The Attorney-General, IGP and Director CMI were asked to produce Simon Peter Odong within 48 hours. We raised this matter 10 days after. Why has the Attorney-General and the IGP not produced Simon Peter Odong in court? 

It is almost coming to a month, Madam Speaker, and the Attorney-General has come to say that he has now been charged in the Court Martial. When was that done? This is because you were given time from 26 June and you were served with these court orders on the 29th but you did not acknowledge the documents I gave you. Just tell us when the Court Martial sitting took place because 10 days after we raised this matter, there was nothing like that. 

Madam Speaker, the family is in pain because they have been trying to access Mr Simon Peter Odong, who is a diabetic case in the hospital in Bombo. One Brigadier, who is a doctor, referred him to Mulago. Unfortunately, the information we are getting is that even that Brigadier has been suspended. What crime has Simon Peter Odong committed that you cannot tell the public his whereabout? 

Attorney-General, you are the legal representative of Government. His family and Ugandans need to know his crime; even the family of this ADF man is being accessed. What is this crime?

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, my senior colleague has brought my character into this matter when he claimed that he served me with documents that I did not acknowledge. First of all, I do not know of any such a service and I would like to know in which capacity he was serving me. Was he a court process server or a party to the application? I would like him to clarify that before he can put my character in record. 

THE SPEAKER: Did you serve the Deputy Attorney-General or the Attorney-General? 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the Office of the Attorney-General was served by the orders of the court on 29th by the lawyers. If I am given five minutes, I can go and get the copy and bring it here. The other day, I gave him copies of all the documents – 

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, we have legal processes we follow. If there is a matter that was served onto the Attorney-General, I would expect my senior colleague to produce an affidavit to that effect. Be that as it may – (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I do not want to be taken as a liar. I am going to pick it. 

MR KAFUUZI: Be it as it may, hon. Okupa’s submission indicates that there was an application for habeas corpus – 

THE SPEAKER: They did not use the word habeas corpus.

MR KAFUUZI: He said the application said, “Produce the body.”  Maybe he should clarify because I do not know the court order. He can read it to us. 

THE SPEAKER: But it was not a habeas corpus application. 

MR KAFUUZI: What kind of application is it? 

THE SPEAKER: This was not habeas corpus. Where is the court order? 

This is Caroline Odong Turyatemba applicant v. Attorney-General, Chief of Military Intelligence, Inspector General of Police - 

The order 
This is by the assistant registrar, Alex Oshabe Karocho and it reads: 
“This matter is coming for ruling this 26th day of 2020 by hon. Justice Michael Elubu, delivered by His Worship, Dr Alex Mushabe, in the presence of Counsel James Byamukama and the applicant and in the absence of Counsel Nabaasa Charity.

Joint respondents
I hereby order the subject of this application, Simon Peter Odong, has suffered on his fundamental right to freedom from torture. His right to liberty was infringed. The said Simon Peter Odong be produced by the respondent before a competent court within 48 hours of this order. 

In the event that he is not produced, court issues an unconditional order for his release forthwith. The respondents to pay damages in the suit of Shs 200 million to Simon Peter Odong for all the violation he has suffered in the same. Respondents to pay exemplary damages in the sum of Shs 50 million to Simon Peter Odong for contempt of court.”   

Therefore, he was to be produced before a competent court. 

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, I have listened and I am very glad that you have read to us that court order. It is unfortunate that my colleague was holding onto that order while he made submissions on matters that some of us did not comprehend well. 

The court order specifically says that he should be produced in a competent court or he be released. I have submitted to this Parliament that Simon Peter Odong was produced in the General Court Martial. 

Now, if need be, should you feel the need for me to confirm that he was actually produced in court, we can get you the case number from the General Court Martial and lay it on the Table at the right time. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can you on Tuesday present here the charge sheet; evidence that he was actually produced in court? Thank you.

MR KAFUUZI: I can do that, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, can I invite the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives on the issue of the sugarcane? 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE FAILURE BY THE EXISTING SUGAR MILLS TO ABSORB THE REMAINING SUGARCANE

6.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Speaker, I beg to respond to the issue regarding failure by the existing sugar mills to absorb the available sugarcane in Busoga region as raised by hon. Robert Ntende. 

Following this issue, the ministry convened a meeting to discuss these challenges raised and in attendance were sugar millers, sugarcane out growers’ association leaders and technical officers from the ministry. 

There were two major groups that raised issues:
(a)By out growers 
(i) The out growers have excess sugarcane available in the fields, which are beyond mature age, in excess of 20-24 months and sugar mills cannot process due to low capacity. 

(ii) Out growers complained that the sugar millers award permits to harvest sugarcane to the middlemen instead to the registered out growers at a cost. The middle men cheat out growers who sell at a loss. It is alleged that some of the middlemen are local political leaders, government officials and rich business persons who influence the millers’ action.

(iii) That some out growers borrow funds from the commercial banks to develop and grow sugarcane on agreement that the banks recover the loan with interest after harvesting. Because of the delay in harvesting, some of the banks have threated to sell off out growers’ property like houses and other properties in a bid to recover the loans.

(iv) The millers crush sugarcane up to their full capacity but are overwhelmed with the large volumes of sugarcane grown at out grower fields. 

(v) Government has in the process promised to establish a sugar mill through a public private partnership arrangement in Busoga region. This is to increase the milling capacity to absorb more cane in the region. 

(b)Issues raised by the sugar millers 
The millers in attendance were, Kakira Sugar Ltd, Kinyara Sugar Ltd, Kamuli Sugar Ltd, G.M Sugar Ltd and Mayuge Sugar Ltd:
(i) The major causes of excess sugarcane were due to unplanned breakdowns and mills stoppages for annual maintenance. In addition, many farmers joined cane farming following the high cane prices in 2016/2017 season privately without being linked to a mill for processing when mature. Further, there is no data indicating the total cane availability without growers in terms of location acreage and age to enable planning for their processing.

(ii) There are very high stocks of sugar at the factories (about 60,000 metric tons). This is because the partner states, namely Kenya, Rwanda and South Sudan have stopped importing sugar from Uganda, but instead import from COMESA, Brazil, Thailand and India, which are low cost producers of sugar.

(iii) The millers reported that there are still industrial sugar in the customs bonds, which leaks into the local market and this escalates the bad situation of poor trade in local sugar and yet these were directed by His Excellency to be closed.

(iv) Recently, on 7 July 2020 part of Mayuge Sugar Factory got burnt accidentally and is now undergoing repairs, which could take up to three weeks or more to fix. This again impacts negatively on the situation of excess sugarcane at out growers’ fields and call upon the investors to quickly fix the
breakdown.

Resolutions and way forward
(i) The ministry gave authority to out growers who have excess sugarcane to export to Kenya since September 2019 and has not stopped doing so. However, most of the farmers could not manage to export due to some requirements set by Kenya to comply with at the border before the cane is allowed to cross the border. 

(ii) In a letter dated 13 July 2020 Reference NCBTA/ 0207 Uganda National Cross Border Traders' Association, on behalf of sugarcane traders in Busia reported that Kenya Government has banned importation of sugarcane from Uganda with immediate effect, and this needed help to clear truck loads with sugarcane at the border. 

(iii) On 16 July 2020, the ministry had a meeting with the Kenyan High Commissioner in Uganda and the Minister of East African Affairs with the objective to resolve the problem. We were guided to write a letter to the Cabinet Secretary of Ministry of Agriculture, Kenya to clear the truck loads at the border in the short term, and engage Kenya Government to harmonise bilateral trade relations going forward. 
(iv) In regard to increasing the domestic milling capacity, the ministry has issued a certificate of no objection to expand some mill capacities to those who showed interest namely: Mayuge Sugar Ltd, Kamuli Sugar Ltd, Kaliro Sugar Ltd, G.M Sugar Ltd, Kinyara Sugar Ltd and Hoima Sugar Ltd.

The ministry has also received applications to establish more sugar mills in Busoga, which are being reviewed. When these licenses are implemented, the crushing capacity in the region will double. 

(v) The meeting discussed at length on scheduling of maintenance factory shutdowns and agreed with millers that no any other sugar mills should stop for annual maintenance at the same period in order to ensure that harvesting of out growers’ cane should not stop. 

(vi) Many out growers are not aware about good agricultural management practices and administrative procedures of cane growing. They need to be sensitised and trained on matters regarding best farming practices, harvesting and market linkages. The cooperatives department will undertake the sensitisation and training programme in collaboration with district commercial officers and agronomy section of the millers.
(vii) This is intended to reinforce the competence of the out growers’ cooperatives or associations, which are currently weak in terms of communication skills, coordination and facilitate collective bargaining power with millers.

(viii) To develop data to provide information about the age and amount of cane in out growers, the ministry is planning to register out growers in collaboration with district technical officers. This information is needed by the various sugar mills in planning for available sugarcane to be processed. 

(ix) The ministry plans to engage our counterparts in the East African region in a bid to improve trade relations by removing non-tariff barriers. 

(x) In addition, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is sorting out the issue of closure or regulation of sugar bonds with the target to increase marketing of locally produced sugar.

(xi) The ministry is fast-tracking the implementation of the Sugar Act, 2020 which was recently passed by the august House. Also, with the supplementary budget to establish the sugar board. This has been forwarded to the minister of finance for consideration. This will go a long way to harmonise the regulation of the sugar sector in a much more organised and efficient way.

Madam Speaker, the sugar industry is a cluster which has a value chain, from growing of sugar cane, which should be linked to processing and marketing. 

It is because of this that regulations developed by countries in the sugar sector address the entire value chain. 

The ministry will continue to monitor the operations of domestic sugar manufacturers to ensure that they increase efficiency and capacity of milling in order to crush all the excess sugar cane. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I do not see hon. Ntende. Let us start with hon. Abala.

6.20
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. However, he is not telling us specifically the short-term plans in addressing the excess sugar. 

When you take the road, from here to around Bukaya, or up to Iganga there are very many lorries parked with sugar. Yet the minister is only saying that they had a meeting and they are planning to register. He is not telling us how the ministry is addressing this immediate problem. He is talking about bringing a supplementary budget and yet lorries are parked, farmers are crying, nobody is willing to buy their sugar – (Member timed out.)

6.22
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister went and held a meeting with the millers and the growers and everybody was there to air out their problems, but there was no solution agreed to. 

Kenya – both the Busia Sugar Millers and the Government have said they are importing from Brazil. If the question is price, we can adjust and have the price that the Kenya Government can take on. 

Sincerely, people are suffering. They need a solution. Whether they are buying sugar cane at Shs 50,000 or Shs 5,000, so long as the cane is cut. 

Can the ministry, through the minister who is around allow to sit with us in Busoga, with a few people and come up with solutions so that Government opens its mind and allows us to have that solution implemented? 

Otherwise, the minister will come here, read the statement and we shall end there – (Member timed out.)

6.24
MR JOHN BAGOOLE (Independent, Luuka North County, Luuka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I attentively listened to the minister’s statement. Most of his reasons were very demoralising to the people who are growing sugar cane. 

Everything he was talking about was about planning. Given the perishability of the sugar cane – it only takes seven days – when it is cut today, after seven days, it dries up.

I would like to remind the minister that last week, this Parliament passed a resolution that the Government should go and talk to its counterparts in Kenya such that the Kenyan Government can allow the sugar cane farmers, who had transported their sugar cane up to the – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: The East African Ministers were supposed to have a meeting. I hope someone can report. What did you discuss when you met? We want to hear solutions.

6.26
MR KENNETH ESIANGU (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister but unfortunately, there is nothing new and useful for the farmers of Busoga that the minister has put across. 

There is a problem. There is a curtail that is taking over most of these big businesses in this country. It is a curtail to frustrate the farmers of Busoga so that they become subject to certain issues that some people want. This is the problem. 

Honourable minister, the President promised a factory. You have not even told us how far the Government has gone with sourcing for finances. This is what we expected to hear from you but you have not mentioned anything like that. 

Every day they are making losses. What do you want the people from Busoga to do? This is their livelihood. Have you met your colleague from the other side? That is what we wanted you to tell us – (Member timed out.)

6.28
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is to thank the minister for that statement. It is however lacking in many aspects, especially given the losses that the traders that are stuck at the border are counting. 

These traders have loans – he made mention of it, but I am reliably informed the ministry officials have not convened a meeting with these affected traders. Some of them had even crossed to Kenya. There are those who even tried to use the other border of Lwakhakha. Up to now, the ministry has not bothered to have stop gap measures in place. 

These are brilliant ideas that he has in this statement that they are trying – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: He is boosting the capacity of the existing mills. It will take time to construct that capacity. It will take two years to adjust those mills. So, it is not a solution.

6.30
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Madam Speaker, this sugar issue is not only a Busoga issue. It is a national issue. It impacts on the economy, on jobs, it affects everybody in Uganda. 

This challenge we are facing, had it been Kenya, the Kenyans would have been here in Uganda today pressing our Government to open the market so that their sugar comes here.

I would like to see initiative from Government to go to Nairobi so that the customs union, of which we are all party to, is implemented to the letter. We are pinching on the sugar industry. 

Secondly, the arrangement the minister talked about, planning for a public private partnership – there is no timeline. There is excess sugar cane, drying on trucks. We have seen it in social media. Lines and lines of lorries. What kind of responsibility are we showing? Not helping our people – (Member timed out.)

6.33
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, I will use very kind words because I respect the minister. He is one of the senior leaders from Bugisu. However, Mr Minister, I am in tears because I received a call five minutes ago that canes, in almost 10 trucks of canes have dried.

Madam Speaker, let the Government, number one, in the minister’s report, talk about the sugarcane factories in Busoga because that will help the people from the west and other parts of the country. 

Mr Minister, I expected you to tell us that you have sat with hon. Munya, the Cabinet Secretary in charge of agriculture in Kenya, and discussed this and that. Why do you always put a lot of efforts on other things? Why are you neglecting sugarcanes at this time when we need the Busoga votes for NRM? Is that the way we can pay them? 

Mr Minister, you must come back to make another statement because Busoga is where NRM gets 80 per cent of the votes and we promised this. Do not make the people of Busoga deny us votes. In fact, what the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives has done to the NRM and President Museveni is very bad. Something special must be done – (Member timed out.)

6.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERALS) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Madam Speaker, these trucks are stranded in my district and so, I share the pain of the women and men that I saw. They had contracts with companies in Kenya to supply the canes. I think we need to find a way out. We are busy compensating other people. Can we also look at that aspect so that these people, who have had their canes dry up on the trucks for a fault, that is not theirs, can be compensated? 

With this COVID-19, Madam Speaker! The people in Busoga have been struggling and suffering with poverty. With their canes, they are still poor but now we want to make them poorer. I think there is need to compensate those people. Wherever the money will come from, I do not know but there is need to compensate them.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was hoping that the minister in charge of trade would tell us that the farmers who are suffering will also be assisted from the stimulus package but it seems it is not important. No one has even picked up a phone to talk to the Government there? Aaah! 

Minister, when will you come back to tell us what has been discussed with the Government of Kenya because that was our instruction last week?

6.37
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, my problem is that this report is actually caning the people of Busoga. In my opinion, since this report is caning the people of Busoga – and caning the sugarcane industry – we must actually throw it away and ask the minister to come back with a proper report to help us address matters in the sugar industry in this country. I thank you.

6.39
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Madam Speaker, before we even throw away the report, there is a memorandum of understanding between the sugarcane growers and Busia Millers of Kenya. The leadership of Busoga Sugarcane Growers met the District Commissioner of Kakamega and he said: “I have no problem. Let the governments agree and we have the canes.” To be realistic, the challenge is only with our Government: they are in their own world; they are not bothered, and are not taking it on – (Interruption)

MR OKOTH OTHIENO: Thank you, hon. Kibalya, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that it is true that the Government is not interested in helping the people of Busoga. It should be recalled that it is the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives that first made an attempt to block Ugandans from exporting sugarcanes to Kenya. Two, even when the minister made a report on 21 August 2019, she committed to doing certain things. Today, they are saying the same things they told us on 21 August 2019.

Therefore, I concur with my colleague here that this report be rejected and instead, this Parliament should come up with measures which we should demand the ministry to implement if we are to help the people of Busoga.

6.41
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I think the problem goes beyond sugarcanes. I represent a constituency that produces milk. Our milk producers have been suffering. This suffering started when Kenya got a new minister for agriculture – (Interjection) – or trade. Kenya seems to have shifted its policies and they are no longer taking our milk and sugarcanes – (Interruption)

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, these are games played in leadership and politics; they are called “divisionary measures.” The Deputy Attorney-General, who knows the pain that our people are going through – my grandmother, Angela, has lost Shs 24 million. The farmers in Busoga are crying. In fact, a one Mr Ngobi burnt 70 acres today. Is the Deputy Attorney-General therefore, in order to come and divert us by beginning stories of milk when he knows the directors in the milk companies responsible?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I know that there are other sectors that are suffering but the issue of sugarcanes has been on for a long time. Let us focus on the sugarcanes for now. I am really disappointed that my Government is not a caring Government on this issue. By now they would have gone. Does the minister want to say something?

6.44
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Jeje Odongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take note of the concerns raised by honourable colleagues in relation to this matter. I take note of what you have described as “inadequacies of the statement of the minister in charge of trade.” So, I would like to recognise and request that, with your permission, you allow Government to prepare and come back to explain the actions being taken to resolve this matter in the course of next week.

THE SPEAKER: Can you withdraw this statement now, on behalf of Government?

GEN. ODONGO: Madam Speaker, as I said, it is really within your powers to do this.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, I put the question that the statement be rejected as inadequate.

(Question put and agreed to.)
(Statement rejected.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have understood the pain the people are going through. We need urgent action. We want answers on Thursday next week. Thank you. 

Honourable members, House adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.46 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 28 July, 2020 at 2.00 p.m.)


