



Tuesday, 28 July 2020

Parliament met at 02.39 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. Last Friday, 24 July 2020, the nation learnt of the sad news of the passing on of His Excellency Benjamin William Mkapa, the former President of the United Republic of Tanzania. 

President Mkapa held many positions in Tanzania including the civil service, the Chama Cha Mapinduzi Party – their ruling party. He also worked in the Foreign Service as an ambassador, minister in the government and as the third President of the United Republic of Tanzania. 

He has been described by President Uhuru as an outstanding East African, who worked tirelessly for the integration, peace and progress of this region. 

President Magufuli has said that President Mkapa will be remembered for his great love for the nation, his faithfulness, hard work and performance in building the economy.

Our President, President Museveni, while addressing the Parliament of Uganda on 24 August 2005, described the late as a person of moderating influence. 

In 1979, as the Foreign Minister of Tanzania, President Mkapa played a moderating role as President Julius Nyerere’s point-man at the Moshi Conference when President Idi Amin’s Government had just fallen after the Tanzania People’s Defence Forces fighting jointly with the Ugandan exiles under the Uganda National Liberation Front (UNLF). 

There had been a lot of infighting and conflicts among the Ugandans. However, the skills of Mr Benjamin Mkapa in diplomacy and statesmanship brought them together, narrowing down their differences and they agreed to work together for a new era in Uganda. 

He carried out global diplomacy to win support for the then UNLF Government. As Ugandans, we will forever be indebted to him and the late President Julius Nyerere for their role in the liberation struggle of Uganda. 

President Mkapa continued to mediate in Kenya, Burundi, South Sudan, Zimbabwe and the Democratic Republic of Congo as part of the panel of eminent African personalities led by the United Nations Secretary General then, Kofi Annan. 

He was responsible for ending post-election violence after the highly disputed elections in Kenya in 2007 and averting genocide in that country. 

In 1999, President Mkapa, together with President Museveni and the late President Daniel Arap Moi of Kenya, revived the East African Community. 

The Members of the Seventh Parliament have very good memories of President Mkapa. He addressed the Parliament of Uganda on 24 August 2005. His address was centred on Pan Africanism and a call for a paradigm shift in governance in Africa, stressing diplomatic governance within African characteristics. 

In Tanzania, he will be remembered for pushing for various reforms in the Government and public sector through the creation of institutions like the Tanzania Revenue Authority, the Private Sector Foundation, private universities, the Tanzania Roads Agency, the Prevention of Corruption and Control Bureau and the Higher Learning Loan Board, among others. 

Just like President Nyerere, President Mkapa was an alumnus of Makerere University. He graduated with a Bachelor of Arts in English in 1962; and honourable members, if you were ever in his presence, he really spoke impeccable English. Makerere is poorer, as it has once again lost one of its distinguished students, who have been able to excel and rise to lead their countries as Heads of State. 

We thank God for the personality of President Mkapa, the services he rendered to Tanzania, East Africa and Parliament. On behalf of the Parliament of Uganda, I confer sincere condolences to the Government of the United Republic of Tanzania, the people of Tanzania, East Africa and the region and also to Mrs Anna Mkapa and the family. I ask that God holds their hands as they continue their journeys without President Mkapa. Let us stand up for one minute of silence.

(The House rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, today is the World Nature Conservation Day. It is observed every 28th day of July to raise awareness about conserving nature. Much of the crises we are facing the world over today, like global warming, climate change, flooding and droughts are a result of the lack of adequate conservation efforts and wasteful use of the natural resources. 

I, therefore, urge you, honourable members, to continue sensitising the population about the dangers of degrading the environment through deforestation, avoid the misuse of plastics, dependence of fossil fuels and judicious use of the water resources. 

Honourable members, at the local level, yesterday, I had a delegation from the producer of Lato Milk, Mr Bhasker  Kotecha, who came to seek the support of Parliament to facilitate trade between Kenya and Uganda. He is an exporter of Lato Milk and he says that since January 2020, the Kenya Dairy Board has declined to issue permits to the exporters of Uganda. 

He says that Uganda is the biggest exporter of milk on this continent. I was surprised but apparently, it is true. However, it is not just about exporting the milk; the industry has a multiplier effect on the farmers who now do not have market for their products and the staff who work in the industry. 

There is also a further multiplier effect in the packaging industry. They used to get boxes from the East Africa Packaging Industry and Riley Packaging. Those companies used to operate three shifts. Today, they have scaled down to one shift in a day at 50 per cent capacity. So, you can see the extent of the negative impact of this blockage of the sale of milk.

Now their complaint, among others, was that before they came to this country, our Heads of State and we, had marketed East Africa as one big market of 192 million people. It was that which attracted them in the hope that the market is accessible. 

However, today, they informed me that Tanzania no longer takes their products and neither does Kenya. They are wondering where the East African Community is in all this. Why are we allowing the members of the Community to breach the East African Community protocols? Why are we allowing them to implement the non-tariff barriers in an increasing manner? First, they started with the milk then they went to the sugar, to the pork, the poultry and now they have gone to the sugarcane. 

This is a debate we had last week and it just shows you how badly the people are being affected. They are calling upon the East African Council of Ministers to address this issue with the urgency it deserves. I hope that our ministers will rise to the occasion and take up this issue. It is a responsibility to support our producers, our farmers, our markets and our employment. 

What is annoying them further is that the products of Kenya are still coming into Uganda. What is it that we are doing? Our side is closed but we are open for the goods from other countries. I think we need reciprocity as soon as possible.

I also received a delegation from the community museums in Uganda, who told me that there are 65 museums and that COVID-19 has had a great impact on them because there is no business; there are no visitors and there is no tourism. What is worse for them is that there is no law in Uganda governing the museums. They said that the Historical Monuments Act, 1967 did not specifically identify where they should go. They do not know whether they are part of culture or tourism. There is no minister responsible for their sector and, therefore, there is no one speaking for them. Even in this COVID-19 situation, no one has spoken about them because they do not belong anywhere.

They have heard that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development announced $43.1 million as a stimulus package and so, they are asking how they can fit into that stimulus package. “Who is going to take us to that stimulus package?” I hope the Prime Minister will be able to address this so that they can know how they fit in and be able to get some benefits. 

That reminded me about a matter I brought here about the musicians, artists and fashion designers. All of these do not have a proper ministry. 

I, again, call upon the Prime Minister to ensure that something is done so that they have a home where they can address their issues and someone to speak for them in Cabinet.

Finally, today, the Committee on Appointments met and interacted with Mrs Sarah Kanyike, who has been appointed the State Minister for the Elderly and PWDs. As you recall, this docket has been vacant since 2016, when we first vetted the Government. We interacted with her and a report has been sent to the Head of State for further management.

Honourable members, this week we really have urgent work. You may be aware that we have two important motions; one, a motion for reconsideration of the “Genetic Engineering Regulatory Bill, 2018” returned by H.E the President in accordance with Article 91(3)(b) of the Constitution and rule 142 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament; and secondly, a motion for a resolution of Parliament under Article 179(4) of the Constitution to provide for the creation of new counties. 

I am now giving notice that on Thursday, 30 July 2020, the House shall, in accordance with Article 91(5) of the Constitution and rules 142, 92 and 98 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament, take a vote on the said two items. They require numbers. 

I urge the Whips to exercise their powers in accordance with rule 15(2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament to mobilise Members to attend the proceedings of the House for that purpose. All Members with voting rights are expected to attend the Sitting. Even those without voting rights should come and sit and watch. Thank you.

Honourable members, there are a few matters of national concern. Let us have hon. Chekwel.

2.53
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (Independent, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I rise on an issue of national importance concerning the killings in our region.

Sebei Sub Region borders the national park at the south. We have gone through very bad days. On Saturday, 25 July 2020, two people were found in the national park by the game rangers; they had been shot. They were rushed to the hospital but yesterday, we lost one of them. The second one, by the name Fred Lekwa, is still hospitalised in Mbale and the bullet is still lodged in his body. 

Madam Speaker, on 28 May 2020, two boys were shot within the borderline of the national park. These two are still nursing injuries. Several people have lost their lives due to the shootings by the national park rangers. Some of them are now living with disabilities across the region, in Bukwo, Kapchorwa and Kween. We have women who have suffered from brutality by the Uganda Wildlife Authority park rangers.

We are wondering; if our people entered the national park and breached the laws of this country, why aren’t they taken to court? Why do they continue to kill them? It is now a concern. Our people are not settled; I am told they are now on rampage – they want to fight back because their people have been killed.

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that these shootings should stop with immediate effect. If these people entered the national park – actually, our major issue with the national park is only about grazing the animals. We are not even poachers. We do not introduce animals or species, which are dangerous to the national park. 

We have been raising the issue of the resettlement of our people. The people who border the national park were evicted from the national park and they have never been resettled. We have raised this issue on several occasions and the Office of the Prime Minister is aware of it. The whole Government is aware of it. Why don’t we settle this issue? Why don’t we resettle these people? Why don’t we have a boundary that is marked and known by the people? If possible – because these are people who are living in the national park and their livelihood is cattle rustling.  Why don’t we apportion a small area where they can graze their animals –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are now making a submission. I think that for some time, we have been having this debate about the coexistence of the national parks and the population and we have not had a satisfactory answer. We even amended the law but we still need the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities to, first, come and explain to us this incident and secondly, explain what measures they will take in future to end this conflict and the misconduct of the game rangers. Finally, the Prime Minister should tell us when he is going to resettle the people who had moved from the national park.

2.58
MR HERBERT ARIKO (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to raise a matter of national importance. The Ministry of Education and Sports together with the Higher Education Students’ Financing Board set 30th July as the deadline for the young Ugandans to submit their applications for consideration to benefit from the Higher Education Students’ Loan Scheme.

In Soroti, where I come from, the young men and women have been moving around in their former schools and educational institutions because the application form for the student loans scheme requires their former heads of institution or head teachers to sign. Many of them have not been able to find their former head teachers perhaps because these institutions are closed.

Madam Speaker, 30th July is a day after tomorrow and most of these young men and women are likely to lose out in applying for these loans. My plea is, can the Minister of Education and Sports, together with the Higher Education Loans Scheme Board, consider extending the deadline for the submission of these application forms in light of the current restrictions and closure of educational institutions due to the COVID-19 pandemic to help our Ugandans not to miss the opportunity of competing for Higher Education Student Loans Schemes? I beg to submit. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, that is a very important issue. Perhaps, it may require the Minister of Education and Sports to create time for the head teachers to go back to their schools so that the students can find them. So, can we ask the Minister of Education and Sports to consider extending the deadline for the submission of these application forms but also to make arrangements nationwide for the completion of application forms and submission by the students who are not in school? 

Honourable minister, since there is a deadline, can we hear from you tomorrow whether you are going to be able to do this so that our children can have an opportunity to apply? 

3.01
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA SSENYONGA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national concern about a fire gutted Kasenyi Landing Site on Koome Islands, on Saturday night, killing one person. Over 500 small houses, including property, were also completely destroyed.

This is not the first time I have stood here on the issue of fire that has destroyed people’s property including lives on Koome Islands where many of our Government officials like ministers do not bother to go to see the hardships we go through. This is an area that does not even have a ferry although Government promised to provide one in the next financial year. 

My prayer is that the minister concerned, through the Office of the Prime Minister, moves to quickly rescue our people. Otherwise I managed to deliver just a few kilogrammes of posho to them. In fact, over 600 people do not have shelter. The chairperson LCIII has a hard time finding accommodation for the fire victims.
 
Our urgent request is that Government should repair one of the old ferries as we wait for the new one, so that these people can be accessed. Otherwise in Koome Islands, people can only use canoe boats. 

Madam Speaker, when we went to rescue the people, we almost lost our lives on Sunday. Our boat was totally destroyed when we hit a rock. Going there is not easy. People are scared especially since water levels are high and not friendly. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are two issues. One is the issue of relief to the people of the Kasenyi Landing Site. The Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Relief should arrange to address that situation urgently.

There is also the need for the Minister of Internal Affairs to establish some firefighting capacity in the islands since they do not have it.

Thirdly, I would like to also ask the Minister of Works and Transport to tell us the plans he has to facilitate transport within Koome Islands. He should give us an update within a fortnight. 

3.04
MS GRACE WATUWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Namisindwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. 

Namisindwa District lost the first COVID-19 victim; a 34-year-old woman who passed on, on 22 July 2020. Namisindwa District is a food basket and business centre for this nation, which borders Kenya. It is also the home of red onions. Unfortunately, after losing this first case, we expected interventions from the Central Government.

Madam Speaker, the only intervention we got was burial and yet the body was poorly buried. The decomposing body odour has sent away the security. Our quarantine centre now has 180 people –

THE SPEAKER: What are you saying?

MS WATUWA: The decomposing body –

THE SPEAKER: Is it still there?

MS WATUWA: It was poorly buried and I think the dogs have exhumed it and so, the odour is everywhere.

We expected interventions from the Centre to sensitise the community. In fact, this lady was a member of the Village Health Team (VHT) who had participated in the supply of nets in the neighbouring village.

Our quarantine centre now has over 180 people but without food yet the whole district has only four temperature guns. We are unable to feed and care for these people. The community is now up in arms. They do not want to receive the family back in the community. There is no psychosocial support from the Centre.

My prayer is that the Minister of Health intervenes by providing psychosocial support. Otherwise, if churches were open, maybe prayers and counselling services from there would help. Unfortunately, they are still closed.

Madam Speaker, we do not have enough sanitisers. We have not even received masks although recently, before the end of the last financial year, we approved a supplementary budget for these. While we are a border district, we have not received a single mask and we do not have any interventions in this case; we are overwhelmed. 

We, therefore, ask for intervention from the Ministry of Health. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Watuwa. This is really a matter of great concern. First, we were told that the first beneficiaries of the masks would be the border districts; Namisindwa is a border district. So, who is getting masks to the border districts, which are still under lockdown?

Honourable Minister of Health, you need to urgently send a team to Namisindwa District to ensure this body is properly buried and treat the people who are around. Maybe they now have problems. This is really urgent. Minister of health, I want to hear from you tomorrow on whether you have sent a team – they are not here? 

Honourable members, this is very urgent. The Minister of Health is directed to quickly send a team to Namisindwa District to perform a re-burial of that body and supply the people there with sanitisers and masks, which you said were for the border districts. We need an urgent answer on this issue tomorrow.

3.08
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issues raised by the Member for Namisindwa are very pertinent. 

Madam Speaker, we were told that Government had put in place a special team to take over burial arrangements of COVID-19 victims. So, I do not know whether that is the team that they told us about; the best team that would handle burials for such bodies? Anyhow, if that burial was handled by the local people and not done properly well, definitely all the people of Namisindwa are at stake.

I would like the Minister of Health to urgently make sure that now that we have two deaths, if one dies of COVID-19, that person should be properly buried so that we do not get cases like those in Namisindwa.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is very urgent. We need the Minister of Health to come to the Floor tomorrow and tell us where the burial team is and how it can be accessible by Ugandans. We already have two cases and we need to know who to contact. We need an answer tomorrow.

3.10
MR DANIEL MUHEIRWE (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Kikuube): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On 19 September 2018, I raised a matter of national importance where the Office of the Prime Minister was evicting people neighbouring Kyangwali Refugee Camp under the pretext of resettling landless people on Kyangwali Refugee Camp land.

When I raised the matter, you directed that, that scheme be stopped awaiting committee investigations and reporting to this House. To the best of my knowledge, the investigations are still ongoing by the Committee on Presidential Affairs. However, to my surprise, on Saturday, the same operation was re-launched and they are calling it, “Resettling Landless People in Kyangwali Refugee Camp.”

These people have their own land and do not need to be resettled. The communities are asking of what use it is to petition Parliament if they cannot be listened to or if we cannot wait for the findings of Parliament. Madam Speaker, the land where they are trying to resettle those people is barren, some parts are rocky and others are a desert. 

There is no resettlement package at all, no compensation for the developments on the land and they are putting them in a situation where they will be starting life afresh while their gardens of coffee and banana plantations are being harvested by refugees. 

I am worried that this may cause chaos in my constituency. Worse still, people with permanent buildings in a trading centre have been given an ultimatum of 24 hours, meaning that tomorrow by midday, they should have vacated their homes for where they are being located to stay, which is 2.5 acres.

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that you again halt this exercise until we get the findings of the committee, issues of resettlement are addressed until we get to know the real owner of that land. I do not what to pre-empt and what will come from the committee report. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can I know from the Chairperson of the Committee on Presidential Affairs how far they have gone with this issue? Is the chairperson here?

3.14
MS ESTHER ANYAKUN (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The committee is in the final stages of writing the report after visiting all the land in contention. Therefore, we are soon coming up with a report on the Floor of Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Do you think next week is too early?

MS ANYAKUN: I will consult with my chairperson because today, we have been working on the Red Cross Bill. If we are able to finish in the course of the week, we should be in position to do that.

THE SPEAKER: Can you update us by tomorrow or Thursday about your state of readiness so that we can deal with this matter expeditiously?

MS ANYAKUN: Yes, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The Prime Minister is not here but this is a matter that we had discussed long ago. I do not know why Government says one thing and does another. First, they said no evictions during the COVID-19 pandemic and we are still in the same time. It is now the Government, which is evicting people.

3.15
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Beti Kamya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There are laid down guidelines on evictions, which are very elaborate and very specific arising out of several statutes that begin with the Constitution, the Land Act, directives from His Excellency the President, guidelines from the Chief Justice and the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development.

We have identified the weakness, which is at the point of enforcement. Cabinet has done its work and Parliament has done its work in enacting laws. However, the point of weakness is at the enforcement.

Madam Speaker, that is why my ministry recently launched a campaign to sensitise Ugandans on the guidelines that must be followed for any evictions. Predominantly, there must be a court order, which must be followed by a notice of not less than 90 days. There must also be a court designated bailiff who must come along with a letter from the Inspector General of Police.

Therefore, the laws are very elaborate but we have identified the source and we have –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, it is the Government, particularly the Office of the Prime Minister, that is evicting people. 
   
MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the House that in our Government, we have people who are there to fail the NRM regime by their actions. Honourable Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, you have performed, you have done a good job and they are worried that since you are slated to become the Vice President of this country in the next regime, they are fighting you. That is why when you give orders, security gives other orders. The people who evict consider themselves more powerful than you. That is the information. (Laughter)

MS KAMYA: Madam Speaker, in conclusion, yesterday during a sitting in Cabinet, it was resolved that all relocations will not begin until the next financial year. That is why people should – (Interjections) -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, if that is the position, can you stop what is in Kyangwali now?

Ms Kamya: Madam Speaker, I am informing this House that Cabinet took a decision yesterday that there will be no relocation of people until the next financial year when the relocation is properly organised, people are properly informed and are planned for. 

The Speaker: Therefore, can you instruct the people who are evicting people in Kyangwali to stop?

Ms kamya: Madam Speaker, I will do so.

Mr muheirwe: Madam Speaker, I raised this matter and because it concerns Kyangwali –

The Speaker: Honourable members, you are now removing masks. Put them on.

Mr muheirwe: Madam Speaker, when it comes to the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and matters concerning Kyangwali, we lose confidence in the ministry. For the information of this House, there was a minister in that ministry on the launch of this operation.

Secondly, in 1998, the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development surveyed this land and got 36 square miles where the refugee settlement would be. In 2016, the boundaries shifted from 36 square miles to 79 –

The Speaker: Honourable member, you are moving ahead of the committee. We have stopped the eviction. On Thursday, we need an answer from the committee on how far they have gone. They will have an answer to most of these issues.

Mr muheirwe: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. (Members rose_)

The Speaker: Honourable members, some of the issues are local issues. Not everything that happens must be a matter of national importance. The issue of floods, which you say are annual, why don’t you address it to the minister? How will Parliament help?

Hon. Akol and hon. Lanyero, the issues of floods are local. 

Hon. Matsiko, I have not understood your issue. When I understand it, I will call you. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

3.1 ON THE STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PARLIAMENTARY RESOLUTION OF 3RD MAY, 2018 ON PAYMENT OF MONIES OWED TO UGANDA-SOUTH SUDAN TRADERS

3.22
The Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I would like to request that we make a statement on this matter on Thursday this week.

The Speaker: Remind your senior minister to be present here.

3.2 ON the INVESTIGATIONS INTO ALLEGATIONS OF TORTURE AND ASSAULT OF PEOPLE BY SECURITY PERSONNEL, INCLUDING ASSAULT OF THE LCV CHAIRPERSON OF MITYANA DISTRICT

The Speaker: The ministers for Internal Affairs are not here.

3.3 ON THE NON-PAYMENT OF HONORARIA, EX-GRATIA AND EMOLUMENTS IN THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2018/2019 TO NEWLY ELECTED LEADERS OF BUKEDEA DISTRICT INCLUDING LC III, II AND I COUNCILORS

3.23
The Minister OF Local Government (Mr Raphael Magyezi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Here is a statement by the Ministry of Local Government on the non-payment of honoraria, ex-gratia and emoluments to newly elected leaders of Bukedea and other districts during the Financial Year 2019/2020. 

A week ago, you referred the above petition to my ministry for consideration and report back to Parliament. I noted that this matter keeps coming up in very many areas and several times.

Therefore, I have decided to give a general explanation on emoluments of councillors, payment of ex-gratia and honoraria. I will end with the recommendations on the way forward. I hope the statement is uploaded on your iPad.

Ex-gratia is a payment made to the village and parish chairpersons once a year, usually in the last quarter of the financial year. The amount is Shs 120,000 and it is not supposed to be taxed.

Ex-gratia constitutes part of the district, city or municipal approved budget. As such, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development releases these funds as part of the unconditional grants to the Local Governments.

Additional funds may be released on request whenever there is a shortfall especially after creation of new local Government units. 

In addition, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development recently advised that local Governments can use the unconditional grant to offset any outstanding shortfalls.

The number of village and parish chairpersons used in the calculation is embedded in the Budget Framework Paper of each local Government.

How different is this from honoraria? 
In the Financial Year 2017/2018, Government resolved to pay honoraria. That is a monthly pay of Shs 35,000 per councillor at the sub county, town council and division level. This category of leaders had all along been left out yet their counterparts at the village, parish, district and municipal level were receiving allowances from Government.

Honoraria to each local Government is dispersed as part of the unconditional grant to that local Government. Many local Governments have been requesting for additional funding to offset shortfalls and additional funds have time and again been released for this purpose by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

In addition, just like ex-gratia, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development recently advised the local Governments that wherever there is a shortfall, they should be able to use the unconditional grant to offset it in the payment of honoraria to their councillors.

What are the allowances paid to the district and municipal councillors? 
The councillors who are not members of the Executive Committees are paid an amount totalling to Shs 250,000 per month each, tax inclusive. 

The salaried leaders in the local Government are the following:
    1. District Executive members of the district committee;
    2. District Speakers;
    3. Chairpersons of sub counties;
    4. Chairpersons of town councils and divisions are paid a monthly salary as follows;
    a. District chairperson is paid Shs 2 million per month,
    b. Vice Chairperson is paid Shs 1 million per month,
    c. The Speaker is paid Shs 600,000 per month,
    d. Members of the District Executive Committee receive Shs 500,000 per month.
    e. Sub county, town council and division chairpersons are paid Shs 300,000 per month.

There are other emoluments. Leaders at the district, city or municipal level receive the following, in addition:
    i. Deputy Speaker of the district is paid Shs 400,000 per month;
    ii. Speaker of a Municipality gets Shs 400,000 per month;
    iii. Deputy Speaker of a municipality is paid Shs 300,000 per month.

Attached to this issue is the question of non-operationalisation of the new town councils and the newly created sub counties.

The bulk of the cases of non-payment of ex-gratia and honoraria are as a result non-operationalisation of the newly created administrative units. 

We are talking of 364 sub counties and 352 town councils. For some time now, the Ministry of Local Government has made requests to the Ministry of Finance to avail these funds so that these LC III could be operationalised. However, the funds were not available. The total funds required for full operationalisation at full capacity is Shs 156 billion. 

In order to make sure that these newly created sub counties and town councils can start off, Government has now agreed to provide funds as follows: each new sub county will get Shs 30 million and each new town council will get Shs 50 million.

Madam Speaker, I, therefore, would like to recommend and commit as follows:
    1) My ministry together with Ministry of Finance shall move to Parliament to make the necessary budget adjustments to cater for the sub counties and town councils as indicated.
    2) My ministry together with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development shall study the cases of districts with unpaid honoraria, ex-gratia and emoluments of councillors and make sure that prompt corrective action is taken. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Now, honourable members, that matter has come up from different constituencies but I think this is now the answer. I would like to advise that Members internalise it so that they can inform their constituents. 

The question of adequacy or otherwise of the money is not an issue for now. We now know how the money comes and how it should be handled. Therefore, for this Session, until the Second Meeting, this matter should not be raised again.

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I would like to get from the Minister of Local Government is that you are aware that whenever Government is running any programme in the country, the LCI is involved in each programme and on voluntary basis.

The minister has given us specifications on how these different local leaders are meant to be paid and those who have not yet got their payments. 

Wouldn’t it be right for this august House, as the minister comes back and as we finalise on that issue, to look at the fate of the majority of Ugandans who are doing voluntary work? Imagine an LCI chairperson with his 11 members of the council are paid Shs 120,000 for the whole year. Madam Speaker, wouldn’t it be right -

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, I have said that the adequacy or otherwise is not a matter for debate now. We are going to start the budget process; you are free to make your proposals then. For now, let us just listen - where is the money, who gets what for now. It is not adequate but that is not the debate for now.

MR ANGURA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement and commitment that he has made towards raising resources for these lower administrative units to take off.

The other comment that I want the minister to make and assure the nation is that the communities in these town councils and sub counties are saying that they want to hold their elections come 2021. Whereas you have talked about the money that we are going to see how to raise here, can you also give the country assurance that all town councils and sub counties are going to elect their chairperson come 2021 elections? Thank you very much.

MS OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Local Government for the information. However, this Parliament is still expecting the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come to us with a revised budget as promised. 

Therefore, I think it is very important that you should not ask Parliament to make money available. We are expecting the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come to the House and give us a revised clear budgeting framework so that we know whether we have something for the local Government or not.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, when did we approve Shs 120,000 per annum for the LCI? I think it was over five years ago. During that time, Shs 120,000 could buy a bicycle. Is it economically right for us, after five years, to be talking about the same figure? Shall we be expecting any work to be done by these LCI? Therefore, let us be realistic when we are talking about other people. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have an opportunity to discuss this matter when proposals for the budget are coming. Please, be alert, make your proposals and make sure that this House passes them.

About the new budget, I do not think that is the Minister of Local Government. We asked the question; where are the payments for the local Governments, the ex gratia. That is what he was answering. It is not a policy statement.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The serious issue is that the roadmap for the elections is out. Most of these of sub counties and town councils are not included in the roadmap for elections. So, what I want the Minister -

THE SPEAKER: I think that is what hon. Angura asked.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, let him come clear. The roadmap is already out and nominations are going on. We are not talking about a budget that will wait. Let him come and tell us what he told the Electoral Commission as far as these town councils and sub counties are concerned?

MS BASEMERA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister for the statement. I am seeking further clarification. I think Government undertook to facilitate chairpersons of LC III and chairpersons of town councils with motorcycles for transport. This has not sufficed and they keep asking about the fate of their transport facilitation. We would like the Minister to clarify. Is Government still maintaining the commitment to provide motorcycles for the chairperson LC IIIs or if it is not, let it come out clearly so that we can explain to the people.

Madam Speaker, it hurts to find a chairperson of a sub county walking on foot to execute his or her mandate. It is very painful. Thank you, Madam Speaker.
	
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before I call the chairperson, I want just to record that last week, I received a delegation of LCIII chairpersons representing the 1700 LCIII chairpersons demanding for their transport and they said that since 2008, Government has never provided transport to the LCIII. Therefore, they want answers about what is going to happen.

MR ONZIMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to give information to the House, particularly concerning the issue of ex-gratia. My sub county councillors raised this same question that they had not got their money for that particular financial year. When we started investigating, we realised that this money was released by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development but because it was an unconditional grant, some of the districts misappropriated this money, which is meant for payment of these councillors.

Therefore, I would like to bring that to the attention of the Minister of Local Government that these districts where people are complaining should work with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to crosscheck which districts received this money. These are not issues of Government; sometimes, these monies are given to the districts but they are misappropriated. 

Therefore, I advise the minister to link up with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and crosscheck the list of monies, which were being sent and those districts must show how they utilised them. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, can I invite the minister? After that, the Minister of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance has something to respond to, on the issue of LCV of Mityana.

3.40
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Raphael Magyezi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Indeed, the Shs 120,000 for the LC1 chairpersons about five or six years ago, was aimed at addressing their transport problem to enable them buy bicycles. To date, I would like to make it very clear to the Members and the nation that Government is going to provide bicycles to all LCI chairpersons. We are also going to provide motorcycles for every LCIII chairperson. The money is already with me in the ministry and we have started the procurement process. These will be procured this quarter. (Applause)

Secondly, on the LC elections, about a month ago, the Electoral Commission wrote to every Chief Administrative Officer (CAO), giving them the list of electoral areas per district. The deadline was 8 July 2020 to give feedback in case they had any problem. In case they did not, then that is the fault of that administrative officer. What I know is that the sub counties and town councils, which were created and gazetted, were forwarded to the Electoral Commission for elections and they are going to have elections.

Under the parishes, there is a way the Electoral Commission demarcates the electoral areas, depending on the numbers, among other things. However, today, the biggest challenge was – yes, you are going to have leaders in place but without funds for operationalisation and this is being addressed.   
 
I would like to thank the committee chairperson - and you are totally right. We found that in some districts, the ex-gratia and honoraria has been misallocated and that is because even the councillors in some areas are not aware of their entitlements. That is why we have given you this statement so that each is aware. What does the chairperson LC1, LC11, a councillor at the sub county and a councillor at the district expect? This money goes as a conditional grant but sometimes, because the CAO thinks that the councillors do not know, they allocate it for other purposes.

I have given the commitment; we are going to follow it on a case by case basis and make sure that corrective action is taken. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, before you go, you talked about bicycles for LC1s; can I know whether the 55 districts that did not get last time will get their bicycles? Kamuli is one of them and I know that there are 54 others. They keep asking me; Speaker, where are our bicycles?

MR MAGYEZI: Madam Speaker, we are giving bicycles to the chairpersons in office today. We are giving a motorcycle to each chairperson LCIII in office today and we followed the numbers we have right now. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: So, should the others forget? 

3.43
MR THOMAS TAYEBWA (NRM, Ruhinda North County, Mitooma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Regarding elections for the town councils, I have two town councils in Mitooma in my constituency; Kabira Town Council and Mitara Town Council. 

Last week, I went to the Electoral Commission to find out the status of these town councils. I was told that there is a circular from the Electoral Commission that all the town councils that were created after 30 June 2019 will not have elections. I would like to seek clarification from the Minister of Local Government regarding this matter. Thank you. 

MR KAHIMA: Madam Speaker, equally important, is that I also have a town council in Ruhaama County called Kakukuuru Rwenanura Town Council. That town council was gazetted but the information I have is that it will not have elections. 

Honourable minister, we would like you to clarify on these new town councils that are gazetted but will not have elections in the forthcoming elections because we have many questions from the constituency.

3.44
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am happy to hear that they are going to buy for the local leaders means of transport. You are aware that people with disabilities who are councillors at the districts were promised motorcycles - and you have been one of the advocates. To date, those two councillors have never got their motorcycles. 

Can I know from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development or Minister of Local Government whether we are part of the package so that our councillors can get the answer whether their motorcycles are being approved? This has lasted about 10 years now; it is a question they always ask us. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, will you answer now?

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you. Madam Speaker, I have just talked to the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and he has confirmed that every town council and sub county, which is gazetted, shall have elections conducted. In case, there is any area that is not covered, it is the responsibility of the CAO to immediately contact the Electoral Commission and also give us a copy so that we can find out why and whether there is a merger with another area.

However, in principle, he agrees with me and that is the policy in place. In case there is any case like in Kabira, let us find out from the CAO; did he respond to the circular about the electoral areas as given by the Electoral Commission? If it was still not captured or if he responded and again, it was not captured, then we will have to take it up on behalf of those areas. 

Finally, the question of the persons with disabilities is a very good reminder. We will have to follow it up with hon. Asamo to ensure that for the motorcycles and bicycles to be procured, there is consciousness about the facility for persons with disability. I do not have the figures now but we are going to issue a circular to all the CAOs to identify their chairpersons who fall under that category so that in the procurement, we take it into consideration. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE CHANGES IN THE BUDGET FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2020/2021

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development -

3.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, from the record, if this is the question that was raised by hon. Amos Lugoloobi, the Chairperson, Committee on Budget, we answered it to the satisfaction of Members. We said all changes in the Budget can only be approved by Parliament. 

Therefore, we have nothing more to add regarding this issue. Thank you.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

REPORT OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON THE AUDIT OF THE TREASURY MEMORANDUM PRESENTED TO PARLIAMENT BY THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IN MAY 2019 ON THE ENTITIES WITH UNQUALIFIED OPINIONS FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015

3.48
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay a report of the Auditor General on the audit of the treasury memorandum presented to Parliament by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in May 2019 on the entities with unqualified opinions for Financial Year 2014/2015. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government).

REPORT OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON THE AUDIT OF THE TREASURY MEMORANDUM PRESENTED TO PARLIAMENT BY THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IN SEPTEMBER 2017 ON THE ENERGY SECTOR FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015

 3.49
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay a report of the Auditor General on the audit of the treasury memorandum presented to Parliament by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in September 2017 on the energy sector for Financial Year 2014/2015. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) for perusal and report back.

REPORT OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF THE ROAD SECTOR SUPPORT PROJECT 4 (RSSP-4): KIGUMBA-MASINDI-HOIMA-KABWOYA ROAD PROJECT; ADF LOAN NO.2100150028796 - PROJECT ID NO. P-UG-DB0-021 FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2019

3.51
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay a report of the Auditor General on the financial statements of the Road Sector Support Project 4 (RSSP-4): Kigumba-Masindi-Hoima-Kabwoya Road Project; ADF loan No.2100150028796 - project ID no. P-UG-DB0-021 for the financial year ended 30 June 2019. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) for perusal and report back. Similarly, Item 3 (iii) on the Treasury Memorandum is sent to the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) for perusal and report back. 

Can I now invite the Minister for Information Communication Technology and National Guidance to present on the issue of the chairperson of Mityana?

3.52
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Ms Judith Nabakooba): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. 

I would like to report on the issue of the assault case on the LCV Chairperson for Mityana District and other members in the community. 

When the incident happened, I talked to the Chief of Defence Forces. He sent some officers to Mityana. They interacted with the District Security Committee and as a result, three suspects were arrested. They appeared before the first division court, Kakiri, for cases of assault and they were sent on remand. 

We hope the case will be mentioned again in court on 31 July 2020. That is the information I would like to give this House relating to the officers who committed the assault offence in Mityana District. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Makumbi and other Members are invited to note that information on that issue.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NATIONAL COFFEE BILL, 2018

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I am sorry to raise a procedural issue on this. Last week, we received a letter from either the chairperson or the Clerk, inviting those who have moved amendments to appear before the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries tomorrow at 9.00 a.m. It has been circulated. 

Since we are meeting tomorrow at 9.00 a.m., wouldn’t it be procedurally right that this is deferred until we take our proposed amendments to the committee so that we can come with harmonised positions?

THE SPEAKER: So, are you seeking for an opportunity to meet the committee and present formally? This means if we allow the process now, we might have to repeat it tomorrow. Let us postpone the next stage of this Bill to tomorrow and I hope the committee will have met and harmonised. It will give us chance to move faster. Item no. 5 is, therefore, deferred to tomorrow. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LABOUR DISPUTES (ARBITRATION AND SETTLEMENT) (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

THE SPEAKER: Is the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development here? They are not here.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT UNDER SECTION 8(3) OF THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS ACT, 2005 FOR REVIEW OF THE REPRESENTATION UNDER ARTICLE 78(1)(B) AND (C) OF THE CONSTITUTION

THE SPEAKER: Is the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs here? He is not here as well? Can we go to item no. 8 - Is the Prime Minister here? We had asked him to give us the Government position on Apaa before we conclude the debate. 

3.56
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Beti Kamya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to remind you that you gave us three weeks from 7th July – because Cabinet had been hampered by the COVID-19 restrictions – to go to Apaa and establish how far the implementations of the resolutions have gone. Madam Speaker, you allowed us three weeks. We shall be ready with the report.

THE SPEAKER: Three weeks from 7th July?

MS KAMYA: Yes, it is in writing, Madam Speaker. We shall be here with the report then.

THE SPEAKER: Where are we now on those weeks? Is this the second week? - it is exactly three weeks. (Laughter) The three weeks are over. Honourable minister, this is the last day. We expect you and the Government to come with an answer about what was done in the Cabinet; what you agreed to do. That is what we are waiting for.

MS KAMYA: I apologise, Madam Speaker. I think something happened to my mathematics. I beg that we bring it on Thursday next week.

THE SPEAKER: No. honourable members, Apaa has been on the Order Paper for a long time. We need to relieve our committee of the stress of walking around with it.

MS KAMYA: Madam Speaker, COVID-19 took three months away from us. I beg that we bring the report on Thursday next week.

THE SPEAKER: Tuesday next week. I deferred Item no. 9. I already said it will take place on Thursday. Let us go to Item no. 10.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE STATE OF INDEBTEDNESS, GRANTS AND GUARANTEES

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson -

4.00
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Lawrence Bategeka): Madam Speaker, I am here to present a report of the Committee on National Economy on the state of indebtedness, grants and guarantees as at June 2019. This report has been on the Order Paper since February.

Before I present the report, I beg to lay on Table the following documents, with respect to this report:
    1) The report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow €162,445,694 –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, where are you? I thought you were reading the report of the Committee on National Economy on the state of indebtedness, grants and guarantees.

MR BATEGEKA: Oh, sorry. Let me lay:
    1) The minutes of the meetings held to consider the report of the Committee on National Economy on the state of indebtedness, grants and guarantees as at June 2019.
    2) The report on public debt, guarantees, other financial liabilities and grants for Financial Year 2018/2019, by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.
    3) The medium-term debt management strategy 2018/2019 – 2021/2022.
    4) Public debt and other financial liabilities management framework for Financial Year 2018/2019 – to 2022/2023, by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.
    5) Analytical report on the state of indebtedness and public debt sustainability for Uganda as at June 2019, by the Parliamentary Budget Office. 

I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I have looked at the time of 20 minutes allocated to me and I will try to summarise the report as quickly as I can. Since the report is uploaded on the iPads, I will not go through some items such as the methodology. Let me go straight to public debt.

Public debt
Public debt is the entire debt, comprised of both external debt and domestic debt. Uganda’s public debt stock increased by 12 per cent from Shs 42 trillion, equivalent to about $10.74 billion recorded in Financial Year 2017/2018 to Shs 47 trillion, equivalent to $12.55 billion, in Financial Year 2018/2019. The existing debt stock constitutes about $8.35 billion as external debt and about $4.2 billion as domestic debt; about 50 per cent is domestic debt. In terms of shares, the external debt takes the largest share of the total public debt at 66 per cent, while domestic debt is 34 per cent of the total public debt.

External Debt
Uganda’s external debt exposure grew by 11 per cent from $12.14 billion in Financial Year 2017/2018 to $13.48 billion in Financial Year 2018/2019, largely due to the need to invest in large infrastructure projects to stimulate economic activities.

External debt service
The total Government of Uganda external debt service by end of Financial Year 2018/2019 amounted to $1,335 million, which was an increase of 384 per cent compared to $275.75 million in Financial Year 2017/2018. It is a very huge jump in terms of external service.

Performance of external debt financing
The national development budget is partially financed through external resources, which take the form of loans and grants. The two forms of financing are channelled through the national budget or the Consolidated Fund for appropriation and projects directly in specific areas and sectors.

Madam Speaker, permit me to quickly look at grants. During Financial Year 2018/2019, total grants received declined to Shs 695 billion, a decrease of 10 per cent from Shs 774 billion the previous financial year. This trend has continued in Financial Year 2018/2019 and over the medium term. Grants are decreasing generally.

I am skipping most of the items because Members can easily read them. I will go to the recommendations after looking at the domestic debt.

Domestic Debt
Domestic borrowing is intended to bridge the Government financing gap, operation of monetary policy and development of the financial markets. As a result, Government in Financial Year 2012/2013, started issuing Treasury Bi1ls and Bonds for fiscal policy purposes. Since then, the stock of domestic debt has increased significantly. 

In the Financial Year 2016/2017, the stock of domestic debt stood at Shs 12,064 billion. In the Financial Year 2018/2019, it increased to Shs 16,026 billion, which is quite significant. Following the decision to borrow domestically for fiscal purposes, the stock of domestic debt has increased significantly.

The trend in domestic debt is attributed to the fact that over the years, maturing instruments are financed by further borrowing from the market. In effect, it implies that every year, Government borrows to finance both maturing instruments and also to bridges the fiscal deficit which, in my view, is not sustainable.

Public debt sustainability
A Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA) allows a country to assess its future debt sustainability, based on the current level of debt and prospective borrowing in the medium-term and long term. The DSA analyses the key ratios of the country's debt stock in both nominal and present value terms and the debt service to GDP, exports, and domestic budget revenue to see whether debt is sustainable.

Madam Speaker, I will go to the observations and recommendations of the committee starting with public debt.

Public Debt
The committee recommends the following:
    1) Government should expedite implementation of all projects financed by debt to increase the country's productive capacity in order to repay debt. Implementation of these projects is slow.

    2) Government should borrow for projects that are financially and economically and with rates of return higher than the finance cost of the loans. This will be able to increase the productivity and production within the economy.

    3) Government should avoid borrowing for consumptive purposes as this will not increase the productive capacity of the economy, especially consultancies, salaries, purchase of project vehicles and workshops among others, as this does not increase the productive capacity of the economy.

External Debt
The committee recommends the following:
    1) Government should expedite the implementation of the export promotion strategy and intervene in areas where the private sector should become more competitive compared to other exporting producers of similar goods and services.

    2) Government should focus on overcoming the export product space by promoting industrial policies that will enhance the diversification of the country's exports in key strategic sectors, especially in the agriculture and energy and mineral development sectors that will lead to the rapid economic transformation of Uganda.

    3) Government through the various public finance management reforms that are being implemented should strengthen the capacity of Ministries, Agencies and Departments (MDAs) in project identification, design and appraisal processes. Further, Parliament should not approve loans for MDAs or sectors with non-performing loans that have not taken off without a clear satisfactory justification to Parliament.

    4) The Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development should further ensure that MDAs prioritise the provision of counterpart funds in the budget for implementation of debt financed projects.

    5) Government should ensure increased transparency in the procurement process, during the contraction of Chinese loans. This will improve efficiency in the implementation of the public investments in the energy, works and transport sectors and improve public debt sustainability through favourable growth spill-overs as long as the baseline debt trajectory is sustainable.

    6) To guard against of plying of unsustainable debt levels, the Government must ensure a careful sequencing of its debt obligations to China as well as guarantee that the current infrastructure growth projects yield both growth and revenue dividends.
Madam Speaker, I am talking about China because it is the biggest lender followed by the World Bank. The details are in the report.

Domestic Debt
The committee recommends the following:
1. Government should develop and deepen the domestic financial sector to increase participation of the various sections of the economy in the domestic financial markets. Increase in participation in the domestic financial markets will lower interest charged on domestic issuance.

2. In addition, Government should limit domestic financing of the budget in the short run, as the financial markets remain shallow and under developed with limited players in the secondary market. The limited Government borrowing from the domestic market will consequently reduce the interest charged to private borrowers. If we want to reduce interest rates, we strongly recommend that Government should desist from borrowing domestically to finance fiscal operations; something embarked on from Financial Year 2012/2013.

3. To mitigate the risk of refinancing domestic debt, Government should continue implementing the strategy of taking on longer dated securities, while keeping domestic borrowing as low as possible.

Performance of Project Financing
The committee recommends that Government should increase funding to sectors that do not attract project financing but are critical to the growth of the economy. The details are in the report.

Loan Disbursements
Madam Speaker, I should have said that disbursements increased but since I could not read the entire report in proportionate terms.  

The committee recommends the following: 
    1) Government should expedite the implementation of approved projects financed through external borrowing in order for these projects to achieve the desired project objectives, outcomes and impact.
    2) Poor execution of the government's large debt financed infrastructure programmes should further be addressed through capacity building in MDAs to better prepare and appraise projects.
    3) Government should provide adequate project start-up preparation funds to MDAs to facilitate the fulfilment of loan effective conditions as required by donor/creditor in order to trigger the disbursement of committed project funds.

On contingent liabilities, the committee recommends that Government should undertake a value for money audit in all enterprises that have benefited from Government guarantees.

On external debt service, the committee recommends that in the medium term, Government should continue to prioritise concessional financing as the preferred means of meeting financial requirements especially aimed at social projects.

Further, given the constraints in accessing large volumes of concessional financing for large infrastructure projects, non-concessional borrowing by Government should be earmarked for projects that have high capacity of increasing productivity and production in the economy; while at the same time implement reforms that enhance efficient project implementation according to the planned timelines. 

Madam Speaker, on public debt sustainability, the committee recommends the following;
The committee recommends the following:
    1) Government should ensure that the infrastructure investments financed by debt yield the envisaged growth dividend.
    2) Government should improve revenue collections by at least half percent of GDP per year over the next five years as a key pillar of debt sustainability.
    3) Government should fast-track the development of the oil and gas and ensure that oil exports commence in 2023. Madam Speaker, that might not be possible because oil will commence three years after signing of the FID investment final decision, which is yet to be signed.
    4) Government should scale down on financing infrastructure investment through debt once the ongoing projects are completed.

There is need for Government to consider adopting a provisional debt ceiling of 50 per cent of GDP in nominal terms, which should help contain spending pressures by setting a tangible and easily monitorable target.

Regarding External Debt Sustainability, Madam Speaker, the committee recommends the following:
    1) Deliberate efforts by Government should be undertaken to enhance the country's competitiveness to boost exports over the medium term, including more effective targeted investment in infrastructure and human development to fill the infrastructure and skills gap.

    2) As the country's external debt position faces significant risks for example the deterioration of exports, that will lead to the downgrade towards a moderate risk rating of debt distress, debt contracting by Government should be scaled down to only projects that have a high economic and financial return in the medium term and target cheaper concessional loans to finance the investment plan.

    3) In order to limit the impact of the ever increasing external debt service, Government should improve tax administration to increase revenue collection, while at the same time lower costs of production to promote private sector development to take lead in the expansion of the productive capacity of the economy.

    4) To limit the impact of foreign exchange risks arising from increased external debt, Government needs to significantly increase its foreign reserves through increase in the export capacity of the economy, attract Foreign Direct Investments and minimise imports to only capital and essential goods and services.

On Domestic Debt Sustainability, the committee recommends that: 
    1) Government should mitigate the domestic debt interest rate risks through a combination of stronger revenue mobilisation and deliberate efforts to extend average maturities over the medium term.

    2) Government should adhere to the domestic stock limit borrowing limit of 75 per cent to private sector credit in the Public Debt Management Framework, to minimise competition with the private sector for credit.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, Uganda's Public debt stock to GDP ratio increased from 35 per cent in the Financial Year 2Ol7/2018 to 37 per cent in the Financial Year 2018/2019 and remains below the 50 per cent ceiling after the latest economic rebasing of the country's GDP. But the major concern is pegged to the speed at which Uganda is acquiring new debt, particularly domestic debt. Domestic debt is the problem.

Uganda remains at a low risk of debt distress with both domestic and external public and publicly guaranteed debt found to be sustainable over the medium and long term, on condition that Uganda sticks to borrowing within the given Macroeconomic framework, which remains a lower fiscal deficit.

Public debt sustainability faces significant downside risks from the Government's ambitious push for infrastructure development, exchange rate volatility and refinancing risks. This calls for the critical need for Government to not only avoid debt policy missteps but also be sure to take the right debt policy steps. This will further require Government to enhance its debt management framework coupled with improving public debt transparency.

The country also faces increased exposure to increased interest rates due to the increasing non-concessional external finance, some of which is contracted at variable costs. Therefore, Government should contract non-concessional finance for projects whose rate of return exceeds the cost of credit. In addition, timely and efficient implementation of debt financed projects is critical for generating higher returns on investments. Poor execution of these projects will hurt economic growth and the country's fiscal position.

Loan disbursement performance has been improving overtime but a significant amount of committed external debt amounting to $ 5.08 billion as at end June 2019 still remains undisbursed indicating slow implementation of some of the projects especially in the Energy, Works and Transport, Agriculture and Education sectors that are poorly executed. The lower disbursement levels compared to what was planned signifies absorption challenges. 

The delays in implementation and 1ow absorption among debt financed projects does not only cause loss of public resources as Government has to meet the excess commitment fees and penalty on un-disbursed funds held on the loan accounts by the development partners but also leads to cost escalation such as increased future prices of goods and services due to inflation and extra administration costs.

Despite the improvements in contracting domestic debt of longer-term maturity, Uganda still has a very high percentage of its domestic debt maturing in one year at 37 per cent, exposing the country to significant refinancing risks. The ratio of domestic interest cost to revenue (excluding grants) declined by 0.4 per cent from the previous year ending June 2018, although it remains slightly above the 15 per cent threshold.

The fiscal space of critical expenditures in the budget is reducing over time and therefore, minimizing impact of any fiscal expansion by Government. This implies that Government should make smarter use of fiscal policy which in turn means striking the right balance between growth, debt sustainability and social objectives. This involves building fiscal buffers in good times, while creating enough fiscal space to act in bad times. It involves the continual hard work of upgrading tax systems, mobilising domestic revenue, prioritising growth, friendly expenditure and reducing the public debt where needed.

Madam Speaker, I beg to report.

The Speaker: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and members of the Committee on National Economy for that report on the state of indebtedness and guarantees.

The report has been signed by the necessary minimum. I know it has been on the Order Paper for some time but the principles are still relevant. Do you have any comments?

4.28
Ms jesca ababiku (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker and the committee for the report.

My concern is on the poor performance of many of the projects we have borrowed money for. I am of the view that Government should come forward with specific action points on non-performing loans so that we are able to rectify some of the situations. If we do not do that, since Government is the implementer, we may suffer a lot of losses because this will even go to the interest rates over which we have committed ourselves.

Therefore, I would request that if it pleases this House, Government should come out with an action point on each of the non-performing loans.

I also have interest in the issue mentioned by the committee that some of the projects are not performing because of lack of co-funding support, which we have committed ourselves to. This shows that we do not normally prepare ourselves adequately for these loans. Processing of the loans takes a long period of time before they come to this House.

Therefore, we need commitment from Government at the time of bringing these loans so that they assure us on some of the specific demands, especially on co-funding before we approve. Without that, we will be joining them, when they have not done proper planning, to commit Government on compliance with some of these key issues.

The committee also raised an issue that we should increase our revenue collection. To me, this hinges on the 68 per cent of our population that is in subsistence farming. Currently, much of the taxes are being paid by the 20 per cent because many of the people in the country are in abject poverty. Others are unemployed so the 20 per cent ends up being overtaxed because all the taxes revolve around them.

My proposal is, if we can work on the 68 per cent, it means that we can have a broader base of the population that will be capable of paying taxes and this will increase our revenue base. Thank you.

4.32
Mr RICHARD othieno (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to add my voice to thank the committee.

Uganda’s state of indebtedness is worrying. This July, Tanzania attained lower middle-income status, a position they had projected to attain in 2025. However, they managed to achieve it this year.

While releasing the ranking, the World Bank was very critical of our debt situation. The point of concern was the way we contract our debts. Most of our debts are non-concessional. They are very expensive because we borrow on commercial terms. This is compounded by the report of the committee, which indicates that China alone accounts for 39 per cent of our creditors. This does not sound good.

If you look at other lenders like Standard Chartered Bank and United Kingdom Government Export Credit Agency, these are agencies that lend us money at a very high cost. Unfortunately, we borrow it at a very high cost and misuse it. For instance, whereas we use the money for infrastructure development, we have got some of the most expensive projects in the world. For instance, Entebbe Expressway is the most expensive project in the entire world. Remember that we financed it using an expensive loan.

Look at Karuma Dam. It is again one of the most expensive dams in the entire world. The list goes on. That means that for us to get out of the situation we are in today, our Government needs to be very careful when contracting a loan. We need to be very careful with the terms. I think it is high time that Parliament started playing its constitutional role of ensuring that the terms at which we borrow these monies are good and preferable to the people of Uganda.

Let me talk about something to do with debt sustainability. According to the Auditor-General’s report of 2018, which covers the period of this report, the Auditor-General studied only 50 per cent of Uganda’s debts. What were the findings? Shs 3.9 trillion of the money we are supposed to pay expires in 2020. We have borrowed more money since then. That means that we are putting ourselves in a situation whereby very soon, this country will be taken up by the creditors. We should be very careful when we continue borrowing from China because the experience in other countries is not good for us to learn.

Let me talk about sovereign guarantees. The report is not so detailed about this but the Government has also been giving sovereign guarantees without any clear criteria as to how the entire country benefits from these guarantees. For example, we gave Rift Valley Railways (RVR) a sovereign guarantee and they borrowed money to revamp the railways sector. 

Whereas they got the money, they did not revamp the sector. We have to pay that money but they have again taken us to court. Now, Ugandans are busy negotiating; we are in arbitration with RVR when they are demanding that we should compensate them. We gave them a sovereign guarantee, they borrowed the money, they did not revamp the railway sector and as a country, we have to pay back.

I think this Parliament must come up clearly with the criteria and mode under which these sovereign guarantees can be given. There are so many examples, Madam Speaker. We have a hotel here called Africa something. That hotel was also constructed using a sovereign guarantee from the Republic of Uganda and it was sold. 

The people whom we gave the sovereign guarantee are no longer there. I do not know if they ran back to Sudan, but now we have to pay. There is a private person who is enjoying that facility but the burden of the loan is on the heads of Ugandans. Therefore, Madam Speaker, something is not correct.

The people we have entrusted with the responsibility of managing our resources and guiding us in terms of investments need to be mindful about the future of these Ugandans. For us, we are going to die but what about our children, who will have to bear the burden of these debts?

Madam Speaker, we must start looking at this country as our own. We are not just passing. This is our country. Let us be very mindful in whatever we do. Let us put the stake and the future of our country at heart. Let us know that today, we are incurring these debts, but our children and great grandchildren will suffer paying these debts and it is going to make their lives more miserable for something that they are not going to benefit from.

The life span of these projects cannot last beyond ten years, so why are we incurring loans on projects that cannot even benefit the future generation that will be entrusted with responsibility of paying back the debt, Madam Speaker? I would like to thank the committee for highlighting a number of these issues. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. For the record, I want to say that on the RVR, the concession was given on the objection of Parliament but the Government went ahead. Now see where we are.   

MS AVUR: Madam Speaker, we are debating a very important report that concerns the backbone of this economy and all of us and every Ugandan out there. However, the responsible ministers are not here and even the ministers that are here, I have not seen any taking notes that would eventually update their colleague. Madam Speaker, I do not know whether we are proceeding right to continue debating this very important report.

THE SPEAKER: I had not realized that we were talking to ourselves. Can I hear from the Minister of State for Agriculture?

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to make a clarification and assure members that I am actually taking notes. My colleague has gone for a short call.
4.41
MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for the report. One of the things that I keep noticing is that within a financial year - I do not know how many times we process loans here. 

I still remember, at one point, somebody had suggested and which I want to suggest here again, that supposing in a budget cycle, we come up and we are very sure of the kind of things we are going to do in a financial year. In addition, make sure that we even factor in borrowing so that it is made once in a financial year. 

We need to ascertain for sure that we are borrowing for A, B, C that will fund part of the budget of a given financial year so that we avoid the issue of borrowing within the financial year and as and when people think they need money.

Madam Speaker, I know it has already been suggested but I also want to bring it in as a point of emphasis that where possible, we should ensure that loans are borrowed purely for investments where we know that afterword, we are going to get some more earning to even cover the interest we are going to pay. 

Even within the investments, I know that sometimes we have administration within the investment. For instance, when you take Karuma Dam investment, we know that within there we have salaries particularly for the local people, allowances, etcetera. Can I also suggest that our co-funding is the one that manages the cost of administration within such an investment so that we know that the cost of administration is purely from our locally generated funds? I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.



4.44
MR JOHNSON SSENYONGA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good effort and report. I remember some two years ago when I was still a member of the same committee; we came up with recommendations about the non-performing loans and the poorly performing loans. We came up with the suggestion that it has come to the time when Government should stop applying or come up with loan applications when we are not yet ready. These loans keep on accumulating interest.

Madam Speaker, when you look at the power supply for the sub-counties, we applied for that money in 2017. The loan accumulated interest and it was just last year that Rural Electrification Agency started some part of implementing the loan.

Madam Speaker, when you see, for example, Busega-Mityana Road expansion - we were still members of that committee and we got the loan but up to date, you do not see any development! 

What comes next honourable members? The middlemen come in between with compensations- for example, even the Busega swamp, some people are claiming to have land titles and at the end of the day, you are going to see shoddy work because much of the money will go for compensations. It is as if we apply for loans when we are not yet ready.

Madam Speaker, when it comes to negotiations - when we had benchmarking trip to Kenya, if you compared their interest rates, they were far below ours when borrowing money. That means, the negotiations might be having some people who have interests or they are being given kickbacks, which must be taken care of.

Madam Speaker, the committee recommended that domestic borrowing should also be limited. The interest for domestic borrowing is too high. At the end of the day, all the local revenue that is collected by our country is being spent on paying the loans. Therefore, something must be done.

Madam Speaker, something must be done for Uganda Revenue Authority. Recently, we were told that out of the money that we are collecting, 80 per cent was being embezzled. We should put emphasis on the institution that collects revenue for this country, to see how we can overcome the burden of debts. But instead, money is being taken by individuals and you only hear on news without any steps being taken to recover the money. I thank you and the committee for the good work.

4.48
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. One of the reasons why Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Planning) is a very active Member on the Floor of Parliament is because of loans. He is doing us a good job and he is very active. 

However, my concern is that as Parliament, I think we should audit ourselves. The more loans we pass, the more we are rendering our economy indebted. We are not conscious of how the loans perform after we have passed them here in Parliament. May be, that is where we have gone wrong. 

Madam Speaker, reading through this report, I think we need to take some action. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development must come to us with a reply although this report has taken long; we need a reply to this report to give us an assurance that there is some improvement in the management of loans. In economic terms, low absorption capacity of funds that we borrow means more cost to borrowers, yet as Members of Parliament, we do not know what happens after we have passed it.

Now, this is what the ministry should come and tell us that this loan has not performed; this is how much the Government has lost because of the non-performance so that by the time the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development comes to us with a loan request, we must be sure that there is already counterpart funding so that there will not be any interruption as far as implementation is concerned.

Madam Speaker, the report is very loud and clear. One of the problems they have cited is poor project design. Why would we approve a loan on the Floor of Parliament when the design of the project is poorly done? It is our fault. Therefore, as Members of Parliament, we need to audit ourselves. The committee should help us to be more stringent, and compel the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come to us with all the conditions. That is the only way we can save this country from unnecessary costs.

We have been told in that report that contract management is poor and there is poor management of all these projects. Why should we approve this money for some people to just eat? Are we approving pocket money for some people or what? We are being told that our money is being mismanaged and we are doing nothing about it. 

Madam Speaker, something needs to be done. It is my prayer that this Parliament having gone through this report must compel the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come with a concrete response to what has been put in place, to stop further mismanagement of the projects. 

Furthermore, to move away from the non-concessional loans because non-concessional loans are very expensive. For example, the new lenders now to Uganda are Chinese and you know how expensive they are. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development knows about it but they deliberately go for that because they have less stringent conditions attached to those loans. UK Export Credit is also very expensive and now, Standard Chartered has joined in. All these are non-conditional loans, which are very expensive. 

Madam Speaker, my prayer on behalf of the people of Uganda is that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should save this country from unnecessary losses. Many of our people are dying because we cannot raise money to finance some of the rural projects, yet we keep coming to Parliament demanding for more and more loans. This is my cry on this Floor of Parliament. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the committee be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, now that we have adopted the report, you are obliged to come back to us with an action taken. We shall want to hear from you under our Rule 217 and you better do it quickly.

Secondly, honourable members, we have been complaining about the performance of loans but what are we doing about it? Can we amend the rules or create a committee? I think we need to move on that and take position. Thank you very much.

Before I go to item No.11, I would like to allow the Minister of State for Education and Sports to come to us on that urgent issue of the loan scheme to see whether it is possible to enlarge the time for the children to apply.


4.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Ms Rosemary Seninde): Madam Speaker, allow me to inform this House that as far as the issue of the Students Loan Scheme is concerned, we are all aware that the deadline was supposed to be on 30th of this month. 

However, I would like to inform this House that the board of the loan scheme was able to sit on the 23th after we realised that it was not going to be possible for most of our students to have the opportunity of applying for this loan. 

The board sat on Thursday 23 and extended the deadline up to 31 August 2020. This is because most of our public universities have not yet issued admission letters, including other tertiary institutions that teach diploma programmes.

Madam Speaker, I would like to allay the fears of our people that the time has been extended up to 31 August 2020. Tomorrow, it will run in the print media and already, it is on the social media. I hope that our people will now continue to inform our students who would like to apply for this loan as soon as they get their admission letters, they can continue applying for this loan. 

I thought it was important to inform the House. Thank you very much, for giving me the opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, minister. In fact, we had demanded that you come tomorrow but thank you, for coming today, and for allaying our fears. I would like to invite the Members of Parliament to transmit that information to their constituencies so that the young people can take up the opportunities. Item No.11.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE PERFORMANCE OF THE ECONOMY FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2018/2019

4.56
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Lawrence Bategeka): Madam Speaker, I am here to present the report of the Committee on National Economy on the performance of the Uganda economy during Financial Year 2018/2019. Allow me to lay the following documents on the Table before I present the report:
    1. A signed copy of the report of the Committee on National Economy on the performance of the economy for Financial Year 2018/2019.
    2. The minutes of meetings held to consider the report of the committee.
    3. The seventh Uganda economic update on public investments, 2018 public debt and other financial liabilities management framework 2018/2019 to Financial Year 2022/2023. 
    4. Annual budget performance report for Financial Year 2018/2019.
    5. Annual macro-economic and fiscal performance report for Financial Year 2018/2019, 
    6. Approved estimates of revenue and expenditure for Financial Year 2018/19.
    7. Volume 1, budget monitoring and accountability unit.
    8. Policy brief of May 2019 on the performance of the agriculture credit facility in Uganda.
    9. Bank of Uganda’s annual report, 2019.
    10. A brief of the agricultural credit facility. 
    11. A guide on incentives and exemptions for Uganda investors.
    12. IMF world economic outlook of October 2019.
    13. The National Budget Framework paper for the financial year 2020/21. 
    14. Public office state of indebtedness, 2019 and the Uganda Economic update, fourteenth edition on strengthening social protection to reduce vulnerability and promote inclusive growth and the Uganda National Household Survey report 2019. 

All these documents are contained in a soft copy. We have attached them. I beg to lay them on the Table.

Madam Speaker, this report was due for presentation to Parliament in March, 2020. It is a bit time barred, nonetheless, it is our duty to present it and we are glad and thankful for the opportunity to present it. 

It is a big report and so permit me, Madam Speaker, to read the executive summary and then look at the committee observations and recommendations in the interest of time.

Madam Speaker, Section 18 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, requires that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development shall, by the end of February and October of each financial year make a fiscal performance report to Parliament in accordance with the law. The minister submitted annual macro-economic and fiscal performance report for the financial year 2018/9 on 03 December 2019, which partially complied with the provisions of the law. The details are in the report.

The global economic growth was, at the time, projected to decline to 3.2 per cent in 2019 compared to 3.6 per cent and 3.8 per cent recorded in 2018 and 2017 respectively. It was projected to rebound to 3.5 per cent in 2020 while the consumer price inflation would remain muted across the advanced economies because of the drop in commodity prices. 

For most countries in this group, core inflation was recorded well below the respective central bank targets despite the pickup in global demand in the past two years.

On the domestic scene, Uganda’s economy grew by 6.5 per cent from Shs 115/117 billion, in the financial year 2017/18, to Shs 122,694 billion in financial year 2018/9. This growth is higher than the NDP II target of an average of 6.3 percentage points and the growth of 6.2 percentage points recorded during the financial year 2017/18.

However, the unemployment and poverty levels have remained high. The poverty rate rose to 21.4 per cent during the financial year 2016/17, from 19.7 per cent in the financial year 2012/13 despite an increase in the growth of national income.

Unemployment in the urban areas is higher at 11.4 per cent, compared to the 6.2 per cent in the rural areas. Within the region, the East African countries depicted a general rise in economic growth with Rwanda registering the highest growth at 9.5 per cent, followed by Tanzania at 6.7 per cent.

The annual headline inflation remained subdued and well within the medium-term target range of five per cent. The annual headline inflation for the period under review reduced to 3.1 per cent, in the financial year 2018/19, down from 3.4 per cent, in the Financial Year 2017/18 majorly on account of the lower inflation under the core inflation and food crops categories.

The commercial banks’ lending rates rose from 17.7 per cent, recorded in the year ending June 2018, to 19 per cent for the year ending June 2019, and as a result, the spread – which is the gap between the commercial banks’ lending and deposit rates – remained wide.

The private sector credit growth, which is a leading indicator of the financial sector contribution to economic activity, increased from 10.9 per cent, recorded at June 2018 to 12.4 per cent in June 2019 and in part, reflecting recovery in the domestic demand conditions and the impact of the relatively declining lending rates.

The Uganda shilling depreciated by 2.1 per cent to Shs 3,736.8 per US dollar from Shs 3,658.7 per dollar in the financial year 2017/18. On a year on year basis, the shilling appreciated by 2.9 percentage points, from Shs 3,840 per US dollar in June 2018 to Shs 3,729 as at the end of June 2019.

During the period under review, the current account recorded a deficit of Shs 3,370 million, which was offset by the surplus in the capital account and the financial account of $ 100 million and US$ 2,983 million respectively leading to an overall balance of payments surplus of US$ 69 million leading to overall balance of payments surplus translated into an increase in the reserve cover to 4.4 months of imports in the financial year 2018/19 for four months of imports cover in financial year 2017/18.

The stock of external debt for the public and private sector increased to 39 per cent of the gross domestic product in the financial year 2018/19 from 36.5 per cent of GDP in the Financial Year 2017/18. This is attributed to the need for increasing public infrastructure investments and foreign direct investments.

During the period under review, Government collected revenues and grants worth Shs 17,333 billion, in the financial year 2018/9, against a target of Shs 18,046.2 billion, resulting in a shortfall of about Shs 713 billion. This shortfall was due to the under performance in the disbursement of the grants during the financial year.

The domestic revenues performed at 102 per cent, which was 12.9 per cent of the GDP in the financial year 2018/19 against a target of Shs 16,358.8 billion.

Both tax and non-tax revenue performed above their targets for the financial year as a share of the GDP. Taxes performed at 12.6 per cent of GDP.

Total expenditure, including net lending, amounted to Shs 24,205.8 billion in the financial year 2018/19, less than the planned expenditure, indicating 95 per cent expenditure performance although it increased by 21 per cent from that registered in the previous financial year. The underperformance was attributed to the underperformance in externally financed development expenditure.

Arising from the underperformance of external expenditures and over performance of revenues, the overall fiscal deficit, including grants, in Financial Year 2018/2019 was five per cent of GDP (equivalent to Shs 6,872.8 billion) below the budget target of 6.6 per cent. The overall fiscal deficit was mostly financed from domestic sources that were equivalent to 3.8 per cent of GDP while external loan disbursements amounted to Shs 4,878 billion, equivalent to 3.2 per cent of GDP. 

Based on the above performance, the committee made the following observations and recommendations:

On compliance of Government with the fiscal report for Financial Year 2018/2019, section 18 of the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA), 2015 (as amended) prescribes the content of the fiscal performance report that is made to Parliament. An assessment of the Macroeconomic and Fiscal Performance Report for Financial Year 2018/2019 can be observed as follows – Here we are saying that regarding this reporting, Government was compliant on some aspects and not compliant on others. 

The date of submission should be by October or February and the microeconomic fiscal performance reports were submitted – the dates are there and the Government was not compliant.

On the current and projected state of the economy, the Government was partially compliant. 

On the performance of the Government against its objectives on the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility, the Government was compliant.

On the financial and non-financial performance of the budget, the Government was compliant. 

On the Contingency Fund – this was missing in the submitted reports and therefore, the Government was not compliant.

On virements to the Vote, this was missing in the reports and therefore, the Government was not compliant.

On donations made to the Vote, if any, this was missing in the submitted reports and therefore, the Government was not compliant. 

On performance of the Petroleum Fund, which is provided for in the section on performance of the Petroleum Fund, the Government was compliant.

The committee recommends that the subsequent fiscal performance reports be presented as prescribed in section 18 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015.

Real sector
Growth driven by the industry sector
The committee observed that during Financial Year 2018/2019, the economy grew at a rate of 6.5 per cent driven by the industrial sector, which contributed 2.9 per cent to the overall growth. Despite this growth, the industry sector currently employs less than 10 per cent of the population. 

On the other hand, the agricultural sector, which employs about 70 per cent of the population, grew at five per cent and contributed only 1.2 per cent to the overall growth of the economy.

The committee recommendations:
    1. The Government should allocate more resources to agriculture to finance activities that are directly geared towards the implementation of the growth strategy in the third national development plan so as to increase agricultural production and productivity, reduce youth unemployment, increase exports and reduce Government domestic borrowing.
    2. Specifically, in the agricultural sector, there should be expansion of production through unlocking bottlenecks to agriculture such as accessibility to water for production through development of micro and large-scale irrigation schemes, value-addition, security of land tenure, export promotion drive through increased market access and operationalisation of industrial zones.

Economic growth not inclusive
The committee observed that:
    1) Economic growth in Financial Year 2018/2019 was mostly driven by the industrial and services sectors, which had the greatest contributions at 2.9 per cent and 2.1 per cent to the overall growth rate of 6.5 per cent while the agriculture sector contributed only 1.2 per cent to the growth rate. 

    2) According to the World Bank Databank on Sustainable Development Goals for Uganda, of the total employment in the country in 2019, the agriculture sector was estimated to employ 70 per cent, industrial sector eight per cent and the services sector 22 per cent. This implies that economic growth of 6.5 per cent in Financial Year 2018/2019 mostly benefitted sectors employing fewer Ugandans. 

    3) In addition, there are still high levels of income inequality amongst the population. Inequality increased from – let us say – 40 to 45 per cent during the period 2012/2013 to 2016/2017, indicating that growth was not inclusive. Consequently, the richest 10 per cent of the population enjoys 35.7 per cent of national income while the poorest 10 per cent claim a meagre 2.5 per cent of the national income and the poorest 20 per cent have only 5.8 per cent. The implication is that the majority of Ugandans are poor and they continue to slip further into poverty while the minority, who are rich, have the capacity to accumulate more wealth.

The committee recommends that the Government strategically increases investment in agriculture that employs the majority of Ugandans to ensure that economic growth is more inclusive in the country. These may include small-scale irrigation, small-scale mechanisation and small cottage industries for agriculture value addition and agricultural financing, among others.

Review of the measures of unemployment in Uganda
The committee observed that: 
    1) The definition used by UBOS in the National Labour Force Survey 2016/2017 was not realistic to the Ugandan situation although it is in line with the Resolution of the 19th International Conference of Labour Statisticians (2013) where persons in employment are defined as, “All those of working age who, during a period of one week preceding the interview, were engaged in any activity to produce goods or provide services for pay or profit.” They comprise: 
    a) Employed persons “at work”, that is, those who worked in a job for at least one hour during the reference week.
    b) Employed persons “not at work” due to temporary absence from a job or to working-time arrangements (such as shift work, flex time and compensatory lieu for overtime).

    2. The OECD definition of employment is better for Uganda although it is based on the Resolution of the 13th International Conference of Labour Statisticians (1982), which defines persons in employment to comprise, “A11 persons above a specified age who, during a specified brief period, either one week or one day, were in paid employment or self-employment.” The context of employment is persons who during the specified brief period such as one week or one day -
    a) performed some work for wage or salary in cash or in kind;
    b) had a formal attachment to their job but were temporarily not at work during the reference period;
    c) performed some work for profit or family gain in cash or in kind; and 
    d) were with an enterprise such as a business, farm or service, but who were temporarily not at work during the reference period for any specific reason.

The most recent survey on labour was the National Labour Force survey by Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS), was conducted in the Financial Year 2016/2017. The survey puts the unemployment rate for Uganda at nine per cent. Whereas, Section 9 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, as amended, requires that the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development annually provides employment data together with the Budget Framework Paper to aid Parliament appraise progress in Government efforts, geared towards reduction of unemployment and improving incomes of the population, this critical information has been missing.

The last time a manpower survey was conducted in Uganda was in 1978. Over time, Parliament has been recommending that Government carries out a comprehensive manpower survey with a view to ascertaining the manpower gaps to inform policy, but this has not been addressed.

The committee recommends that:
    i. The definition of unemployment be reviewed so as to provide statistics that are more realistic to the Ugandan situation. For international comparison, UBOS may also collect the current statistics in addition to those that provide a more realistic situation in the country.
    ii. UBOS be facilitated to provide more frequent labour statistics to guide the policy decisions.
    iii. Government should ensure that resources are earmarked towards comprehensive manpower survey.
Absence of a Streamlined Job Market
The committee observed that -
    i. Uganda National Household Survey 2016/2017 by UBOS indicated that the working population was the age group of 14-64, which was 18,843 million people, of which 13,701, million people reside in rural areas, while 5,142 people reside in urban areas.
    ii. The National Labour Force Survey 2016/2017 by UBOS indicates that the unemployment rate was 9.7 per cent in the country, with urban areas having a lower rate at 9.1 per cent, while rural areas had 9.9 per cent. Unemployment rates varied across regions with the eastern region having the highest unemployment rate at 15.3 per cent, followed by the Northern at 13.5 per cent and Kampala at 10.7 per cent.
    iii. With regard to education attainment, the unemployment rates were higher for those with primary education at 11.6 per cent, followed by those with secondary education at 10.3 per cent, and those with a degree and above at eight per cent. 
    iv. Currently, there is no data on the total number of people employed and unemployed in the country. There is no system to match the labour to the available jobs, which has resulted in inequitable access to the available jobs and some graduates spend a much longer time searching for employment than others.
The committee recommends that:
The definition of unemployment be reviewed so as to provide statistics that are more realistic to the Ugandan situation.  I have already read this. 

Agriculture Credit Facility (ACF)
The committee noted that in 2009, Government established the ACF in partnership with Participating Financial Institutions (PFIs), with an aim of facilitating the provision of medium- and long-term financing to projects engaged in agriculture and agro-processing. 

The Bank of Uganda Annual Report, 2019 indicates that as at June 2019, total disbursements from the facility amounted to Shs 350 billion extended to 592 eligible projects, of which Shs 177 billion was from Government of Uganda. In addition, the grain facility introduced under the ACF in 2015 to address the drastic fall in grain prices especially maize, following the bumper harvests, had total disbursements and commitments for grain trade at Shs 111.84 billion for 62 sub-projects as at June 30th 2019. The grain facility provides working capital for grain trade to facilitate mopping up of the excess grain by the grain traders.

The committee further noted that in a bid to unlock credit to small holder farmers who were not accessing credit due to the stringent requirements by Participating Financial Institutions, in ACF, one of them being collateral, the current Memorandum of Agreement 2019, introduced block allocation, where beneficiaries can access loans Shs 20 million with alternative collateral requirements other than land. Under this arrangement, micro borrowers accessed Shs 535 million as at June 2019 of which, Shs 354 million was a contribution by Government of Uganda.

The committee was concerned that the concept of the ACF, where a few people access these funds then employ others, is not working for various reasons such as: money accessed under the facility being diverted to other activities other than agriculture, and the farmers at the grassroots not benefiting among others.

The committee observed that the Budget Monitoring and Accountability Unit of Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development Briefing Paper 2016/2019 of May 2019, on the Performance of the ACF revealed regional and gender inequalities in the distribution of the project beneficiaries with women - eastern and northern regions having the least beneficiaries. The regional inequality was attributed among others to most farmers in north and eastern regions not being aware of the ACF and poor record keeping by some farmers, which made it difficult for lenders to appraise their requests.

Further, the committee noted that although the loan rates under the ACF are very appealing, the bureaucracy associated with accessing the facility was hindering most targeted beneficiaries and ordinary Ugandans were not benefiting from it. The procedure for accessing the ACF loan facilities was as follows – I think the rest can be read.

The committee recommends:
a) The conceptual framework for the agricultural facility be reviewed from top-bottom to bottom up, targeting the entire agricultural value chain to include: production, storage, processing and marketing.
b) Government establishes an agricultural bank to manage the credit facility and Bank of Uganda be relieved from that role so that it concentrates on its core mandate related to monetary and exchange rate policy.
  
c) Government ensures that the current gender and regional inequalities among beneficiaries from the facility be addressed to ensure that all regions benefit from the project. 

d) In the meantime, the amount of money allocated in the block arrangement be increased as majority farmers in the country are small holders.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, this report was actually distributed a couple of months ago; we have the information. Could the chairperson just paraphrase the report because we already have it and it has been with us for a couple of months? I think it would be better. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, just read the subject and the recommendation. 

MR BATEGEKA: Okay, Thank you.

Monetary and Financial Sector

Increasing Yields on Government Securities 
The committee recommends that Government scales down on domestic borrowing so as to reduce the cost of domestic debt while minimising its potential crowding out effects on the indigenous private sector. I think that is clear.

High Cost of Private Sector Credit
This is also in line with the previous one of reducing Government borrowing. The committee recommends that -

    1) Government ensures that there is a clear balance between monetary and fiscal policy to support the reduction of interest rates.

    2) The private sector be supported through capitalization of Uganda Development Bank to ensure that they have an alternative window for accessing credit.

    3) Government addresses the supply side of the economy by investing in the productive sectors such as agriculture and manufacturing, so as to reduce on the use of the monetary policy to stabilise prices. Here, the point is that Government is using the demand side management and not the supply side to stabilise prices and yet there are two curves. 

Fiscal Sector 
There is need to enhance fiscal discipline and the committee recommends that Government adheres to the approved macroeconomic framework to promote fiscal discipline and minimize budgetary disruption as well as distortions in the domestic market arising from non-planned domestic borrowing.


Impact of Domestic Refinancing
This is borrowing to pay debts. The committee recommends that Government adopts austerity measures aimed at cutting back on consumptive expenditure and high public administration costs. These should be in addition to the implementation of strategies to curb corruption so as create fiscal space.

The Need to Strengthen Public Investment Management
These are projects which delay. The committee recommends that public investment reforms be strengthened. In addition, inefficiencies and implementation challenges for public investments should be addressed and management of public assets be enhanced to preserve their value and maximize their return. 

The Need to Reduce Domestic Arrears 
The committee recommends that Government ensures that all accounting officers comply with the commitment control system as well as the provisions of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 (as amended) on accumulation of domestic arrears by imposing sanctions under section 78 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 (as amended). In addition, Government should adhere to the Public Debt Management Framework, Financial Year 2018/2019 to Financial Year 2022/2023 with regard to financing of the domestic arrears, to avoid suffocating the private sector.

Need to Strengthen the Fight against Corruption
The committee recommends that Government reviews the legal and regulatory framework governing the institutions established to fight corruption. This should be done with a view to increasing their impact on eliminating corruption, and hence increasing the fiscal space through additional resources to finance public expenditures, and as a result cutting-back on the resources required to finance the widening fiscal balance.

Need to Increase Investment in Human Development 
Here we refer to health and education, among others. The committee recommends that Government increases investments in the social sector, for example through increasing the capitation grants, among others, in order to improve human capital of the economy.

Stagnant Tax to GDP Ratio 
The tax to GDP ratio has remained stagnant and very low. The committee recommends that Government closes tax leaks through elimination of the various tax exemptions and unrealistic tax incentives to foreign investors so as to create a fair playing ground in the economy and increase the tax to GDP ratio.

External Debts
Need to Improve the Country's Trade Balance 
The committee recommends that the export incentive be expanded to include more companies with ranges for tax holidays for companies exporting more than 40 per cent but less than 80 per cent of the finished goods. In addition, producers should be discouraged from the export of raw materials using tax policy, among others, so as to improve the country's trade balance.

Need to Diversify the Economy to Boost Foreign Exchange Inflow
The committee recommends that Government scales down on the acquisition of loans in anticipation of oil revenue inflows, and instead focus on promoting increased production for exports across various sectors of the economy, including tourism and agriculture, among others. In the long-run, this will reduce undue pressure on the exchange rate through jobs, and support from economic growth.

In conclusion, Uganda's economic outlook then - it might have changed because of circumstances - revealed that Uganda's economy is poised to remain on a steady growth trajectory. However, the growth is not inclusive. Consequently, economic challenges such as high levels of poverty, unemployment, high interest rates, low tax/GDP ratio, lack of quality education, and income inequality are still prevalent. Therefore, there is need to review the role of the market as well as that of the state to enhance growth in all sectors of the economy to guarantee inclusive growth. I beg to report. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson, and the members of the Committee on National Economy for that comprehensive report. The report has been signed by the necessary minimum numbers and you are free to debate.

However, I have three small areas where I would like to hear from the Government. One, since the 1990s, the Committee on National Economy has been recommending establishment of the agricultural bank and now we are in 2020. We would like to know why the Government has not picked up this recurrent recommendation - every year.

Two, we have also been told about the high poverty levels in the eastern region; they are the highest in the country. We have talked about Karamoja, Bukedi and Busoga and the poor education and poor facilities; what does that communicate to Government? Are they listening or not?

Three, you talked about improvement in the human capacity development. Last year, we had a long skirmish with the Government on the need to increase funding for higher education financing scheme. We just wanted Shs 5 billion as additional money to absorb more children. I do not know whether anyone is listening or whether it will be picked up. Those are my comments.

5.37
Mr godfrey onzima: (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for presenting a comprehensive report, which covers all the aspects of the economy. I have very few areas to comment on. 

The committee observed that there has been economic growth in the country of up to 6.5 per cent and that this is attributed to the growth in the industrial sector. They went ahead to note that much as the industrial sector has improved and got the economy to that level, the number of people it employs is still less than 10 per cent of the total population.

I know that with the current challenges of unemployment, the only solution to creating employment lies in having a vibrant industrial sector. However, I would like to say something about the people being employed in these industries. One time as I was going upcountry, I met some youth who were going to work in one of the industries in Matugga. They stopped me after I had just fuelled my car and they asked for a lift to their place of work, to which I agreed. 

As we moved, these youth complained and wished something could be done for them. They said that they had to commute to their workplace, where they were being paid Shs 3,000 every day; mind you, these were graduates. Therefore, when we talk about industries creating employment for our youth, it should be meaningful employment. 

Many of these children are undergoing exploitation in what we consider employment. They have created industries that are employing our people but is this meaningful employment? We cannot cheat our own citizens under the guise of attracting investors. At least something better should be done. I felt bad when they narrated that story because it meant that if they worked for a month, each of them would earn only Shs 90,000. That is the situation.

The committee also observed that more money should be given to the agriculture sector because it employs around 70 per cent of the population. However, every time we allocate money to Government, the agriculture sector is one of those sectors allocated the least amount. On areas of improving productivity, one time we had serious debates here when cattle farmers complained about the lack of supplies to handle ticks, yet the committee observation indicates that this sector employs the majority of our people. 

Let me now address myself to the high levels of income inequality. We are talking about the economy increasing from 5 per cent to 6.5 per cent, but the observation of the committee is that there is a consistent increase of poverty levels among the poorest people; this has been highlighted. Whereas the poverty levels are generally going down, in some areas the levels are going high. This is due to differences in intervention mechanisms employed by Government. 

One time I visited an upcountry area where people were supposed to receive heifers from Government. I was surprised to find that in a whole parish, they selected only 10 people from one village to receive the heifers. Once the cow gave birth, the first calf would be given to the next person and the other to the third person. That meant if there were 10 people, the last person would have to wait for 10 years to receive a heifer. 

If you go to other areas of the country, this is not the case. In some of these areas where poverty levels are very high, it is because Government is doing less than what it does in other areas. Therefore, we must change our method of resource allocation in this country if we are to have everybody on board. We cannot say that the poverty levels have gone down in this area - maybe people are talking about 11 or 9 per cent - but in other areas, we are still talking about 60 per cent. What is the problem?

If we analysed the budgets that we always pass here to find out how much money goes to some of these regions, you may find that 50 per cent of the budget goes somewhere. Therefore, the argument that the poverty levels vary from one region to another is explained by that. It is up to Government to ensure that there is equitable resource allocation.

On the issue of payment of domestic arrears, we are talking about suppliers and contractors. Some of our people who have supplied Government have had their businesses collapse because Government has failed to pay them. This is what has been indicated under domestic arrears.

One of the strategies that was adopted by Government to refurbish the economy after the COVID-19 pandemic was to ensure that those who have supplied Government and those who have implemented Government projects are paid their money. However, up to now, no action has been taken. That is one of the factors contributing to increased domestic arrears.

Finally, I would like to address myself to the high levels of borrowing. On the one hand, we are borrowing a lot of money yet on the other hand, we are giving tax holidays. We get investors who are supposed to pay taxes that would increase our domestic revenue from tax collection, but sometimes we behave like a rich country by granting investors tax holidays. We say that we should give tax holidays to companies that are supposed to pay a lot of taxes to this country, yet the poor citizens are squeezed; those who pay peanuts. Therefore, I think Government must revisit this paradox on tax collection. Thank you.

The Speaker: Let us listen to hon. Othieno, hon. Timuzigu and then hon. Mungoma; use three minutes each, please. Do I assume that the senior minister is noting or that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is listening? Okay.

5.44
Mr RICHARD othieno (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson for the flowing presentation of the report and members of the committee for compiling this good report.

I would like to concur with the committee in many areas and my brother, hon. Onzima, on the point that he has raised specifically on the drivers of poverty in this country. In the period under review, the economic growth was largely driven by the industrial sector. When you look at this sector, you realise that most of the big industrial firms are owned by foreigners and these are the firms that enjoy tax holidays. All the preferential treatment is given to these major foreign industrialists. 

When it comes to local firms, some areas are generally starved of these entrepreneurial drivers. That explains the very high poverty levels in Busoga, Bukedi, Karamoja - generally, the whole of eastern Uganda. In these areas, we do not have most of those industrial entrepreneurs who can enjoy preferential treatment from Government. 

In short, there is something that we need to recollect. President Idi Amin had started – If you get out of this country, people do not know Uganda but if you mentioned three names, they will know you are from Uganda. When you mention Museveni, they will say, “We know about Somalia”. If one mentions your name, Madam Speaker, they say, “Oh, that powerful lady”, because of your stand against the gay movement. When you mention Idi Amin, they recollect Idi Amin because of his attempt to indigenise Uganda. He may not have performed well but at least it is because of Idi Amin that we have some Ugandans doing business in the Central Business District (CBD). Therefore, this is something that the country needs to look at. 

In economics, there is what we call sufficient conditions and necessary conditions. Because of the necessary conditions, Uganda has been able to post good economic growth but now we need to translate this growth by using what we call sufficient conditions. How do we ensure that our people also begin to benefit from this growth outlook?

The committee has rightly reported that much as there was growth, it was not inclusive. Therefore, can we have inclusive growth for all Ugandans so that the growth begins to trickle down and benefit the indigenous Ugandans?

Madam Speaker, the committee reported on the compliance of Government ministries with the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA). Ever since I came to this Parliament, the Government has been reporting about good management and low inflation rates but the PFMA requires Government to disclose to us the size of the money supply. How much money are we supplying? This has never been done for all the years I have been in this Parliament. You cannot continue telling us that you are managing inflation when we do not know the amount of the money in circulation. The Government does not know; therefore, how do we now take it that Government is actually managing inflation. Are these real or just imaginations? 

We are now talking about printing money in the country. How are we going to start printing money when we do not even know the amount of money that we have in circulation? This is basic and it is a requirement of law. This law was actually sponsored by Government under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development but I do not know why the same ministry, which sponsored the law, is the very ministry that is reluctant to comply with the law.

Finally, we need an agricultural bank. This is an agricultural country. We continue talking about the poor performance of the agricultural credit scheme. However, what is this money doing in Bank of Uganda? How can farmers access money, which is in Bank of Uganda? This explains why year in, year out, the money is there. They tried to channel it through commercial banks but they are very expensive and they have many restrictions; they put conditions, which farmers cannot afford.

Therefore, if truly this is an agricultural country - I do not mind whether the industries are now driving the economy, but over 70 per cent of Ugandans are still in the agricultural sector. It is a sector, which is leading in providing employment to the majority of Ugandans. Therefore, we need to strengthen this sector by providing a commercial bank. We had a bank for the farmers but Government closed it. What is the problem? Why can’t we have a farmers’ bank re-started by Government so that the support to farmers can be channelled through such a financial institution? Thank you, Madam Speaker.
   
5.50
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am happy with the report, which has been delivered by the chairperson of the committee. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to first comment on the general observation concerning the report, which advises that we should add money to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries so that we can strengthen agriculture, which employs a majority of the people in this country. I expected the committee to give us a recommendation concerning how we can get that money to add to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. 

We have many votes, which take more money than the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. Therefore, I expect, maybe in another report, to see the committee giving us advice on how to get the money to add to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries or wherever they want us to add the money. To get more money for a certain sector, we have to reduce money from another sector.

Madam Speaker, the other issue is about the interest rates. At the moment, Uganda has got the highest interest rates in the region. I also believe when we consider the average interest rate in the world, which is around 10.3 per cent, we are too far from reaching that average interest rate. That explains why poverty in Uganda is increasing and business cannot be done the way Ugandans wish to do business. 

When they say there is an income imbalance, we have the poorest and the richest. If the interest rate is too high, because the people who do small businesses pay around 24 per cent as interest, that shows that they cannot do better business. The richer business people are, however, allowed to go and get cheaper loans. Of course, Uganda Development Bank (UDB) can do a lot for the richer business people. They can even get money from development banks elsewhere, which small business owners cannot afford. Therefore, I do not expect Uganda to have a rich population when they cannot access cheap money.

Madam Speaker, there is another issue which concerns - (Member timed out)

5.54
MR ALEX BURUNDO (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, chairperson of the committee, for the report. 

I would also like to add my voice to comment on the issue of poverty rising in Uganda, specifically in eastern Uganda. It is my view that until Government deliberately goes to areas, which are highly hit by poverty, specifically in eastern Uganda, look at the people and try to increase on the funding - If we look at Operation Wealth Creation, for example, we should not all get the same money because in eastern and northern Uganda, people are highly affected by poverty, therefore more money should be given to these regions.

Madam Speaker, some Members have already talked about the issue of interest rates. You will realise that time and again, during the budget reading, Government emphasises that the masses should go and get money from UDB. If we critically analyse this, you will find out that many of our rural population do not even know where UDB is located. Therefore, in this scenario, I would recommend, together with what the committee has put across, that commercial banks be compelled to reduce on their interest rates. 

In a district like Mbale, we have so many commercial banks and the rural people are used to these banks. They do not know that outside there, there is a bank called UDB where they can go and get money at low interest. However, even if they are aware, it is very difficult for a local farmer to connect herself or himself to UDB. This is only for the rich people and I think that is why the poverty levels are increasing. 

Additionally, Madam Speaker, on the issue of agriculture, we have got a very big problem because of climate change. Many Ugandans are very hardworking but climate change has affected them in one way or the other. Sometimes there is too much sunshine, which affects the farmers, and also at the end of the day there is too much rainfall. In Bulambuli, for example, for the last six years the farmers have failed to get anything from their farms because we have been having a problem of – (Member timed out.)

5.57
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I also want to add my voice to thank the committee chairperson and members of the committee for the good report. 

I would like to begin with the issue of an agricultural bank. Just look around the East African region. During one of my visits to Tanzania, I discovered that they have an agricultural bank supported by the Government and the interest rates for farmers is between three and five per cent per year. Because of this, the level at which the farmers are progressing in Tanzania is very admirable. I do not know why our Government cannot copy this practice. 

I would suggest, as one of the recommendations from the committee, that as a House we take a stand and advise the Government that we can do this progressively. We can plan in between three and four years or three and five years and allocate some money to this, so that we are able to build up the capital and get an agricultural bank open for farmers. We needed it as soon as yesterday. 

Madam Speaker, a majority of our farmers are smallholder farmers and they need cheap sources of income and finance. They always struggle during the time of planting and harvesting. This is the time we can be able to extend this credit to them and then be able to recover easily. Therefore, Government needs to really look into this critically if we are to remove the 78 per cent of smallholder farmers and bring them to commercial level. Otherwise, if we are to continue with same practice, then we are going to have the same problem. 

When farmers visit most of our commercial banks, they do not encourage them to get loans concerning agriculture; the banks are interested in commercial loans because they want to make quick money. The moment the farmer gets into the bank and he or she asks for a loan to do with agriculture, they begin to discourage them and attach a lot of collateral, asking for a lot of money. In the end, the farmer will calculate the interest rates and it is a loss for the farmer, and he or she gets discouraged. Therefore, commercial banks need to go back to the drawing board and see how best they can support the farmers and be able to help them. 

The other issue is about the poverty levels. Madam Speaker, it goes without saying that we are always the last, even with school performance. I think Government needs to have affirmation action for these areas. We really need to see Government come up with programmes that are tangible.

In our rural areas, the locals have tried to mobilise themselves into village savings loan schemes and they are working. However, the problem is that they do not have enough money – (Member timed out.)



6.00
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the chairperson and the committee for the good report. 

The concern of the majority, who are the youth, is unemployment and it is still a challenge. In the eastern region and the other areas, normally when we go for committee work, in every trading centre early in the morning you find a group of 20 to 50 youth already gathered in the upcoming urban centres. That is where the emphasis should be if we are to fight unemployment and the many challenges that are going to face in our country. 

Madam Speaker, I will give an example of Skilling Uganda. When you look at the programmes that are ongoing in Kampala, they are only here in the centre. The committee should recommend that such programmes be transferred to those needy areas. The youth are very many and they cannot get involved in gardening because the gardens are also very small unlike in the past. 

It is good the Government Chief Whip is here. Programmes like Skilling Uganda should be transferred to those needy areas. When you look at the school dropout rate, in central Uganda here it is at least between 2 per cent to 5 per cent but in northern and eastern Uganda, where we are saying poverty prevalent, the school dropout rate is over 50 per cent. 

After COVID-19, you are going to have a big challenge. I was in Mbale District; many P.7 girls have been impregnated and they are going to be out of school. What are they going to do? When it comes to farming, they do not have the capacity. Loans, NAADS, Boona Bagagawale in the real sense will only help those who are serious. Look at the seeds we were given as Members of Parliament - one tonne of seeds when we have between 7 to 10 subcounties; what impact are you going to create if we are to fight unemployment? 

The Government should concentrate seriously on these areas and the recommendations in the report should be followed, in addition to the Members’ suggestions, and programmes like Skilling Uganda should be taken to the needy areas. I thank you.

6.03
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Every year, when we discuss the status of the economy, we seem to be reading from the book of Lamentations. I do not know when we are going to reach the book of Revelation; maybe after several generations. 

My main concern is that this economy is running on its own. It is just like a bus, which is being driven by a turnboy who is not a well-trained driver, and that is a fact. We do not have a scientific plan, with strategic targets, of what we want to achieve in one or two years. Maybe, we have to change our method of looking at the status of the economy, to demand that the Government should come up with the implementation of what Parliament resolves or prescribes the previous year, so that we know how we are progressing. 

My concern is unemployment. This is an agricultural economy and we are talking about unemployment among the youth; it is a shame. Some of us who have been to Israel know how much those people are struggling to have a piece of land. We have vast land and yet we are talking of unemployment. 

Interestingly, in this report, we are being told that the highest rate of unemployment is in the east followed by the north. As if that is not enough, I thought the cure would have been through agriculture. However, we have just been told that the agricultural loan is actually discriminatory, that the people from the east and north are not benefiting from this agricultural credit fund. Somebody must tell us why. It is there in the report; it is not Mrs Ogwal accusing a minister or the ministry. Can we be told why the people of the north and east are being discriminated against? We must also be told why gender is also being discriminated.

Madam Speaker, this is not politics; it is what has come out in this report. I believe the chair of this report is not necessarily a member of the Opposition. Even if he was, I think he is presenting factual information. 

Finally, I find that the Government is failing in monitoring and evaluating the economy effectively - (Member timed out.)

6.07
MR RICHARD OSEKU (NRM, Kibaale County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern, as far as the state of the economy is concerned, is the miserable state of our human resource. We have talked about the issue of unemployment and indeed it is real. However, even when you look at our people who are employed - the song of attracting investors has been a welcome one for a long time but we have remained grappling with the problem of the wage bill. The minimum wage bill is a problem. A majority of the people who claim to be employed in this country are languishing in poverty.

As Parliament, I think we need to seriously pick up this matter because it cannot go on and on forever. The infrastructure we build and the investments we make must be meaningful to the lives of the people of Uganda. However, where we are, for so many decades now, there seems to be no progress at all in terms of empowering our people. 

The designs of the projects we have, targeting our people, also need to be reviewed. We have this particular problem of public procurement and the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (PPDA) law. We need to revisit this law because the administration of the projects consumes all the money such that at the end of the day, talking about projects like Operation Wealth Creation, we talk loudly about them but when we go to the ground, it is miserable. 

As hon. Onzima observed here, you will hear that in a whole parish, only one village is benefiting, and from only one heifer. We then come back here and talk about how we have given money to NAADS or to Operation Wealth Creation when the people are not actually benefiting. There is need for wide consultation to see how to invest in the respective regions. The zoning exercise that was done needs to be revisited so that we, through a consultative process from among the population, determine which kind of investments we should put in our respective areas. 

As of now, there is inequitable distribution of resources, inequitable development and this is keeping the economy content in the theory that it is progressing when actually it is not translating into improving the lives of our people. I beg to submit. 

6.10
MS RUKIYA CHEKAMONDO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to thank the presenters of this report. 

I would like to go specifically to the poverty in eastern Uganda. I think Government should have a mindset change. When they say there is poverty in eastern Uganda, the mindset remains that those are poor and they will remain as such. So, whatever the people of the east do, the mindset is that those people will not come out of poverty. 

Madam Speaker, when you look at areas like Sebei and Karamoja where they are getting a lot of minerals, the people who go to buy this land, where they are extracting minerals for cement like marble, give the local people very little money that cannot help them. In addition, instead of constructing the factories in those areas so that people can be employed, they transfer all the jobs to other areas. They get limestone, for example, from Sebei but it is worked on in Kampala, so the people of Sebei and Karamoja end up only loading the minerals into the cars. They take all the riches from their districts while our people remain poor. 

The other issue is on the loan scheme. I remember in the Eighth Parliament, we allocated money for agricultural loans and it was given to specific banks for agriculture and innovation. When you go to these banks, the money is there but they cannot allow any person to access that money; they want people to access the money from their own banks. I pray that a special fund be given to these areas that are affected so that they can have low interest rates and they can do something. 

The people from the eastern region of Uganda are very hardworking. My people in Kapchorwa are very hardworking. My brothers in Bugisu and Busoga are hardworking. However, when they put their efforts into agriculture, they are hit by either too much sunshine or floods and they sometimes lose hope. They get money at very high interest and when they invest it in their farms, they do not get the expected outcomes. So, they go back to living in poverty. If they are given soft loans and are provided with water for production, I think people can come out of this poverty. 

The other issue is – (Member timed out.)

6.13
MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, JONAM COUNTY, PAKWACH): Thank you once more, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the committee for the report. 

I have three aspects to comment on. The first one is on agriculture. I know my colleagues have mentioned a number of aspects but one that has not been mentioned is the land question in this country. Everywhere in this country, we are having issues of land. Madam Speaker, you are still stuck with the Jonam land issue, where we could go into commercial agriculture in Nwoya District. If the land question in agriculture is also solved alongside other issues, we would probably have more improvements. 

For the industries, I am happy that Government is trying to expand and in a number of regions there are industrial parks, which have been identified. I would like to thank Government for that. Specifically, in West Nile, we still have the issue of power because those industrial parks can only be actualized if we have a stable source of power. 

The final area is the one of human resource development. I would like to look at just two aspects: education and health. I am a member of the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government). Every time we move out – actually, we have now stopped reprimanding districts on the issue of standards which are not being implemented. With regard to education or health, the Government sets standards but the things which are supposed to help to actualize those standards like staffing, equipment, supplies cannot be actualised by the Government. How then can we expect the local government to implement proper standards? 

In education, specifically, - I am happy our Minister of Education and Sports is here - our focus should be more on skills development. However, the capitation grant given to technical institutes is so small; it is miserable. 

These are areas, which if improved, we will have made a step. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Does the minister in charge of finance want to say something? You can also tell us why there has been no manpower survey since 1987. 



6.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Just to clarify, let me say that we now do everything using information and communication technology. Therefore, I was taking notes using my iPhone, unlike hon. Raphael Magyezi, who is still noting – (Interjection) – Oh, he is local government. (Laughter)

That aside, Madam Speaker, I have captured 15 important points raised by the Members of Parliament and with your permission, we beg to be given an opportunity at a later stage to respond to them. They are very important things that we should answer. We should be given an opportunity, maybe in the course of next week, to give responses on the progress we are making on those key issues. 

On the issue of the manpower survey, I am glad to inform you that we have completed a manpower survey. It was done by Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS) and we will be able to share with Parliament what we have done. We are sorry that we took long to do this but we are doing it now.

On the issue of the poverty levels, it is true that eastern Uganda - actually Karamoja has the highest level, at 47 per cent. In an attempt to resolve this, in the third National Development Plan we have adopted regional planning. We also have initiatives such as Emyoga, into which we have invested Shs 110 billion, and I am very grateful to Parliament for that. We have put Shs 70 billion in microfinance. These are some of the initiatives that we think we can use to reach the ordinary persons as we prepare for other initiatives to help our people.

Madam Speaker, there was an issue on the agriculture bank. I beg that you give us time to come back and respond to that. 

On the interest rates - I hope the honourable member meant the lending interest rates – it is true that the lending interest rates have been very high, actually the highest in the region. As a result of the liberalised economy, we cannot command the commercial banks. What we are doing now is to capitalise the Uganda Development Bank. As you know, Parliament approved Shs 103 billion. Our target is to have Shs 1 trillion in that bank this financial year. We are capping the interest rate at 12 per cent. 

After the categorisation of the areas for which people can access the money – such as agriculture, industry and even human resource capital development like education – we think this interest rate should be capped. The more we continue to capitalise the Uganda Development Bank, the more we shall bring the commercial banks to their knees to have interest rates come down.

Madam Speaker, I beg that I prepare written responses so that Members can be answered – (Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I think Members are concerned about borrowing from commercial banks for quick business operations. However, the minister is talking about UDB. Uganda Development Bank is more or less an investment bank that focuses more on industrial enterprises not the commercial activities that we are talking about now. So, is the minister really guiding us properly in his response?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I have said that we have UDB, where we are putting money for those small and medium enterprises. For other businesses and economic activities, we have put money in Emyoga and the Microfinance Support Centre. Therefore, if you cannot reach UDB, your association will be able to access money from Emyoga and the Microfinance Support Centre. 

Hon. Cecilia Ogwal said we do not have targets as a country but I would like to remind her that Parliament passed the National Development Plan III here. In this plan, we actually have an approach to programmes where we want every Government department to, instead of working in silos, work as one Government and work on a programme. If you want to fight diseases, for example, you need water in the rural areas for hygiene purposes. So, we must work together on a certain programme. If it is industrialisation, you need roads, irrigation, production, silos and all these things to support industries. Therefore, we are working on this and the action plan for each programme will be shared with Parliament when they are out. 

Madam Speaker, I will be ready to come back on Tuesday or before to make these responses. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee on the National Economy be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we close, I have been reading stories about the banning of boda bodas in the central business district. Parliament is in the central business district but I do not remember if there was a public hearing to find out our views. I think the Minister for Kampala Affairs should come and explain to us this plan. 

If you are going to ban any type of motorcycle from here - our mail people - it is something which we need to discuss. I think even the people of Kampala should have been given a public hearing; I do not know whether they were given one. It seems Government is sitting alone and taking decisions. Yesterday, they had to withhold implementation because it was not properly thought about. Government Chief Whip, I do not know what you can say about that.

6.23
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, the Minister for Kampala Affairs has a mega plan to reorganise the city. This plan started when COVID-19 struck us. She has the mandate, together with Kampala City Council Authority (KCCA). 

You are right to demand that she should come and explain the plan to reorganise the city. There must be areas where boda bodas are not allowed. We have to guide the pedestrians. Otherwise, there will be a lot of chaos, like you have been seeing, in the city. However, information flow must happen. Therefore, I will tell the minister to find time and come back to tell us the mega plan to reorganise the city. I will inform her, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the thing is that the Government is only thinking about boda bodas but not every motorcycle is a boda boda. There are actually people who use motorcycles for transport to work. It is something that we really need to discuss. There are people who use them to deliver mail and food. It is really important.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: We localise the word “boda boda” but when the minister talks to us, you will see the difference with those who are using motorcycles to go to work and those who are using motorcycles to carry passengers. I am sure that clarification will be made by the minister.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Thank you. Honourable members, the House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.25 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 29 July 2020 at 2.00 p.m.)




