Wednesday, 21 July 2004

Parliament met at 2.37 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this meeting and I want to introduce our special guests today in the strangers’ gallery. These are students from City Hill College, Lubaga South constituency of hon. Ken Lukyamuzi. You are most welcome. (Applause)

2.39
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am raising two points regarding the procedure of the august House. The first one is more of a concern and in a way a proposal. Is it possible for us to start at 2.00 p.m. instead of 2.30 p.m. so as to leave us a little bit more time to consult the library? And those of us who are attending classes elsewhere can also get an opportunity of reaching there before lectures start?

THE SPEAKER: The answer is, we can start at 2.00 p.m. and I am ready to start at 2.00 p.m. But since sometimes we have a problem with ministers who have scheduled meetings on certain days, if we come when they are not here because they are in Cabinet and so forth, we may have a problem. Otherwise, according to our rules, we should be starting at 2.00 p.m. and for me I am ready to start at 2.00 p.m. But we have to make that adjustment to accommodate the frontbench, which a number of times has meetings.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My second concern is regarding a point I raised last week about our colleagues who go abroad to attend conferences allegedly or supposedly on our behalf. I am referring specifically to the recent Summit regarding AIDS in Bangkok, Thailand. I understand more than ten of our colleagues attended that conference and also from the reports we have received in the absence of their own reports - we have to rely on the media to know what transpired in Bangkok. But some of the things that we have read in the media are not favourable. I will give an example –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: To address that particular issue, the secretary of the delegation informed me that he had drafted a report, but I think he is waiting for the Chairman of HIV/AIDS Committee to look through the report. The report will definitely come, and I think it will give you an opportunity to raise any matter that you want to raise in respect of this particular subject.

2.41
REV. PETER BAKALUBA MUKASA (Mukono County North, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My problem concerns the people of Mukono and it rotates around the vanilla growers. Sometime back the Minister of State, Trade and Industry made a statement here explaining the problems surrounding vanilla and the vanilla growers. After that time we received some businessmen –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Sergeant-at-Arms, could you please draw the attention of whoever is outside that proceedings are going on here so that they can tone down their voices?

REV. BAKALUBA: Immediately after his statement we received some businessmen from Kenya who had come to start buying vanilla at the cost of Shs 30,000 per kilo, and even going up from that. We heard that when they were doing that business, I think they were intercepted by security and some were arrested. After that, over the radio, I am still hearing of some business people here in Uganda announcing where they are located, that our village peasants who grow vanilla should go to their offices so that they can buy their vanilla from the range of Shs 50,000 and above.  

Our people are wondering, if after some time we have been selling at only Shs 5,000, just in a short period again when our vanilla is getting finished now we are getting people who are buying it at a very high rate! Our people are wondering whether there is a conspiracy or whatever. They support our Movement Government and they think it will come to their rescue so that they are not exploited.  

Just yesterday I intervened in another case where some of our vanilla farmers had made some barter trade with some business people around Kampala, who sell vehicles and boda boda in exchange for vanilla, they had received vehicles and boda bodas until when the prices fell down. Now these people have come to our constituencies, either demanding back their vehicles and boda bodas or taking these people to prison. We have that problem.  

As government and after knowing the problem we have gone through, and the poverty situations in our areas, we are calling upon the hon. Minister of State for Trade and Government to come in to intervene to arrest the situation and assist our people and to see how we can solve this problem. And even to make people know, after this period why there are some people now coming up to buy this vanilla at a higher rate compared to the Shs 5,000, even to the Shs 3,000 recently they have been buying our vanilla. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, since this matter was just considered by the House last week or so and we handed it to the relevant Committees of Agriculture and Trade, I think we should ask the two committees to expedite whatever they are doing so that they can come and report to us, instead of us starting another debate on this. But I think the point has been taken and the committees should investigate and then report back some time soon.

2.44
MR ODONGA OTTO (Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. With all due respect to the Chair, I rise to bring to the notice of this House an article that appeared on the first page of the government-owned New Vision which says: “US $150 million palm oil project starts.” The article begins by saying: “President Yoweri Museveni has blasted Members of Parliament who attempted to block the BIDCO Oil Project.” It goes on to quote the President saying: “In Parliament even the ignorant express their ignorance.”  

This is in line with the denial by honourable minister, Rukutana, on the statement I made in Parliament. If you could give him an opportunity to synchronise his statement with the recent appearance, it will be of benefit to the House. 

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Otto for giving way. I am giving information, which is constitutional in regard to what hon. Otto has pointed out. The matter in regard to the protection of the economy of this country is a constitutional undertaking, which could even necessitate impeachment of the President for misdeeds. (Laughter). One of the grounds under which the President may be impeached is highlighted in Article 107(1) (b)(ii) and I want to read this provision verbatim: “The President” – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, but hon. Lukyamuzi –(Laughter)- if you have grounds for impeachment of the President, why do you not state them instead of alerting us? But let us listen to hon. Otto.

MR LUKYAMUZI: I was giving him information. Since this is a constitutional provision, it is important that we hear it –(Laughter)- and the ground is that if, “he or she has dishonestly done any act or omission, which is prejudicial or inimical to the economy or security of Uganda…” and the BIDCO conspiracy is a ground, which could be undertaken. That is the information I wanted to give you.  

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I was part of the delegation from this Parliament that was invited to witness the grand occasion in Kalangala District. I partly regretted why I went. I was more than disappointed, honourable members, because while we were there, it was an open confrontation between His Excellency the President and the other two arms of Government, the Judiciary and Parliament. Actually, the pressmen were a bit polite because what the President said was that: “You investors, do not be bothered about what the Judiciary and Parliament are saying. It is only me (pointing at himself) who has the powers to decide either for you to come in or not” because earlier on, one of the investors had expressed dismay over negative reporting that he had seen in the papers. 

Somehow, the three arms of Government really need to co-operate and synchronise their activities. But the moment we begin fighting one another, and more so when it starts from the top, I think that sends a very negative signal. I was physically present there and I wish what the President said was taped. And more so, those of us who are in leadership should learn that when you are a President, there is somebody who is fully paid as the speechwriter. When you are a minister, you have your permanent secretaries, and you have your commissioners who are technical enough to guide you with the right message to give. But when you want to talk off cuff, you run into these blunders and today when we say, “you said this” you are ready to say “well I did not say it” because there is no document. But please, for heavens sake, let us respect one another and let us be ethical to whatever we do. Hon. Rukutana you are laughing, you were there. You were even present –(Laughter)- you stand up say nothing but the truth.  

MR OTTO: Mr Speaker, as I wind up in a good spirit, I would appeal to my honourable colleague, hon. Rukutana, if he would listen to me to withdraw the statement he made and now that the reshuffle is at the corner, we really beg you and wish you all the blessings. Since there are no rules that concerns lying in this House, I guess you were unfair yesterday. You withdraw the statement so that we do not take necessary steps against you. Thank you.

2.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I do not intend to withdraw my statement. I still abide by the statement I made yesterday. I have looked at this report by the New Vision, it is very clear that the President was quoted out of context. The President did not refer to Members of Parliament as being ignorant. Actually he said, as I said yesterday, he was referring to negative reporting and he said, “In Uganda even the ignorant express their ignorance.” He did not specifically say, “Members of Parliament are ignorant”. That one I stand by it because I was there and I watched the programme last night on television. So, I cannot withdraw that statement. 

Secondly, it is not true –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is common knowledge that before us is a report on the BIDCO project, which is awaiting approval in consonance with Article 159 of the Constitution. The company we are referring to will be exempted from tax for 25 years and this greatly impacts on the economy of this country. As if that were not enough, over 3,500 hectares of tropical high forest will be destroyed summarily. I am just mentioning one item. So, is it in order, noting that we have not received the report on BIDCO and noting that the President could have the audacity to go to Kalangala and launch a programme, which is in question, for the minister to start defending something that is obviously erroneous? 

THE SPEAKER: I think honourable members with due respect, the point of order is misplaced because we were not talking about BIDCO, we are talking about a different subject.  

MR RUKUTANA: Secondly, Mr Speaker, I wish to deny the allegation by hon. Wadri that the President said that it was only him who could sanction the coming of investors into this country. It is true the President mentioned detractors; the President mentioned bad reporting and asked investors to ignore them. All he said was that the detractors and the bad reports should be ignored because it is because those do not matter that he has continuously won elections.  

It was not true as it was alleged yesterday by hon. Otto that the President said that Parliament is useless. Because yesterday the words that were used by hon. Otto were that the President said that Parliament is useless and Members of Parliament are useless. I was there, I listened and last night I listened to the television reporting and I stand by what I stated yesterday that the President did not refer to honourable members of this House as useless or as ignorant. I think for the time being, that does my explanation.  

2.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE, ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Mr Tim Lwanga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was not here yesterday and I have not sat down with anybody to discuss what happened yesterday but I am a bit disturbed that Members of Parliament can lie. I have listened to hon. Wadri saying that the President said that it is only him who can sanction investments here and that all the other arms of Government are useless. That is a big lie! 

What the President said and I was there, and actually we were all very happy with my colleagues who came to witness the launching of the palm oil project. I recall that His Excellency said, in response to an investor who had expressed concern on the adverse publicity that the project had received, that: “Ignore all those detractors. I have always ignored them” and I quote: “I have always ignored them and that is why I have continuously won the elections.” That is what he said. 

Mr Speaker, actually I think you should find a way of maybe reprimanding the hon. Members of Parliament for telling lies to this House. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter came up yesterday. It was raised by hon. Otto and he has raised it again. We said that we were going to investigate this matter and find out the truth. So, I would rather think that we stop this matter here and then proceed with another matter because it came up yesterday and we handled it, now it is surfacing again.

2.57
DR FRANK NABWISO (Kagoma County, Jinja): Mr Speaker, I rise to bring to your attention a matter of great importance to this country. There is a great deal of worry about the rumour that some national teachers’ colleges are going to be closed. A number of students sat their A’ Levels in 2003 and their parents are extremely worried about this matter. I would now like to ask government to come out with a clear statement on this matter. Are some NTCs going to be closed? If so, when and why?  

Maybe a second issue is that I am aware that government does not have a strong, manpower planning unit in this country to enable us plan for manpower ahead of time. We now see a lot of universities, a lot of colleges training many teachers whom we are bringing onto the market, and yet the demand for teachers is diminishing everyday. So, I would like government to make comments on these two issues. Thank you, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I do not know who is going to handle this question because I do not see the Minister of Education here. I do not know who is holding the portfolio.

2.59
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER, GENERAL DUTIES (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Thank you, Sir. I cannot speak very authoritatively on what the honourable member has said but it is true that government has got a definite policy on teachers’ training colleges. While I have not read the policy statement of the Ministry of Education, I would even suspect that there is some information in that book regarding this policy. However, just in case there is none, I am taking it upon myself because I know we have discussed it in Cabinet that is why I can stand up and talk about it. We have discussed it in Cabinet therefore there is a definite government policy on teachers’ training colleges. This House will be provided with full information about this policy. I thank you, Sir.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO SECURE FINANCING FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA), THE NORDIC DEVELOPMENT FUND (NDF) AND THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND (ADF) FOR PURPOSES OF FINANCING THE SUSTAINABLE MANAGEMENT OF MINERAL RESOURCES

3.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that Parliament does make a resolution authorising government to borrow from the following sources for purposes of financing the sustainable management of mineral resources, and that the resolution do read as follows:  

WHEREAS financing agreements are to be individually concluded between the International Development Association of the World Bank Group, the Nordic Development Fund and the African Development Fund of the African Development Group, and the Government of the Republic of Uganda for purposes of financing sustainable management of mineral resources project;

AND WHEREAS under Article 159(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Government is authorised to borrow money from any source subject to other constitutional provisions; 

AND WHEREAS under Article 159(2) of the Constitution, borrowing by Government has to be authorised by or under an Act of Parliament;

AND WHEREAS in line with the above stated constitutional requirements, Government has laid before Parliament the terms and conditions of the stated financing for their approval and authorisation;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that the Government is hereby authorised to secure Special Drawing Rights 17,700,000 from IDA, US $7,000,000 from the Nordic Development Fund and Units of Account 5,350,000 equivalent to US $7,700,000 from the ADF for the sustainable management of mineral resources project. 

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Seconded by the ministers. I would request that you be brief, whoever is coming up to discuss this. The chairperson should summarise this report rather than read it all.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, as we all know, Uganda is greatly endowed with a variety of minerals. While some of these minerals have been exploited to some extent, a number of others have not been adequately explored or evaluated, notwithstanding the knowledge or the suspicion that they do occur.

There have been key constraints that have hindered the development of the mineral sector and the full exploitation of these minerals. Some of these constraints as follows:

• Insufficient geological information to attract investment.
• Low institutional and regulatory framework.
• Dilapidated infrastructure.
• Lack of support to small scale and artisan miners.  

To overcome these bottlenecks, and to revive the mining industry in the country, government came up with a project termed the Sustainable Management of Mineral Resources Project under the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. The objective of the project, Mr Speaker, is to increase investment in mineral exploration through acquisition and updating of geo-information over the whole country, and to support activities of small and private miners. 

The funding of the project will be jointly undertaken as follows: 

• IDA, SDR 17.7 million, which is approximately 25 US $25 million.
• ADF, US $7.7 million.
• Nordic Development Fund US $7.0 million.
• Government of Uganda US $3.0 million. 
• The total is US $42.7 million.  

The IDA component and the Nordic Fund component are both highly concessional, and are in line with government strategy. The African Development Fund component is 100 percent grant.

Mr Speaker, our debt strategy today is to borrow for production and increasing wealth. Since this borrowing is intended to enhance mineral production and bring more revenue to this country, I call upon honourable members to support this motion and approve the borrowing. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Chairperson?

3.06
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mrs Kabakumba Masiko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is a report of the Committee on National Economy, on the loan request for sustainable management of mineral resources in Uganda.  

This request was referred to our committee in line with the procedures of this Parliament and the Constitution.  

The background: 

It is a long one, but I will try to be fast. Maybe, I do not know, honourable members, if you have read through then I could skip it.

Modern mining started in Uganda during the 1920s with tin and gold in the southwest of the country, and gold mining was also carried out in areas of Buhweju, Busia and Karamoja. There are other minerals that attracted mining later and they include: beryllium, asbestos, copper, cobalt, iron ore, limestone, phosphate to mention but a few. In 1960s Uganda provided ten percent of the world’s beryl production.  

Other historical mining activities covered construction materials like sand, gravel, aggregate and clay. 

With the exception of copper, all other mines constituted and still do, a vigorous but small-scale industry with the following characteristics:  

• There is lack of information on the reserves, that is, the location and the quantities. 

• Lack of skilled manpower.

• And use of rudimentary means.  

In the 1970s mining in Uganda declined since most of the mines were destroyed or closed down due to the prevailing political situations. The examples are, wolfram and tin mining in southwestern Uganda where members of the mines were forced outside the country and mining infrastructure completely collapsed. 

The mining sector used to employ approximately 10,000 workers. All these became unemployed at that time. Informal mining by these groups mushroomed, which focused on illegal mining and exports of especially gold and tin. This led to increased rural revenue in the localities but had the following disadvantages:  

• There was loss of revenue, especially to government’s fiscal and formal foreign exchange revenue.

• Environmental degradation to some extent.

• Then poor mining techniques that led to health and safety problems.  

During the period of 1992 to 1996 government tried to organise the mineral sector with the aim of promoting private investment on the basis of rather isolated and modular initiatives. Government initiated a compilation for the existing data, computerisation and then general sectoral information. 

The process of drafting new legislation for the sector was also initiated and to some degree there was some promotion, which was undertaken though at a very small scale.  

Despite the above efforts, the mining sector remains greatly undersized in terms of the contribution to the national economy, and is vastly unexplained and undeveloped. During the 1999/00 period it accounted for one percent of the Gross Domestic Production (GDP). Formal levels of mineral production were worth approximately US $22 million in 2000.  

There was an initiative following the Mineral Sector Review completed in 1999 and the upstage in 2000, which identified the following constraints: 

• Insufficient geological information
• Poor infrastructure
• Deficient legal framework and
• Lack of capacity.  

In January 2001, Cabinet approved a new mineral sector policy that clearly defines the Government’s role as a regulator, promoter, facilitator and supervisor of mining activities and leaves operational and implementation roles to the private sector.  

Government has, therefore, decided to undertake a strategy based on the reform of the mineral sector to revamp the administrative infrastructure, train critical manpower, modernise exploration capabilities and the mineral data base and thus establish an enabling environment that is attractive to potential investors in the mineral sector for exploration and development.
 
The methodology used is as it is in the report and, honourable members, the project has four technical components and the other one is really for monitoring:  

• The first one is strengthening of governance and transparency in the mineral sector management. 

• The second component is community development and small-scale mining.

• Number three is environmental and social management framework.
 
• Number four is geo-information and development and 

• Number five is project co-ordination and management.  

The component of strengthening of governance and transparency consists of the following sub-components:

• It is intended to enhance the regulatory framework for the management of the mineral sector and the stakeholders’ consultations.

• Also setting up of an adequate institutional framework for the management of mineral resources.  

• They will also establish a mining cadastre system.

• Then there is development of Intranet and Internet network.

• Setting up of the mining promotion unit for the promotion of socially and environmentally sound investments.

• Also strengthening and supporting the national mining associations.

Component two is the community development and small-scale mining. This one will work in collaboration with the local authorities, regionally and communally. The project will facilitate the development of information and the approaches and integrate the natural resources including environmental management, delivery of social services and infrastructure.

This will also include identifying and supporting actions to support annual planning at community level. The actions to be supported are those linked to:

• The decentralisation of funding of the relatively minor investments related to the infrastructure needs. 

• The enhancement of capacity for decentralised administration related to the areas with mining activities. 

• To help to co-ordinate local affairs in villages, oversee trade and transport and ensure payment of taxes also to support education activities and the like. 

• To address the problems associated with advancement of small-scale and artisan mining with a possible inflow of miners. 

• The improvement of health and building capacity related to the management of mineral resources to improve the communities and the infrastructure. 

• Improvement of Artisan and Small Mining (ASM) in selected mining areas. 

• A small grant programme to support ASM performance to improve will also be given.  

Component No. 3 will have the following activities:

• Preparation of a mineral sector environment and social assessment to help determine the location of protected biodiversity zones that have to remain restricted from mineral activities.

• Definition of sector specific environment and social policies, regulations and standards including procedures for rehabilitation of areas and resettlement after mine closure.

• Preparation of social-economic baseline studies at selected mining districts to serve as a base for methodology and capacity development to assess and monitor social regulation and guidelines. 

Geo-information and development:

Honourable members, the major objective of this component is to provide geo-information necessary to relevant sectors to enhance the economic development of Uganda. 

The provision of geo-data is fundamental for good governance and proper land use management. 

In order to address the present lack of systematic and reliable basic earth sciences information infrastructure, the project will support the following multi-disciplinary activities:

• It will conduct airborne geophysics activities to cover the whole country.  

• It will update and improve existing coverage of geological maps to 1:250,000 and 1:100,000.  

• There will also be a compilation of existing geo-chemical surveys data.

• It will also conduct sample analysis and complementary sampling and produce a modern, regional mineral resources inventory assessment.

• This component will also establish a modern and computerised geological and mineral information system.  

The project co-ordination and management unit is meant to execute the project and the main functions will be to procure, then to monitor the project, report and evaluate, and give financial reports and do some book keeping among others.  

The breakdown of the components is just as you can see in the table on page 7. The first column is the total cost and others indicate the sources of funding. 

The total ADF fund of US $7.7 million will be a grant extended by the African Development Bank from its technical assistance window. 

The other funding is concessional and in line with the Government’s debt strategy, that is 40 years including 10 years of grace with a service charge of 0.75 percent and one percent for the NDF and IDA respectively.

Comments and observations by the committee:
The committee made the following observations and comments after analysing the relevant documents and meeting with the project implementers.   

General observations:

The mineral sector has been neglected for a very long time and this has led to its marginalisation in the resource allocation, leaving only small, private individuals to keep the sector in its current status.

The mineral potential of Uganda is unknown and hence unattractive to investors, which leaves the country behind as far as attracting foreign direct investment in mining is concerned. A country like Tanzania, whose geology is similar to Uganda, has opened up five mines recently with export earnings of over US $500 million per year. With such earnings, Uganda would, in less than ten years, be able to finance her own budget. There is, therefore, urgent need to have information on the potential, location and type of minerals in the countryside. 

The potential of the country will materialise when government has substantially invested in the sector by obtaining adequate geo-information that can attract large mining/exploration companies.  

A large part of Uganda remains unmapped; actually it is 50 percent. Although various mineral occurrences and prospects are known in some parts of the country, the level of mapping detail is low and exploration and technology used then is outdated.  

The committee was informed that the stakeholders, who have been involved in explorations by carrying out surveys, have been monitored by the ministry and inject in about US $1,000,000 every year over the last five years. This includes some surveys carried out by Koreans and Karamoja Development Association in Karamoja region.  

The mapping will cover the whole country and expose the locations and types of minerals in each region hence effectively helping to draw the exploitation plan with the local governments. This will also help the local governments in mobilising communities to engage in small mining activities hence re-orienting them to other sources of income since small agricultural production has not transformed the society to desirable levels.  

The development of mines on a large scale will help in development of infrastructure in the localities, which will address the problem enshrined in the PEAP. Societies will break their traditional groupings and mix with other societies that will create a pseudo-metropolitan society hence easy to mobilise for development.  

The geo-information will help in planning the development of infrastructure, which will be economically and socially viable. 

The mining sector has a lot of potential in as far as mobilisation of resources both for the centre and local governments is concerned. The collection of income tax will be streamlined and easy since these people will be employed in the formal sector.  

We also looked at the performance of the sector:  

Members observed that the performance of the sector has been marginal and that the only minerals known were copper, limestone, cobalt, tantalite, gold, tin, wolfram to mention but a few. There has been scanty information on the performance of these and other high value minerals.  

The contribution of minerals in terms of export earnings to the economy has improved over the last ten years compared to the 1990s when this contribution was insignificant. In the year 2000, the value of mineral exports was Shs 120 billion. 

On the best case scenario, the value of mineral production is expected to rise from the current US $12 million to over US $100 million while on the best case scenario the value is expected to be over US $200 million.

Limestone, which is used locally, has reduced importation of cement drastically. The importation of clinker is steadily being replaced by the local exploitation of marble in Karamoja and Moyo. Three mines are going to be opened up to substitute for clinker importation. Most minerals are liable to royalty payment in addition to various licence fees amounting to about Shs 2.0 billion annually.

The performance of the sector is appended as Annex I, showing the value and amount. This is at the end of the report. The value and amount of earnings per mineral.

The formal mining sector provides direct employment of approximately 10,000 people.

The number of private operators since 1994 to date has ranged from 140 to 200 licences. Currently, there are 191 licences distributed as follows:
  
(i) Prospecting rights, they are 56
(ii) Exclusive prospecting rights, 67 
 (iii) Special exclusive rights, 11 
(iii) Location licence, 15 
(iv) Mining lease, 17. 

The operators do their own surveys and as a legal requirement, they file their report on a monthly basis. These reports are incorporated in a ministry database to avoid duplication in case the ministry wants some information. The ministry carries out on-sport inspections of mining sites on a monthly basis. 

The sectors own investment promotion attracted investors in Kasese Cobalt Plant, and also expansion of both Hima and Tororo Cement Industries, development of Tira gold mine in Busia, Namekhala vermiculite mine in Mukono and Nyamuliro wolfram mines in Kabale.  

The ministry has also carried out exploration and evaluation of a number of mineral resources in different places. These include: Muko iron ore in Kabale and Kisoro, gold in Busia/Bugiri greenstone belt, Gold in Buhweju, glass sand on Lake Victoria beaches in Masaka and Rakai and phosphates in Mbale.  

About the geo-information mapping:  

• Members were informed that the existing information is outdated, and in order to attract the investment in the sector, there is need to update it. 

• It was noted that the systematic collection of information in the mineral sector started in 1919 with the establishment of geological survey of Uganda. To date, coverage for geological mapping at various scales is about 50 per cent, airborne geophysics is about 40 percent, geo-chemical 20 percent and although Uganda is tectonically active, there are only 5 monitoring stations.

• Over the last 25 years, there have been advances in exploration techniques science and technology with high success rate, which have not been applied in Uganda. It is, therefore, important to update Uganda and there is no duplication. 

• The surveys to be carried out will be more detailed with close line spacing, which will be a great improvement on the past, low coverage surveys.  

• The aerial surveys will be followed by detailed complementary ground geological/geo-chemical/ geophysical surveys to “ground truth” - that is a technical term - and locate anomalies and production of information reports. Maps at small scale will also be made to make a complete package of information.

• The committee was also informed that the areas of the central and northern region have never been mapped. Members wondered whether the prevailing insecurity in the North would not hamper the surveying process. It was noted that if there is persistent insecurity for the five years of the project, nothing much could be done. Otherwise, funds have to be earmarked in the project to cover the North should the region normalise before the project expires.

·	The geo-information will be marketed as it is got, whatever will be discovered will be packaged, but substantial packages will be ready within two years after the project has taken off.  

What are the expected economic benefits?

Members noted that this project would address the gaps that hitherto existed in the mineral sector. Therefore, if properly managed the project could lead to generation of wealth through mineral exploitation in the country.

The following are some of the specific socio- economic benefits: 

• It is expected that there will be an increase in fiscal revenue from royalties, licence fees and export earnings.

• Higher employment levels

• Infrastructure development

• Contribution to other sectors since mining supports a large service industry

• Development of localised industries that will enhance further development.

How is the capacity like in the sector?

The committee noted that there is lack of manpower in the sector despite the huge task before it to implement this project. Most of the requisite courses are not offered locally.  We lack mining engineers, mineralogists and geophysicists to mention but a few.  

Currently there are 58 professionals of which only 11 have a Master’s level qualification in that field. 

This problem is compounded by lack of consultants in the country in the same field. This also affects the private sector. The project will, therefore, undertake a capacity building programme for the ministry officials through short-term and academic training. The technicians will also learn on the job. 

Recommendations:

1. Government should urgently address the need of capacity building in this highly potential sector of the economy, for sustainability. The Ministry of Education should include some of the courses needed in this sector to save on the cost of training abroad and also to allow many Ugandans have such qualifications. This training should include the use of the equipment used for mapping for sustainability of future mapping programmes.

2. The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development should make sure that the staff understudies the consultancy in order to take over from them when the project winds up, since the mineral potential may be huge and would take long periods for exploitation.

3. Funds have to be earmarked in the project to cover mapping of the North, should the region normalize before the project expires, since it has never been geo-mapped. 

4. There should be sensitization on royalties to address possible conflicts with local governments and miners. These are covered in the Mining Act of 2003.

5. The project implementation should also focus on incorporating existing local investors to interest them in the whole project operations in order to actualize the mineral resource utilization in the country.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, this project will attract investors in the mineral sector, which is believed to cover the whole country. It is, therefore, in line with the PEAP since it is multi-faceted including provisions of services, increasing household incomes by increasing employment and possible transformation of the society to a semi-industrial one.  

The committee, therefore, requests this House to approve the request by government to secure SDR 17,700,000 (US $25 million) from the International Development Association (IDA), US $7,000,000 from the Norwegian Development Fund (NDF) and US $7,700,000 from the African Development Fund (ADF) for the Sustainable Management of Mineral Resources Project. I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson. Honourable members, I hope you appreciate this has been a very clear, well-detailed report on this loan. However, we should allow some limited debate on the issue.

MR AWORI:  Clarification.

THE SPEAKER: In form of debate, or you want a clarification?

MR AWORI: To facilitate debate.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking clarification first from the hon. Minister of Finance and then from the line Minister of Minerals and Natural Resources. Could the minister confirm or deny that these figures are revisable? 

Why am I requesting for that information? Mr Speaker, when you look at page 7 of the committee’s report, virtually 50 percent of the loan is going back to where it came from in form of consultancy fees and other technical persons’ consultancy. The only area where we stand a chance of getting some little money is in community development against small-scale mining, US $9.2 million and US $5.4 million. That is the only money that is going to remain or to be invested in our place, for the taxpayers. For the first time I agree with the President when he says we are donors. Once again, here is a good example of Africa giving money to Europe and other places. So, I am glad he has admitted that we are donors and this is a good example of donating money to people who are milking us already.  

I would have hoped that these figures could be revised so that most of it goes into community development. But as it is here, out of the US $42.7 million, only US $14 million will be invested here. The balance of the money is actually going back to the people who are assembling the information. In other words, we are buying this information at the rate of US $30 million. Really, most of this information, we know; it is with us. What we want is capital to exploit what we already know. Even none of the first two that I am talking about is going to small-scale miners. 

In my own constituency, probably with the largest deposits of gold in the country, Busia, my little constituency has more gold than the whole of Uganda put together –(Interjections)- the information is right here in case you doubt that.

THE SPEAKER: Is it easy to get land there?

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, according to the chairperson and her committee and the minister, they have given us a breakdown of various areas of Uganda, which produce gold, and only my constituency can prove that we are producing gold. For the information of the august House, we produce 15 kilos a month. No other place can produce 15 kilos of gold a month, and that is what the miners can declare.

Mr Speaker, my concern here is that we are borrowing over US $40 million and yet only US $14 million will be invested in the communities where these minerals are hidden. Can’t we reverse the order that US $30 million should go into assisting the small-scale miners and those of us who might wish to do it at medium to large-scale mining?

As for the consultants, we have been told we lack capacity in this area that we are going to train people at Masters level, PhD level and so forth. So, at the moment essentially we are again going to bring in consultants to fill this gap until such a time that we are ready. Mr Speaker, it boggles one’s mind to look at a figure, almost at the bottom of the table, contingencies, and US $2.1 million. Is this a bonus or what? Really if you take US $2 million out of US $42 million, that is too much money lying loose. It is loose money, which anybody can actually pick and call contingencies like going to Mweya Lodge for a weekend. These are serious concerns, Mr Speaker. Why should we continue to borrow money from abroad and only a little bit is left here? If this money were going to go to commercial banks for the ordinary persons like others and me to borrow and get into mining, I would support this resolution.

But, Mr Speaker, to conform to the President’s statement that we are donors - as if we would be proud of it - I say, no, really we should not approve this kind of loan. We should send it back to the Ministry of Finance, to the ministry responsible for minerals, so that they can alter these figures and leave a small figure for the purpose of buying this information. Without amendments as I proposed, I oppose the motion.  

THE SPEAKER: Let us have this clarification because it was intended to assist us to debate, but actually it went into a full - let us get it from the Minister.

3.43
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mrs Syda Bbumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to start off by thanking the chairperson of the committee for the good anatomy he has done of the credit.  

Mr Speaker, in responding to the clarifications sought by my good friend, hon. Aggrey Awori, I want to say that the US $21.6 million he is referring to as technical assistance, it is technical assistance in the broader sense. And why do I say “in the broader sense”? It covers collection surveying, because in mining, unlike in many other investments, people need information, and the most expensive part during the preliminary state of any mining venture is gathering information.  

Today we know that investors do not want to waste time and to invest money where that money can be saved considering that there are several investment havens in the world. That is why this credit is going to collect information. We have information, but it is scanty. He is talking of 15 kilos of gold being mined in Busia. If he carried out exploration, I am sure the production from Busia might go up to 100 kilos or even more. We have scanty information and that is the reason we have not been able to develop this very important sector.

Government for the first time is coming out with deliberate action to get the necessary information. –(Interruptions)- Mr Speaker, I am still clarifying on the issues raised by the hon. Aggrey Awori. This information, as it has been stated in the report of the committee, cannot be sought without the necessary equipment. We do not have them in this country and we have got to procure them. Our officers, who by the way should be commended for doing a good job with limited facilities and training, need to be tooled through training, and modern exploration facilities.

Mr Speaker, our small-scale miners are trying but they are not making good progress because they do not have the money to carry out exploration. People have seen gold in Arua, people have seen gold in the southwest but they do not know its economic quantity, they do not know how much to invest because the information is not scientifically proven. This credit is going to do that for our small-scale miners.

Mr Speaker, we want to put up our own laboratories. We do not have laboratories in this country to do analysis of the mineral findings. We either go to Tanzania, South Africa or London. So, really we want to have this to modernize our laboratories so that we can do the analysis here. We want to train our people. We are going to acquire limited foreign consultancy during the period when we are training our people. The kind of training we are going to conduct for our people is going to be using two approaches. One is through further academic qualifications and the other one is on the job training. We wanted them to understudy those consultants who will be hired here so that they acquire the knowledge and we do not engage these consultants for a long time.

On the contingency of US $2.1 million, we all know that inflation is a factor in the economy. Over a five-year period to provide for 5 percent inflation, when the current inflation is 6 percent, I do not think it is out of the ordinary. Mr Speaker, I will stop there for the moment. I thank you.

3.48
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Prof Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to add to what the Minister has just said. Twenty-five years ago, I happened to have been a Minister in charge of Minerals in this country –(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: Order, order.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: All of us who are here have our mothers and fathers and we do not cry out that they are older than us. There is no big deal; I am slightly older than hon. Ssekikuubo, so this is no problem. Twenty-five years ago when the then Ministry of Natural Resources got in touch with the Ministry of Minerals in Tanzania, the then Minister of Minerals was Nulu Kassam. At that time he was carrying out a geo survey of Tanzania and the benefits we are now talking about of Tanzania reaping from the mineral sector go back to a 25-year period. It means a lot of investment, a lot of painstaking effort at doing a mineral map. You do not get an investor to come and do a geo survey for you. 

The knowledge the Minister was talking about needs to be so detailed for an investor to come and be ready to put in his or her money. That is why oil exploration becomes very expensive simply because few countries on their own are in a position to invest in the pre-investment exploration. So, this is a very important thing. We did a geo-survey in 1980 up to one degree north but actually the Government failed - immediately the Government took over in 1981, it failed to pay for the information that had been collected under the survey, so the information was not delivered.

In that preliminary study, there were indications that even Uganda had uranium in certain parts. There were indications that we even had platinum, which is more valuable than gold; there were all sorts of possibilities. This question of beryl, there was even talk we have 40 percent of the world deposit in Uganda. So, there is a lot of wealth that is in the ground but it needs a lot of investment and a lot of time before we can reap it. So this, Mr Speaker, is something belated even within the Government of the Movement. We have invested in a number of other areas, this sector is probably one of the sectors that will liberate the economy of this country because we will be tapping resources that had been sleeping underneath, and many of those resources are more valuable than those we have on the surface. 

Sir, the hon. Aggrey Awori wants this money to be given to Ugandan investors. But as the honourable minister pointed out, hon. Aggrey Awori is very excited about 15 kilograms of gold a month but Tanzania is talking in terms of tonnes. South Africa, which has been living, among other things on gold, produces hundreds of tonnes. So, when you are excited about the 15 kilograms, it shows how far we are from where we should be. Where we should be is much further away and there is more gold -(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I am very proud of the little that we produce but at no given point was I excited about the little that I produce. Is my honourable colleague on the front bench, one time Minister of Minerals of 25 years ago as he says, in order to imply that we cannot be proud of the little that we have without even help?

THE SPEAKER: I do not think that is what he is saying. He is saying that, well, we are proud of this but there are other big things we can get, why don’t we aim higher? I think that was his implication.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you for your ruling, Mr Speaker. Although hon. Aggrey Awori was emphasizing 25 years, I am younger than him so there is no big deal.  

Mr Speaker, laboratories to analyze samples; this is where we are very vulnerable. I remember that time we picked samples of what we thought was uranium and we had to send one of these samples to Switzerland and another to Australia. Why should we think that we are dealing with godly men and women when we send our samples that we should be told the truth of what our samples represent when probably this would be helping us to get ourselves from backwardness? So, establishing our own laboratories and having the right personnel to study and analyze our samples is part and parcel of fighting backwardness and liberating ourselves from the global grip we are tightly held in.  

So, I strongly recommend that we welcome this effort and that the technical personnel in the ministry and all the people who will be involved in this take this as a chance to push Uganda ahead. We are in agriculture, yes, but minerals may actually be that effort that will jettison us into a new orbit where we must operate if we are going to survive in the 21st century. I thank you.

3.57
MR BERNARD MULENGANI (Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the work done. But possibly to inquire from the Minister, what creates contradictions, at times in these reports is that we tend to look at blanket figures. For example, she mentioned the requirements of opening up laboratories and yet we are using laboratories from Tanzania and South Africa. Some of this information is lacking in the report, eventually we fail to get measurable items in these loans that are being requested. For one to say geo-information and development and then attaching it to, say, laboratories required - we are aware that investment into minerals mining is quite costly, and it will only be prudent for this House to pass this budget after putting in place or on paper here in the House the requirements that will be measured in future. 

We keep on saying that Members of Parliament play a supervisory role but there is no way we can supervise the geo-information and development, which is including things like construction of laboratories. So, the Minister needs to give more information to the committee as to what functions is the US $21.95 million is going to do in items so that a year after we are able to appraise the ministry on its performance on the loan that we are yet to pass in this House.  

Mr Speaker, the other issue I want to raise is on page 10 regarding the various rights they are giving out. We are looking at this loan as one that is coming to assist the people to get out of poverty. When I look at the number of operators who have been given the various rights, it is clear that they are put in the order of strength in that the prospective rights (56) are to bigger firms, and exclusive prospective rights (67) to the second bigger firms. In any case, the only benefit here is in terms of the manpower employed. But if we are to benefit, we the people who own the land, I believe the mining lease - I stand to be corrected - would benefit the local populace more. But when you look at the figures of the people with the licenses (17), they are fewer than the people who are operating on a large scale. These eventually will not benefit the people. The benefits that we intend to attain will not necessarily go to the people given that the exploration licenses look like they are going to bigger firms who will eventually just exploit the peasant.

I would also want the minister to give us more information about what areas they are targeting for this particular loan. Because we are aware that there are various areas that are not explored yet, but this particular loan, which area is it going to address? Again the reason being that we are able to appraise the ministry’s performance and the performance of the loan. Will it address the concerns that we are going to pass here or it is going to be diverted eventually? I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.01
MR MARTIN WANDERA (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. I have some issues that I would like to raise. The first one is under methodology on page 3 –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I have a problem, honourable members, because we have to vote on this matter. If you go – (Interruption)

MR WANDERA: Mr Speaker, the committee said it analyzed, among others, the project appraisal documents. However, on going through the report I realized that the committee seems not to have carried out a cost benefit analysis. The essence of looking at that is that you would be able to inform Parliament about the future value of this money. I am interested in knowing very specifically, at the end of the loan period, how much money the government or the people of Uganda will be paying. This is the reason we submit these loan requests to the committee. Could the chairperson tell us exactly how much we shall be paying back?

Also, Mr Speaker, if you go to page 12 of the report, the committee mentions some of the socio-economic benefits of the loan. These include increase in fiscal revenue from loyalties, licenses and export earnings; high employment levels, infrastructure development, contribution to other sectors since mining supports a larger service industry, and development of localized industries that will enhance further development. 

Mr Speaker, this is not prose; we are talking money and when you are dealing with issues of loans, you must be very specific. How many jobs are we talking about? Because, as a student of economics I know we are able to say this in very specific terms if you carry out a serious loan analysis.  

Can we, Mr Speaker, also be informed what the projection in increase in revenue from loyalties and licenses is? We are talking of infrastructure development, this is broad; what is it that we are talking about? If we are talking about roads, can we be told how many kilometers of roads? Is it first class bitumen roads that we are talking about or we are talking of the corrugated road that we were given from Bugiri to Busia and Malaba?  

So, I would like to request the committee and the Ministry of Finance to tell us very specifically what the benefits are, because the mathematical formulae are there. And this is why we sent these things to the Committee of National Economy.  

Finally, Mr Speaker, I would like the committee to be very specific and tell us; how much exactly are we borrowing? If you go to the last page, the committee says that the august House does approve the request of Special Drawing Rights 17,700,000 – it is given in US dollars. I think it is answered. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR ELIJAH OKUPA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I must thank the committee for the work they have tried to do. But I just want one clarification on table 1. It is showing us the mineral production for the year 2000–2003 and then mineral export for the same period. Let us look at specifically gold; the mineral production in the year 2000 was 0.06 tonnes but we exported 7.3 tonnes, where did that difference come from? In the year 2001 we produced nil but we exported 6.09 tonnes, in 2002 we produced 0.03 tonnes, we exported 7.59 tonnes and in 2003 we produced 0.04 tonnes and we exported 4.2 tonnes. Where is the difference coming from? Is it smuggled out of this country? 

THE SPEAKER: This is not the question for the committee, which dealt with this particular loan. Why don’t you ask the person concerned, the Minister, rather than the committee?

MR OKUPA: Yes, exactly because the Minister is here, so the Minister who provided this information to the committee should be able to provide it to us. 

Also, on the issue of value, just take one figure, the mineral export of 7.3 tonnes in the year 2000; the value given here is Shs 98 million. I do not believe that is the value for the 7.3 tonnes of gold. It should have been more than this amount of money. Thank you. 

4.08
MR WANJUSI WASIEBA (Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the good report that they have prepared, but there are two points that I want to point out, maybe for the attention of the Minister. 

On page 13, item 4.6, they said that there should be sensitization on loyalties to address the possible conflicts with local governments and miners. When an investor comes here and he is interested in mining a certain mineral, he comes up with a feasibility study, which normally the Government approves and the contents therein. The ministry does follow it up eventually to see that the investor is following exactly what was put in his feasibility study. I am referring mainly to the phosphate feasibility study, which was prepared in Mbale. They are mining and the investor is not following the feasibility study that he had prepared, which is lying with the Government. So, I am asking whether government has a supervisory department that follows up to see whether the investor is following up exactly what the he/she proposed?

The second point, Mr Speaker, is on item 6.5 where they say that the project implementation should also focus on incorporating existing local investors. In other countries like Dubai, if you wanted to invest there, they would not allow you to register your business unless you have incorporated a local person or investor to support the international investor. So, in this case I want to ask the Government to consider including local investors to work jointly with the international investors so that eventually when they withdraw, we remain with some kind of investors who will continue prospecting whatever item that they are interested in. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.11
MR DAVID WAKIKONA (Manjiya County, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have to thank the committee also for the report but I have some clarification to seek, mainly from the minister. I am a victim of this arrangement of mining. Two weeks ago I looked at a map of mining in Manjiya given to some investors, and the map even covered my own house – everywhere on the hill. I had not actually known this until I went and found these people there and I wondered how they had reached that far. But of course when they showed me papers from the Ministry of Minerals, I kept quiet although the papers again talked of another sub-county and they were in a different sub-county. I think the Ministry should clarify. 

Normally when you send these people –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you say you are a victim but maybe you are sitting on a gold mine. (Laughter)

MR WAKIKONA: Mr Speaker, I was coming to what they are trying to mine, but the whole hill – Bukiga hill - the NPC knows it - is all full of limestone. We all support what the Government is doing to earn or to donate but Manjiya is so populated, what happens is that exclusive rights are given, like the ones they have given to these people in my constituency. I am concerned that the ministry, even throughout the report when the committee members read the report, there was no element of funding in the distribution of funds for resettling people although they talk about putting people back after mining. 

I am concerned that when the ministry gives out exclusive rights to mine, they should also help the local people to resettle them somewhere and then maybe bring them back. Like in my case, after 40 years they can come back and resettle in those areas. So, next time you negotiate or give these rights, Ministry of Mineral Resources, please think of resettling people or moving people to another place. 

Mr Speaker, I will tell you, they leave the negotiating rights between the peasants and the miners to the people who have been given licenses. And because of poverty the miners normally take advantage. Sometimes they underpay them and then they say, “Within six months, move”. When they come back after six months even the Shs 700,000 or Shs 800,000 they have paid them is not there and they leave people hanging and they all look to the Members of Parliament for solutions -(Interruption)

MRS BWAMBALE: Mr Speaker, thank you very much for this opportunity. I would like to inform the Member holding the Floor that his concerns can be adequately addressed by a provision of the Constitution. So, allow me to read Article 244 where his concerns can be addressed together with the Ministry concerned. 

“Subject to clause (2) of this Article, Parliament shall make laws regulating  - 
(b) The sharing of royalties arising from mineral exploration.” That is one section where a legal claim can be substantially made and the people affected will be assisted. 

A more practicable one is Article 244(2), “Minerals and mineral ores shall be exploited taking into account the interests of the individual land owner,” and these are the Manjiya people settled on this gold mine as the hon. Speaker put it. It will also benefit local governments and the central government. So, honourable member, please get informed that you only have to move and you will be the wealthiest county. Thank you.  

MR WAKIKONA: Thank you for the information. Mr Speaker, these are things, which come later, but I am concerned now that as we start the mining, the people must be safely put in one place and then brought back later.  

The second point concerns the mapping of the nation, and I think this is not the physical; it is the mineral mapping. This Ministry of Minerals and Water Resources must have really known where the minerals were 25 years ago. In 1997 we hired an aeroplane from South Africa, I was somewhere in Soroti, it stayed with me for three months and they were doing mapping and surveys of the minerals in the Northern and Eastern part of the country. So, I am surprised - and in fact we went up to Gulu - I am surprised that today we are being told we need mapping in the North. I do not know how unsafe - the North cannot be mapped because, Mr Speaker, mineral mapping is with sensitive elements, which are kept in the machine; and Kony must be operating somewhere underground - unless now he has acquired that capacity to bring down aeroplanes. So, Minister of Mineral Resources, can’t you do aerial mapping and surveys of the minerals before this Kony becomes dangerous to us?

I am also concerned that the prospecting is done by different - we heard here of the Koreans and then the Karamoja whatever. I am calling upon the Government to know what we have before we give it to those who come here to mine. Let the Government do the mapping of minerals in this nation and we keep it. Even when people prospect it we will know that this is what we have in this and that area. But if we leave it to these people who come here for commercial purposes, they are already injecting US $1 million per annum for five years. Can you imagine people who are getting nothing putting US $1 million per annum in a project out of which they earn just 15 kilos of gold. There must be something they are hiding from us. But if we have the information ourselves, we shall be able to follow this and monitor it properly. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.20
MR DEUSDEDIT BIKWASIZEHI (Buhweju County, Bushenyi): I Thank you, Mr Speaker. I vividly recall that in 2001 when we had just come, I think it was during my maiden speech, we were debating the State of the Nation Address at that time and we were looking at issues pertaining to poverty in this country. I raised an issue that we are talking about agriculture and these others, what about minerals?  

Mr Speaker, it has been mentioned that Buhweju has gold and indeed it has gold because in the late 30s and early 40s very many Bazungu from Kenya and South Africa came there and did mining. Actually, I do not know what technology they used to understand that there was gold at that time. Buhweju does not only have gold but it is also believed to have diamonds. So, this is wealth that should be tapped for the country. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to learn from the Minister because when we are talking of minerals, the emphasis is on metallic minerals. I had an opportunity about two weeks ago to visit our Industrial Research Institute at Nakawa and I was amazed to find that the floor and wall tiles we are importing are actually made out of raw materials of a mineral nature, which we have abundantly in Buhweju and in other parts of the country. This is kaolin, gypsum and tin, which are mined here. So, I see that we are importing these kinds of materials all the way from Spain and China yet we have them in this country. They are just molded and baked in a kiln. I am wondering, Madam Minister, what you say about that.  

Mr Speaker, my colleagues have talked about exploitation of small-scale miners in the villages by these licensed miners. Actually this is true because they do not invest anything, he just gets a license to the area and gets the local people to mine and he pays them a price, which is determined by this miner. I do not know whether there is a mechanism, which will ensure that they should be paid a certain amount of money, but there is a lot of exploitation in this area.

Mr Speaker, when I look at the report on page 12, where they are talking of training experts, after the information has been obtained by this technology and you know that there is so much gold in an area, do you need to use our local experts? My understanding is that this is going to be a business; you engage a company that will hire its own experts. I remember when cobalt extraction started in Kasese, they never looked for the local experts, they looked for experts elsewhere. I imagine you might train people who may not be utilized because these people are supposed to be utilized by these multi-national companies. I would hesitate to recommend that we borrow money to train people, which people may not be used, because we are not going to mine as a government; it is the companies, which will mine.

Mr Speaker, I highly recommend this loan because it is overdue. Recently I was discussing with the hon. Members of Parliament from the East African Legislative Assembly and they have been telling me how gold mining has turned the economy of Tanzania around. It has actually improved the economy of that country. When I was talking to our Ambassador to Japan he also told me of how the trade between Tanzania and Japan has increased because of gold mining. Why don’t we do the same? I thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity.

4.25
MR JACK SABIITI (Rukiga County, Kabale): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairperson of the committee and the committee members for the good report. I also thank the Government for at last developing an interest in mineral development and exploitation. (Applause)

I have been wondering why in the last 18 years this sector was neglected. If you look at the budget of this particular sector, it has been between Shs 1 billion and Shs 3 billion every year and if you compare this with other sectors that are not as important as this one, they have been fully and well funded say to the tune of Shs 20 to 40 billion every year. 

I worked in this ministry some years back and I can remember that our emphasis in every policy statement we presented to Parliament, we urged the Government to invest more in this particular sector. So, I am happy that at least, at last the Government has realized that poverty cannot be fought by just bringing in briefcase investors. We need now to have a look at our resources and then invest in and get more taxes to help our people.  

Mr Speaker, if you look at page 6, I am particularly happy to note that geo-information and development is going to be worked on very well. This is an area, which I think hon. Awori should note. Without this particular information there is no way we can exploit these minerals. I am, therefore, happy that the Minister has put in more money, US $21 million, to make sure that survey is done properly. But I would like to ask the Minister; how are we going to conduct this? I thought US $21 million could be better put to use if we used satellite sensors? I do not know whether that is less or more expensive, but this could actually cover the whole country. Therefore, I would like her to comment on whether this is possible or not possible.  

Another area I would like the Minister to throw more light on is Article 244 of our Constitution. One of our colleagues has referred to it, and I am beginning to understand that the Mineral Act was passed sometime back in conformity with the demands of the Constitution. The Article stipulates that Parliament should pass laws regarding exploitation of minerals, the sharing of loyalties, the condition for payment of individuals who have interests, and of course, bearing in mind the interests of districts and regions. May I know whether she has presented Bills to cover all these areas? This is because as we start to exploit minerals, we shall need laws to cover all these areas. We would not like to have a situation where all the revenue collected from the minerals just comes to the centre when the local governments, where the minerals come from and individuals, are not paid their due share. 

I, therefore, request the honourable minister to throw more light on it so that I am comforted that this move that the Government has taken is going to benefit our people. With this, I support that this loan be passed by this Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Is it time really that we vote on this?  

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

MRS BWAMBALE: But I am already up, Mr Speaker. You had given me the Floor.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I see there are policy matters about this ministry, and this particular item will definitely be covered in the committees when they are dealing with the Budget. This is really for the loan so that we start, that is all. But other policy matters can be canvassed in the committees. Don’t you think it is time we voted on this?

MR AWORI: Motion?

THE SPEAKER: Yes?

MR AWORI: I beg to move that you put the question, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: But isn’t it the consensus that we vote?  

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Do you need responses from the ministry? Okay, let us get this and then see how we proceed. 

4.31
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Syda Bbumba): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I thank the Members for the support they have given to this motion. I will, however, clarify on a few issues. Our target is to raise the revenue for minerals in the short-term from the current two billion to 200 billion. If we go by what has happened in Tanzania when they got such credit, the economy of Tanzania has changed within two years. Their foreign exchange reserves have gone up, mineral exports are the number one foreign exchange earner for Tanzania, and Uganda can also achieve this.  

One Member of Parliament raised concern about the difference between exports and production. One of the things this credit is going to address is to formalize informal mining because what is bringing about the difference is the informal mining, which is not captured in production and is captured at the time of export, because the exporters are licensed. 

We have a law, an Act of Parliament, which was passed only six months ago regarding licensing, exploitation, management and compensation under the mining activities, and this law is quite comprehensive. However, where we found some inadequacies in the provision in the existing Constitution, we have proposed constitutional amendments and they will be coming to this House.  

Mr Speaker, the issue of compensation is well dealt with. In case of a disagreement, the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) is the arbiter. 

One member proposed controlling prices; this is against the policy in a liberal economy. Since we do not control prices for all the other commodities, there is no way government is going to control prices for mineral exports. 

On the exploration, hon. Wakikona said that in 1991 there was exploration. I think that was something different because according to the records the last serious exploration was done in 1980 and it was done up to one degree north. The whole of Northern Uganda and the biggest part of Central, have never been surveyed. The purpose of this credit is to come up with the mineral map so that people can know that in such and such an area there is such and such a mineral. We also want to have these minerals quantified so that if an investor, whether local or foreign, wants to take up an investment in this area, the information is readily available. 

Under this credit we are also giving special recognition to the small-scale miners, who have been seriously handicapped. We want to provide them with information by giving them hand regulations, separating them from the big miners. We are also providing them with the facilities like the processing facilities so that they can add value using the facilities, which they cannot afford to raise individually. Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for giving way. Madam Minister, you have mentioned “one degree north”, some of us may not understand what it means. Could you please tell us to which extent one degree north is; does it stop at Lake Victoria, Kampala or it goes up to Lira?  

Another clarification is on page 7. Could I be educated more on the estimated cost and source because I am seeing number one, community development and small-scale mining, then the second one is community development and small-scale mining? There is something, which I do not understand on this. Could you clarify it also, Madam Minister? Thank you.  

MR WANDERA: Mr Speaker, the honourable minister has informed us that we expect to earn about 200 million, how do you arrive at this? This is the question that I asked. What is the Executive hiding? (Interjection)- no, but we are not rubber stamps; we are here to demonstrate that we are not ignorant. If we continue passing things without all questions being answered, we shall be giving credence to what the President is saying; that MPs are ignorant. I am not going be party to this –(Applause)- until the information is given, I will not support this law.

MR GAGAWALA: Mr Speaker, I would like the Minister to clarify to me –(Interruption)

MRS BBUMBA: Mr Speaker, I want to alley the fears of my good friend, hon. Wandera, that government is not hiding anything. We gave a detailed breakdown to the committee and it is from that detailed breakdown that we derived the DSD protections, which we have. 

On where the “one degree north” stops, I think all of us are familiar with the map of Uganda, and since all of us did O’ Level Geography that should not be a problem to any of us to understand. But, Mr Speaker, one degree north –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, there is something that you must have seen about a month ago when we had a conference of ADB at Munyonyo. There was a blanket accusation of Parliaments delaying the processing of these loans. I think you saw it and, therefore, we should also be conscious about that but at the same time getting the information we want. But that was a very big accusation and you must have seen it. Proceed.

MRS BBUMBA: Mr Speaker, there is a typing error on page 7. The first item should be community development and small-scale mining and the second one should be “strengthening of governance”. We apologize for that error.  

I want to conclude by saying that training is paramount in this programme. I assure the honourable members that we are not going to get any redundant capacity because the survey is going to be done for a five-year period. If we say we are going to train our people, they might be able to take over from the consultants before the period is over. In the mining activities, it is not surveying and geo-studies only, there are other activities such as exploitation, monitoring and so many others, which require expertise. 

On the issue of monitoring, I want to say that we have got regional offices, which if well facilitated can do a very good job in monitoring the miners in as far as compliance with the licenses and the laws are concerned. I thank you, Mr Speaker, and once again I thank the members of the committee.

THE SPEAKER: No, there are matters, which we shall get in detail when we go to the committee, about the policy –(Interruption)

MR SABIITI: There are things, which I raised and she has not touched. I wanted to know whether Article 244(1) and (2) have been complied with and she is not bothered to answer that question.

THE SPEAKER: What is this about?

MR SABIITI: About whether they have come up with Bills to make sure that the exploitation of the minerals and the development is in conformity with the law.

MRS BBUMBA: Mr Speaker, in the last Session hon. Sabiiti was a Member of the Natural Resources Committee, which carried out a thorough anatomy of the Mining Bill, which was later enacted into law. In my presentation I stated that where we have found the constitutional provision on mining lacking, we have proposed constitutional amendments. 

On the methodology of surveying or mapping, I think we are going to use whatever is most appropriate in terms of cost and also technology, because the technology that was used in 1981 is now obsolete. We are going to use the latest technology, which is affordable within the credit. I thank you.

MR APUUN: Before we embark on this one to approve this law, I would like the Minister to clarify on our concerns in Karamoja. I understand that there are some people here in Uganda who have gone ahead to get land titles in Karamoja and all these areas spotted to be having gold or whatever kind of mineral. We should be clarified and our fears should be allayed that the same scenario of Kibaale cannot be transplanted into Karamoja because it will become a very serious problem.

THE SPEAKER: But that point cannot be a matter for the minister who was holding the Floor. That is a matter for the Ministry of Lands because you are talking about titles, you are talking about the operation of district land boards, which has nothing to do with this. You have a valid point but it cannot be answered by her.

MR WANDERA: Mr Speaker, I take cognizance of your information that this House has been blamed for not –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Not this House, Parliaments in Africa.

MR WANDERA: Okay Parliaments all over the world, but we are talking about US $42 million. You do not just seem to approve this kind of money where the committee and the Minister are not coming out to give satisfactory answers. I said earlier on, Mr Speaker, this is not prose and poetry –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But, hon. Wandera, you sought clarification about the 220 and said what was the basis? You were told - in fact the Minister showed you the table, which was the evidence that the committee received to come to that conclusion. They did, they had evidence. I think it was done.

MR WANDERA: Mr Speaker, I think as a Member of this House, and this House as a whole, is entitled to answers. If we request for a cost benefit analysis, let it be laid on the Table. I asked for the future value of this money before I - this House has approved loans that have no value to this country, like the nutrition project. I have been on the committee for health, I know it and I am not going to be party to approving loans where the Executive does not give proper answers.

MR EKANYA: I am a Member of the Committee –[Hon. Members: “Of health?”] of National Economy, and we discussed this issue very seriously. We realized that because of shortage of information within that sector, government has in the past lost a lot of revenue, for example the cobalt in Kasese during the privatization. Another area is the Tororo/Karamoja limestone. During the privatization, if you read the document and what the investor is now exploiting, because the technical officer did not have information, and lack of capacity, government lost a lot of money in negotiation. We decided that this loan is very important because government will now be armed with information, such that any investor that comes into this country will be able to negotiate from a more informed point of view. 

Two, once there is information of gold in Tororo, the Government will be able to market it and attract investors to put in place gold processing industries, and then export it. So, if through this survey we find that we have 20 mineral resources, government will attract investors who will put a processing plant to export gold and we get the money. Thank you.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, we raised concern about the North being part of what should be included in this report here. It is our concern that the Northern region should be considered here. That question has not been answered. I raised the issue of the discrepancies in these figures here; the Minister has not answered it. That is why we need clear and specific answers to this question before we pass the loan.  

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I belong to the Natural Resources Committee and I think it is prudent that I be heard about some concerns, which have environmental implications -(Laughter)- yes. 

I would like the Minister in charge of Mineral Development to answer the following questions before we pass this loan. One, the Minister throughout her response has been over-emphasizing foreign investment. Did God create this country for foreign investors? What interest has Uganda as a nation shown in terms of direct investment to make use of this big money? US $42 million is a lot of money; we cannot simply pass it before the Minister answers.

THE SPEAKER: But honourable member, do you have a copy of the report?  

MR LUKYAMUZI: Yes, I do.

THE SPEAKER: One of the objectives is environment and social management framework; did you address that one? Somebody who was addressing the information, did he look at page 6, geo-information development? What are these purposes?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, finally, Article 244 demands that we formulate an appropriate law. In regard to that law, the Mineral Development Act, which we have passed as an enabling law, demands that we have regulations to control the use of these resources. I would like to know from the Minister whether the regulations have been put in place.

THE SPEAKER: May I ask you as a Member of the Committee in charge of this, what recommendation have you made in the past on this issue? Your committee is supposed to supervise the activities of the ministry, including this particular Article. Have you in the past made any recommendation to this effect?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Yes, the recommendation remained to be brought to us as a committee. So, it is not in order for the Minister to start making use of that money before the regulations, which she will use, are put in place. This was my concern.

CAPT. GUMA: Mr Speaker, I am a Member of the National Economy Committee, whose report is being discussed by the House today. If there is a loan request presented by government that should be passed, of all the loans we have passed, this is the loan we should pass. And I can assure you we are seriously informed committee members. We carried out an indepth analysis of all these issues you are raising. So, we recommend that colleagues trust us and pass this loan request.

This loan request is simply to enable government gather the information that is necessary in the mineral sub-sector. In light of the private sector-led growth, this information should be available. Hon. Kamanda Bataringaya, and later on his senior Minister, told us that people have been coming wanting to invest in the mineral sector but the information is not available. So, we recommended for Parliament to pass this loan so that this information can be readily available for people who have the money to come and invest. 

So, I appeal to you, colleagues to trust us; we carried out an indepth analysis of this loan request –(Interruption) 

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, having heard all that we have heard this afternoon, I beg to move that the matter on this Floor be put to vote. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Any objection?

HON. MEMBERS: No.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I am going to put the question. Honourable members, this is what we have -(Interruption) 

MR GAGAWALA: Point of order.

THE SPEAKER: Let me finish then you talk. I now put the question to the motion.

(The Members voted by a show of hands)

THE SPEAKER: One Member is abstaining; those against the motion are two; and those for it are 108. The motion is carried. Thank you. (Applause).

(Report adopted)

MR GAGAWALA: Mr Speaker, I was raising a point of order because hon. Aggrey Awori did not put up his hand for abstention. I did not see him putting up his hand for support and neither did he oppose it; was he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Aggrey Awori is representing a constituency that is benefiting from this and I saw him supporting it.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I am seeking your guidance. Initially you are aware that I opposed the motion but after serious explanation by the line Minister, I consented. Really, the guidance I am seeking from the Chair for future reference is, if you have an amendment to a motion put by the Government for the purpose of raising a loan, is it possible to do so from the back bench? Take for instance this case -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: An amendment to do what?

MR AWORI: In figures for instance, I said in this case, I got the principle, but the figures are wrong.

THE SPEAKER: You can only move a motion to reduce, not to increase.  

MR AWORI: No, no, re-allocate; take for instance this case – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, but really, that is for them to do; you cannot do it here.

MR AWORI: Okay, can we negotiate after this?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, during the committee, but otherwise, how do you re-allocate here? It cannot be meaningful.

MR AWORI: I can continue to negotiate with –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, I think our office is open to – You can go there and negotiate.

4.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): I thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday while I was appearing before the Committee on Finance, a concern was raised over delayed submission to this House of the Treasury Memorandum for the year ending 1998. I am seeking your indulgence for the Order Paper to be amended so that I am able to submit the Treasury Memorandum.

THE SPEAKER: Do you have it?

MR RUKUTANA: I have it already.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. I think honourable members you have heard the background, it is better that we accommodate him and then he lays it before us and it be considered. Do you have any objection, honourable? Okay, I think we should adjust the Order Paper before we proceed with the debate on the Budget. Then let him do so.

LAYING OF PAPERS
THE TREASURY MEMORANDUM ON THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE FOR THE YEAR ENDING 30TH JUNE 1998

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): I thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Speaker, I beg to submit the Treasury Memorandum on the Report of the Public Accounts Committee for the Financial Year ending 30th June 1998. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let the same be handled by the Public Accounts Committee.

MR SABIITI: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You recall the work of the Public Accounts Committee has not been moving on well because of failure of government to produce this report. I would urge the honourable minister to move fast and produce others. As you remember, there are matters still pending, which we have not dealt with because of lack of this memorandum.

THE SPEAKER: I think that is a valid observation the Minister should comply with.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, on a lighter note but on a very serious matter, I am wondering, what is the weather forecast? (Laughter).

THE SPEAKER: What is it? The weather! 

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, I am a very good weather technician and I can assure honourable members that soon it will rain in this august House –(Laughter)- and when I say soon, I mean in the course of this week.

THE SPEAKER: So you can prepare the gardens for planting. (Laughter)

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

i) The Revised Revenue and Expenditure    Estimates for the fiscal year 2003/2004, and

ii) The Budgetary Proposals for the Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure for the fiscal year 2004/2005

(Debate continued.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I must say I thank you for the way you have handled this matter expeditiously but meaningfully. Thank you very much.

5.00
MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI (Ibanda County South, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First, I want to thank the Committee on Budget for a good job done and I will only dwell on the Ministry of Defence.  

Of late we have seen some good results in Northern Uganda in as far as fighting insurgency is concerned. I am sure this is due to budgetary increments, which were done by cutting across budgets of other ministries. The Government managed to purchase helicopter gunships and really positive results have been registered in as far as fighting the rebellion in the North is concerned.

We want to appreciate the concerns of the committee on the increased funding of the Ministry of Defence. Whereas the air supply and ghost soldiers’ cases are being handled, it is not as expeditiously as it is supposed to be. We also had a report here concerning the junk helicopters, but to date the people who caused us financial loss have never been brought to book. Ghost soldiers’ cases are in court but we do not know to what extent and coverage, whether it has covered all the soldiers who have been creating ghosts within Defence. But at least something is going on to curb that malpractice within the Ministry of Defence. 

As far as junk helicopters are concerned, it is a shame to see that the Ssebutinde reports mentioned the people who actually caused financial loss to this country but the Government, which I love most, has not taken any appropriate measures to bring these people to court. 

However, I really appreciate the work of the UPDF in the North. Of late even the Members of Parliament from Northern Uganda have seen the results and are telling us that really something is being done. Therefore, to hasten the end of this war, a lot of measures must be put in place. One of them might be a political solution, as the committee has suggested, but we have to maintain also the pressure on the ground by the UPDF. Therefore, when you say that we should relocate Shs 59 billion from the Ministry of Defence, I really get concerned. 

The UPDF still needs weapons. We are talking about gunships doing a good job but they are very few. You can imagine the whole army having about only two functional helicopter gunships. We do not have even helicopters to lift our troops from one place to another. Therefore, I am not supporting the idea of relocating Shs 59 billion from the Ministry of Defence to other ministries. The President stated that after improving on their weaponry we have seen positive results. Why can’t we give them the benefit of doubt at least for another year? Let them have that Shs 59 billion and purchase modern weapons so that this war can come to an end.  

Those are the only comments I had. Otherwise, the report is good and I support other comments within the report done by the committee. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.06
CAPT. DAVID GUMA (Ibanda County North, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As far as I am concerned I consider the debate on the Budget to be one of the most important debates this House could indulge in. But it is interesting that out of about 67 Ministers, we have less than ten in the House. I thought that as members of the Executive arm of Government they would be here to listen to what the backbenchers are saying so that they can take full cognisance of it and then when they go back to the kitchen, in the Cabinet, they reflect on these issues. But here you are, we just talk and talk our voices hoarse –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, do you have any explanation to make?

THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER & MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Henry Kajura): Mr Speaker, many ministers may have moved slightly ahead of us for a meeting, which is coming later on, that is, the extension of the meetings of Cabinet. In an endeavour to make progress on the road map, we are making an effort to get this work completed tonight. I suspect that some have left in order to prepare, and many of us will be following them. As I have informed the hon. Speaker, when we leave he will understand why we have left. But a few may have left a little too early; we are resuming at 6.00 p.m. I thank you.

CAPT. GUMA: Mr Speaker, some time in 2000 we went with you to Colorado and elsewhere in the United States of America. You remember we copied this idea of the Budget Office from the United States of America, to assist Members of Parliament to have an extra focus on the budget while debating. It was also meant to break down information so that people can understand, because good budgeting is good politics; it is good administration. So, when the entire Executive leaves the House saying that they are discussing the road map, but without good economics, this road map will be no road map at the end of the day. I can assure you, Mr Speaker and the Leader of Government Business who is here that the tensions whether political or whatever, have all got roots in the standards of living, in the nature of the economy. So, discuss the road maps, ignore the economics!  

I want to state as follows, Mr Speaker. One, in 2002/2003 real GDP at market prices was projected to grow at 5.4 percent. That is the other fiscal year. I have looked in the books to tell me what it grew at exactly, because they say it was projected. I have been looking for the rate at which the economy grew in 2002/2003. I read and go through, they tell me “projected”. Nonetheless, that is not really the biggest point. I have also looked for the projected real GDP growth rate at factor cost rather than the market so that I can compare the two. I cannot get it in the books that are available from the Ministry of Finance. So, I would like the Minister to give us the real GDP at factor cost.

In 2001/2002 it was projected to grow at about 6.3 percent compared to 5.4 percent. When you read the indicative document of the macro-economic plan you will see these figures there. In 2002/2003 the rate was lower than that of 2001/2002 and the reason they give is that there was weaker agricultural growth, especially in the food crop production sector. So my question is, and you colleagues must pay attention to some of these things, what has the ministry done or what is the Government doing to improve these factors that are responsible for the variation in the GDP? What are you doing? Food crop production went down because of less favourable weather conditions. So, what are you doing or what do you intend to do so that the projected growth rate remains on target? Or do we depend on God if it is a dry season like it is now? 

Right from the Eastern to the Western region, it is dangerously hot and it started in May –(Interjections)- you wait; you are going to interrupt me yet I have very limited time. So, I want to know what government is doing about these weather conditions to have the real GDP projection remain on course. Does PMA address this thing?

In financial year 2003/04, real GDP was projected to grow at 6.1 percent. Did it really grow at that rate since it is now an old financial year? Why do you not tell me the exact figure and I say, “It is because of the agriculture picking up” and once agriculture picks up, they are always talking about the food crop basket. I can tell you that when there is a favourable whether factor, food crop production picks up, GDP of government is commensurate and really exciting, investors and so on and everybody sing about it. But what does it means? Is that the celebrated majority of the masses who are so supreme, having bad terms of trade, what they produce cannot really afford them the other goods and services, which they do not produce? So, their conditions do not improve and this has always been my problem. That is why, Mr Speaker, because I know you are also a Member of Parliament of a rural constituency, there is always a constant cry by the majority of the rural masses about mass poverty, terms of trade are against these people but here we always sing, “GDP is always going up”. The GDP that goes up is not in their interest. They produce more and earn less.  

From the bush, Mr Speaker, we came out with the Ten Points Programme. No. 5 was the development of an economy that is integrated, self-sustaining –(Interjection)- just keep quite I used to recite it -(Interruption)

MR NYANZI: Mr Speaker, according to the State of the Nation Address the President stated that it started by taming state agencies to respect the rights of the people. Hon. Guma is a soldier, in fact hon. Kityo wanted to give him information but he rejected it. Is he in order to refuse information from an honourable member when he has already been tamed to respect people’s rights?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I do not know against which order but I think he gave a good reason. The flow of his ideas would be interrupted but he would get the information afterwards.

CAPT. GUMA: Mr Speaker, thank you for your very correct ruling. Hon. Vincent Nyanzi should find me in the lobby there and we exchange more ideas because I need minimum interruption here.  

In 2003/04 agriculture picked up, industrial sector and services slowed down. I am just getting these things from books of the Ministry of Finance. The industrial sector and the services sector slowed down. The reason they give is that there were constraints in the construction. I want to know these constraints, hon. Rukutana. 

In 2004/05, the financial we are in now, the GDP is projected to grow at 6.2 percent and the assumption is that Bujagali will be in place. Will Bujagali be in place really? Otherwise, you people you are giving us defective GDPs. Will Bujagali be in place? It is in your books, absolutely indicative of something. I will quote you the -(Interruption)

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, I do not want to interrupt the flow of debate by my good friend hon. Guma but most of the issues he has raised are pertinent. When I look at the background to the budget, copies of which were circulated to each member, I find answers to most of his concerns. They are very good concerns but all the answers are here. So, I would advise my colleague to go and have a more concentrated look at the background to the budget. I thank you very much.

CAPT. GUMA: Mr Speaker, I have read the background to the budget, it is here. I have read it page to page like I have read every document because I am interested in knowing the truth. I have read it but I do not find answers in this document to the questions I am raising. 6.2 percent is your GDP projection for this financial year ending June 2005. The premise of that GDP is Bujagali, is it reflected here? I am asking, will Bujagali take off?  

Hon. Prof. Kamuntu yesterday talked of inflation variables and the micro-economic framework. They are absolutely necessary for economic planning and government must be commended particularly on inflation but the interest rate has defeated them because of the indiscipline in government spending. But for inflation we have tried sometimes to artificially maintain it. You have sometimes tried artificially to maintain it in single digits for various reasons anywhere. But when you maintain inflation also to negatives below zero, I can assure you that is bad in economics. Inflation is a bad economic phenomenon but an inflation that is negative is not an inflationary rate that a serious economist should be proud of. Absolutely not! And it is reflected in your books but I do not have the time, particularly when there is increase in food production and so on.

Mr Speaker, I was talking about No. 5 of the Ten Points Programme. People have forgotten it. We bushmen and other new Movement arrivals have forgotten it. Number five: integrated self-sustaining national economy. Why can we not put mechanisms in place for the integration of this tiny economy of ours? Why can we not woo investors since the song is about investors? Why can we not put conditions possible, Mr Speaker, that would help investors to come and invest in the industrial sector that has got an impact on the raw materials produced by these celebrated masses who have got supremacy? Why do we have a dominant ratio of investors in the service sector - industry, salons? Why can we not go out of our way, like the loan we have just passed, to woo investors to come here and initiate an industrial base that has got a linkage with the raw materials that we produce?

We sing of the value added – I woke up at 4.00 a.m. this morning, I was reading these books, hon. Rukutana - it remains a lip service. Where are the industries that are linked up with the raw material base that we have? Where are they?  

Mr Speaker, in 1994/95/96 - I want to give some substantiation on the amount of suffering of these masses we represent. I will take an example of milk production. In 1994/95/96, a litre of acaracide was between Shs 7,000 and Shs 10,000. A litre of milk was then about Shs 200 or Shs 250. Divide the upper limit of the cost of the acaracide that is Shs 10,000 by Shs 250, the cost of milk, and tell me how many litres of milk you required then to buy one litre of acaracide?  

Today acaracide is about Shs 80,000 to Shs 90,000 and a litre of milk is still stagnant at around Shs 200. The terms of trade, which I am talking about, tell me today how many litres of milk you have to sell in order to buy the same litre of acaracide in 2004. Absolutely ridiculous! But people just sing things. 

A number of you have cows. If you go to the production of maize, of Matooke, of simsim, the situation is worse, ladies and gentlemen. Today you need about 400 litres of milk to buy a similar litre of acaracide in order to work on your cows. In 1994/95 it was probably about 30, some of you who know arithmetic know this. So, who is worse off? The person selling acaracide is better off; the person selling milk is in a worse economic position. We come from the rural constituency, where is the growth there? When hon. Kamuntu was talking about the growth translating into development, this is precisely the point, growth for who? This was his point yesterday, growth for who, growth ya nani? Whose growth is this you are talking about?

The recovering economy must reflect about three things: One, the rate of savings of the nationals. I hear people saying, “Uganda has a poor saving culture.” Are we cursed by God? Why do we have a poor saving culture? Are we bad East Africans?  Kenyans and Tanzanians save and Ugandans cannot save. This is a very uneconomic argument. What is the rate of saving? Honourable minister, you must tell us the rate of saving when you are winding up this debate, you have never said so anywhere in the books from the Ministry of Finance. Tell us the rate of saving, tell us the rate of unemployment, the human development index, which hon. Kamuntu again talked about. I do not want to repeat those things.

Mr Speaker, I have no time, I want to go to the health sub-sector and wind up. Sixty percent of the Ministry of Health resources are spent on curative rather than primary healthcare. Primary healthcare started in 1964 in Nakaseke by a man called Lithuli, after whom one road in Bugolobi is named. He was the director of the unit in Nakaseke in 1964. It later spread to the Eastern region in Bubuulo in Mbale, and Mbarara in 1969. 

This idea of health centre IV, Mr Speaker, I am sure you have it in your constituency as much as I do, without medical staff although we are now exporting the medical staff to the United Kingdom. We are exporting nurses and so on. There is that scheme I am sure it is under Madam Nabagesera. There are no drugs, personnel is not there, they are miserable, but I am told there are some figures to increase their pay; nevertheless still miserable. It reminds me of Obote’s 21 hospitals, which he built in the 1960s, without the medical staff to man them and he imported Korean doctors who ran away from Uganda at the first shot in 1971. These Bugiri, Kiryandongo hospitals did not have the staff. Similarly, these health centre IVs are completely – and there is no programme to rejuvenate Mbale School of Hygiene, Fort Portal and so on as we know them in the country. 

So, how are you going to man these institutions, which you have put in place? Kampala alone, by 1969 had about 25 health workers, and you know the majority in Kampala were not Africans they were these Indians and Bazungu, whose method of feeding was different. The way Africans feed brings a lot of dirt, garbage and so on. There were 25 health assistants in Kampala here by 1969, but now they are merely five. I am telling you, there are five health assistants in the entire expanded Kampala.  I have done my research I know what I am talking about.

Increasingly, Mr Speaker, there used to be countries in the world actually shutting down hospitals because they have stepped up primary healthcare for people to avoid falling sick. But in this country, you hear of more Cholera, like two or three months ago there was Cholera in Ibanda in Mbarara District. You hear of people without latrines in Bushenyi and Busoga. Actually, I think Bushenyi and Busoga are the regions in this country with the least ratio of latrines according to the health – so, there used to be a Ministry of Community Development whose primary function was community mobilisation of the masses, “boil water, do not sleep with chicken, do not sleep with goats, rubbish, bulungi bwansi, dig latrines” and so on. Today, I do not know what is there. But the blame is on Members of Parliament, “Members of Parliament are not doing their job.” Is a Member of Parliament a community mobiliser? Is a Member of Parliament a medical doctor? Is a Member of Parliament a social worker? What is a Member of Parliament?

Mr Speaker, I want to wind up that between 1988 and 2001 the World Bank approved 21 loan packages for various economic policy reforms in this country, and the money was over US $1.0 billion. It was actually around one US $1,085,000,000. All this money has been injected into this economy. So, while I support the private sector development, the number of foreign companies that are competing in the market are chiefly service oriented. I do not have time to go into details, but there is a problem. You must take a very serious look at the nature of the economy and where it is growing, areas being emphasised, the money that comes in and which sectors are being promoted. Where do you want to take the country? It is chiefly a service sector. When they talk of growth –(Interruption)- I am winding up, honourable minister. Ladies and gentlemen, Mr Speaker, I think that matter of the economy is extremely important –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, INDUSTRY AND TECHNOLOGY (Ms Jenipher Namuyangu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I did not intend to disturb my honourable colleague but there is an issue he raised that, “Where are the industries that are linked to agriculture” and I felt I should give him this information.  

I will begin with milk. We have the Dairy Corporation, which is processing milk. That milk is even exported to countries like Tanzania and Rwanda, and it is drunk here. We have cotton, we have so many ginneries now, we have textile factories – Phoenix Logistics is just here in the industrial area, you can go and see for yourself. We have Southern Range, we have ATM in Mbale it is working and we have Tri-Star.  

Coffee, we have the wet processing factories that are processing coffee, some of which is exported – (Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, it is well known that Tri-Star imports almost 100 percent the textiles they use in their factory to make apparels to export to America. Is the minister in order to confuse and mislead this House that Tri-Star has got linkages with our cotton producers? Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: You have provided information. Proceed.

MS NAMUYANGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. All I was emphasizing is that it is a factory and some of the garments used are from Southern Range. I am knowledgeable. (Laughter).

Mr Speaker, coming to rice, I think many of the colleagues have read about what is called Tilda rice. This rice is made here and it is exported and it is even eaten by some of you. That is an industry.

We have skins and hides. We have a small factory here, Crane Shoes. I will even show you a sample. They are even processing skins of fish, making belts, bags, they are making shoes and some of these are even exported to countries like German.

Britania is processing fruits from our mangoes, passions, from the oranges. 

We have so many meat processing plants. Some of the meat that is eaten in the canteen here is from our processing plants.  

We have fish factories that are exporting fish, which is processed, and that is agriculture.

We have sugar producing factories. Sugarcane is an agricultural crop.  

We have tea factories, and you can go on. So, actually all I want to emphasize is that most of our industries here are linked to agriculture.  Thank you, Sir.

CAPT. GUMA: Mr Speaker, let me finish really. I do not want to dwell too much on these issues. (Interruption)

MR NYANZI: I was a minister before in that ministry. (Laughter). Mr Speaker, I thank the honourable member for giving way. I want to inform the House that by the time this government came in, all industries had collapsed. So, it is our President who has persuaded all these investors to come back to Uganda –(Interruption)

MR ONANG-ODUR: I was an adult with good knowledge of economics and I know by the time this government came to power there was production going on of beer, soda and other materials, which were coming from industries. I think the minister might not have been properly informed by his juniors.  

CAPT. GUMA: Mr Speaker, let me rewind and say as follows. When you are a government minister or you are a chauvinist government backbencher and supporter, you do not have to be on the defensive really because we are supporters of this administration. 

Britania? Who does not know that they bring in concentrates from India? If you do not know, I can educate you on that. They are bringing in concentrates from India.

Tri-Star - do not even talk of Tri-Star. They are importing nearly 100 percent of all the materials they require. So, what are you telling me? That, however, does not mean that the situation is zero. No! That is not all I am saying. Someone who talks big like myself, I want to see very serious industrial growth linkages with the resource raw material base of this country. I want to see things in a big way not a small Britania, not a small other person somewhere doing what. I want to see big things so that we can come out of this poverty trap. I am not someone who thinks small things and then glorifies them. Mr Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity you have given me.

5.38
MRS ROSEMARY SENINDE (Woman Representative, Wakiso): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the hon. Minister of Finance for his speech and I would also like to thank the committee for this comprehensive report. I would like to make a few observations about three areas: the primary and post primary, the women, youth and people with disabilities’ councils and also about the public service reform.  

Mr Speaker, it is true that human resource development is key to economic and social transformation. I am glad that more money of about Shs 10 billion has been provided for recruitment of more teachers. However, I do observe that the biggest problem our teachers are facing is lack of accommodation. I hope the ministry is going to do everything possible to ensure that our teachers are facilitated as far as housing is concerned. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to talk about the technical institutes in the various sub-counties that we were promised sometime back. When I was looking through the Budget Speech and policy statement of the Ministry of Education, I did not see this mentioned. I just wish to ask, where has the technical institutes’ idea gone? Where is it talked about? I hope the minister will explain to us what is in place.

About the women, youth and the people with disabilities councils, I remember on the 8th of March the President made a promise of Shs 2.5 billion to these councils. But, Mr Speaker, it seems it has not featured anywhere and you will agree with me that these councils are really handicapped –(Interruption)

MS TIPERU: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker and thank you hon. Seninde for giving way. I would like to assure you and to assure the House that this financial year, we have been budgeted for it and the money is there. I sit on the Committee of Social Services, we have met and interacted with the Minister of Gender and they have equally assured us. Thank you.

MRS SENINDE: I thank you very much for that information. Then I am glad because I was wondering, and I have always been wondering why the youth, the women and the people with disabilities councils are not properly facilitated. If this financial year they are going to be catered for, then I am glad to hear that.  

I would like to emphasize, Mr Speaker, that I do appreciate and commend the Movement Government that put these structures in place. But I have a fear that probably they were set up without thorough study and analysis of their importance and how they are supposed to be financed. I say this because you will agree with me that most of our people, when they are elected to these councils, after a period of about two years they even forget that they belong to these councils just because they are kept dormant. The women cannot do their work. When we go to request them to help us with various work they always say, “We do not have the funds” and you have to get money from your pocket to support them, and yet we are not donors. So, I am glad to learn that at least this time something will probably be done.

About the public service reform, I am glad that the Minister of Finance pointed out the Government’s commitment to the implementation of the pay reform strategy to attract and motivate the workforce in public service. But, Mr Speaker, I would like to concur with the committee’s observation as far as the Police force is concerned, that they have been grossly neglected. Recently I was visiting the Police posts in my constituency and what I discovered, my God! I could not believe my eyes to find that two families stay in one uniport, sometimes three families! As a teacher, as a legislator and as a parent, I felt so concerned. Imagine two families with children sleeping in the same uniport, children witnessing their parents responding to the demands of nature. 

I got so concerned and I wonder what sort of persons we are going to have in future when they have grown up in this kind of situation. It is very unfortunate that probably the Government has not taken seriously the importance of the Police force. I have always heard the defence force is catered for as far as construction of barracks is concerned but I have never at any one moment heard about the construction of barracks for the Police force. I may give an example in my constituency, of Kasangati Police post. There are over 40 police officers but they have less than 20 uniports, and you can just imagine the situation. A poor man works 24 hours, he is earning Shs 156,000 and how do you expect him to survive?  

Honestly, Mr Speaker, as a government we are working so hard to fight corruption but I realise whatever we shall do, however many commissions will be put in place, corruption will never end in the Police force. I say this basing on the observation of the conditions in which they live. They are so appalling that they force them to exploit their powers and get involved in corruption. I think this is the time the Government should also take the Police force seriously because they keep law and order and without –(Interjection)- please give me a chance because my time is short, let me just wind up. I pray that the Government equally considers all categories of workforce in the Public Service in the implementation of the pay reform strategy.

Mr Speaker, I thank you so much and I hope that some of these serious issues are going to be put into consideration. I would like to thank the Government finally that at last the teachers have been considered. I am glad because I was about to raise complaints about their pay but I am glad that teachers to some extent are now considered. I pray that the Police force is also catered for. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Really, I wanted the Member for Koboko’s maiden speech but as you see the ministers - because of what they told us - have gone and there is no point in addressing ourselves when we want the ministers to take note and make an improvement. Hon. Awongo, I will give you an opportunity tomorrow to make your maiden speech so that we allow the ministers to go and complete the road map’s White Paper so that it comes to us, we consider it also and see how to move forward.  

We only have three ministers here, the Minister of Education, Parliamentary Affairs and Finance. I think it is better that we adjourn and then resume tomorrow. I do not know whether we should resume at 2.00 p.m. as one Member suggested because for me I can be here at 2.00 p.m. But it is question for the ministers because they have a number of meetings. But I think the Minister of Parliamentary Affairs should alert them that we are going to start at 2.00 p.m. tomorrow so that we can cover as many Members as possible.  

MR SEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I am sorry it is not for me to detail how you go about the Order Paper but in circumstances that sensitive matters say approving of loans are done with on the Floor, immediately thereafter the front bench and members of the back bench all of us are to blame - we tend to move away. I would suggest that if it is to your wish, such sensitive matters could come at the end on the Order Paper such that we first handle those matters, which are less sensitive, such that we might be able to keep them around. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, it is true I have powers to adjust the Order Paper but it is drawn up in accordance with the Rules of Procedure. However, without tying my hands, I do not want to use this discretion many times unless it is necessary. It should not be that when we finish the loan then they move away, they should not, because everything we say is important for our country. So, we have to look into this instead of using that easy way that “how do you put them there?” we cannot do that. It is a question of realising that everything is important so that they are here all the time. But I will look into this. Sometimes I will be doing that but not on a daily basis.

So, I think it is a convenient time to adjourn. I thank you for whatever contribution you have made today and persisting up to this hour. It is not your fault we should have continued but because of circumstances, we cannot continue. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.54 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 22 July 2004 at 2.00 p.m.)

