
Tuesday, 29 July 2008

Parliament met at 10.37 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am happy to welcome you to this special meeting. I am happy to note that you all look fit. I want to thank you for the work you have been carrying on especially on the Budget; and I hope you are winding up that business because next week we intend to hold plenary to deal with the Budget and complete it within the stipulated time of the month of August. 

I had to interrupt your work on the Budget because of other urgent business that has necessitated me to convene this plenary. There are events that have happened that necessitated Parliament to convene and thus on the 23rd of July I received the petition under Article 95(5) to hold this plenary and thus the interruption. I hope we shall be able to do good business and then release you to continue with the Budget process.

I note that in the distinguished strangers’ gallery today we have got the former President General of the Democratic Party, former Member of Parliament, and former minister, Dr Paul Kawanga Ssemwogerere. (Applause) There is also another former Member of this Parliament, hon. Damiano Lubega and our sister hon. Salaam Musumba of FDC. You are most welcome. (Applause) 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT 

10.42
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am presenting a statement on the arrest, detention and subsequent release of Mr Charles Peter Mayiga, Mr Medard Lubega Seggona and Mrs Betty Nambooze Bakireke. 

Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, on 25 July 2008, I received my copy of a letter written to the Clerk to Parliament by the Rt. Hon. Speaker responding to a petition that Parliament convenes in plenary today, 29 July 2008, to handle business relating to the arrest, detention and subsequent release of the three persons named above. This petition required Parliament to convene and receive the official position from the Ministry of Internal Affairs on the arrest of the three individuals, who also happen to be officials of Buganda Kingdom. 

Inter alia the statement was to state the personnel who effected the arrest; the subsequent confinement and treatment of the three; the proper procedure for commencement of criminal proceedings and the duration within which such proceedings would commence.

Mr Speaker, the Police has been closely monitoring actions and the statements made from time to time by some individuals and groups of individuals. The statements have been both in the print and electronic media. Investigations were carried out in respect of these statements made by the three individuals that were viewed by the Police as amounting to offences of promoting war, sedition, incitement to violence, threatening violence and sectarianism. 

In addition, investigations revealed that acting jointly, and at times individually, the three engaged in what appeared to be unlawful activities in Kyenjojo, Kamwenge, Kasese, Kibale, Bundibugyo, Hoima and Kampala districts. Investigations of the three individuals on terrorism and other offences are still continuing. At some point during the investigations it became necessary to arrest the three individuals. 

On Friday, 18 July 2008, Police detectives carried out the arrest at different times and from different locations within Kampala. 

Mr Speaker, since some of the acts constituting the alleged offences are said to have been committed in and outside Kampala, it was necessary to transfer them to areas outside Kampala in order to assist the Police in the investigations. It is for this reason that it became difficult to adhere to the 48-hour rule regarding detention of suspects in police custody.

While the investigations were going on in those areas, Buganda Road Court on Wednesday, 23 July 2008, issued a court order for their unconditional release from police custody. Accordingly, the three were on Thursday, 24 July 2008 released from Kyenjojo Police Station. 

On the basis of the evidence that had been gathered and in accordance with the law, the three individuals were re-arrested. Medard Lubega and Betty Nambooze were produced before Nakawa Chief Magistrates Court on Friday, 25 July 2008, charged with sedition, as investigations for other charges of sectarianism, threatening violence, incitement to violence and promoting war continue. The two accused were granted bail by court. Mr Peter Mayiga was released on police bond at Jinja Road Police Station pending further investigations.

Regarding the specific issues put forward in the petition, I wish to state as follows: 
    (a) The arrests were effected by the Police; 
    (b) The three were at all times in Police custody;
    (c) Criminal proceedings may be instituted in several ways in accordance with Section 42 (1) of the Magistrates Court Act, inter-alia, a police officer may carry out this by bringing a person arrested with or without a warrant before a magistrate upon a charge. It was under this provision that the proceedings against three individuals were commenced. 
    (d) Mr Speaker, investigations start immediately information is received and thereby criminal proceedings begin. 

The government, in accordance with the Constitution, will continue to carry out its mandate of ensuring security of the people and their property and is an equivocally committed to the rule of law.

As I conclude this statement, rule 60 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament does not allow a matter that is before court to be discussed out of court. On Friday, 21 July 2008, Mr Medard Lubega and Ms Betty Nambooze were charged in court. 

In view of the above, I am wondering whether discussing this matter out of court is not subjudice. 

Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance on the matter and I thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have heard matters affecting the subject of today commenced on 18th Friday. As far as I am concerned, the petition was handed to me requesting for this meeting on 23rd July. This was before the court proceedings commenced. I entirely agree with you that our rule 60 prohibits us to discuss a matter, which is in court, but what we expect to deal with today are incidents that happened before the charges were made -(Applause)- because when I decided to convene this plenary today, I was not aware that there was a court matter regarding these people. (Applause) So, while you deal with this matter today, do not deal with evidence concerning the charges in court. (Applause) It will not be our duty to say, “Evidence is weak, evidence is strong.” Just deal with arrests and things that happened before the charges were taken. I think this is clear so that you deal with the process as I have said. You deal with the arrest and the confinement up to the date when these people were confined. I hope this will not offend the rule. But do not in any way, deal with the evidence. Do not say, “There is a weak case; there is a strong case”. That is not your business. Yes, hon. Kaddunabbi.

10.42
MR IBRAHIM KADDUNABBI (NRM, Butambala County, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This matter, as everybody would agree with me, was of public concern. It is a matter, which was bringing disharmony in our country and, therefore, my colleagues and I decided to petition you. We thank you because this is the first time, under Article 95(5) that a special session of Parliament has been convened to discuss such a matter. (Applause) 

We requested the Minister to give an explanation of the subsequent confinement and treatment of the three officials of Buganda Kingdom. I expected the Minister to boldly tell us why these three officials were denied access to their lawyers, their families and their doctors. This statement is silent on that and I would need it from the minister. 

Mr Speaker, I also want the minister to tell us whether it is allowed, in the process of arresting, to use inhuman manners like smashing peoples’ cars because one of the people who were arrested, Mrs Betty Nambooze Bakireke, had her car smashed in the process of arresting her.  

And I expected more beef on the proper procedure of commencement of criminal summons up to court proceedings but this statement is not firm on it.  I also want the minister to help me understand and appreciate which reasons were difficult and made government to abuse the constitutional provision which commanded government to produce the arrested people in 48 hours.  

Mr Speaker, as you rightly guided, our request is focusing on the arrests, which were made on 18 July 2008 and not to those arrests, which were made on 24 July 2008. I would like my government to come out boldly and if there were excesses, they should say sorry and agree to adhere to the rule of law so that we can proceed. I thank you.

10.57
MR ACHIA REMEGIO (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the minister for this statement. When these arrests were made, some of us were upcountry preparing for the visit of His Excellency the Vice-President, and in Karamoja there were a lot of concerns particularly because a lot of our Ugandans from that region do not read papers. But they listen to radio and one of the concerns that has really been voiced to most of us was, “Why is it that there are a number of Ugandans from Kampala abusing people and talking about fighting?” They were asking me, “Is there going to be war in Uganda, we are on radio all the time - why are we returning guns? If people in Kampala are saying they are going to fight, are they just going to fight with sticks?” There is a lot of concern and fear created by the way people in Kampala have been talking about war, about fighting and about chasing others, and they are worried whether some of us who are in Kampala are safe. 

They said, “Honourable, you should probably start keeping yourself away from those areas.” So this constant talk of war, fighting, violence; some of us have known that Karamoja has just given 27,000 guns to the Government of Uganda because we want this country to be peaceful. But the biggest concern is about individuals through their own fora who are always constantly talking about violence and war, and then name calling: Abalalo, Abagwira incidentally all these words are in Luganda, I do not understand why.  

Some of these people who are alleged to have committed these offence, and I really want to condemn this kind of talk because it is too much and it makes the rest of the people in Uganda to think that there is going to be war - they are imputing there is going to be violence in this country. Nobody wants war in this country we are from that environment where in every family there is a father, a mother, children; and we have always sat in the village. When a small boy stands up to -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I told you, just deal with what happened, the arrests and the confinement. I do not think you should deal with evidence. That is what I said; you should not go beyond what happened. Just deal with the arrest and the confinement.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I thank you, Mr Speaker.  I live in Kampala, and I have never talked about fighting, I have never talked about war. The honourable member on the Floor is making a statement clearly that people who are living in Kampala are always calling for war and fighting without naming them. The honourable member is subjecting all of us to suspicion and arrest. So, is he in order to talk about people who are waging war on this country without naming them? 

THE SPEAKER: Many times I have told you that you cannot make a point of order where it will be necessary for the Chair to verify facts, because the facts he knows and the facts you know might be different and in such circumstances a point should not be made. (Applause) But as I have said, please confine yourself to what we agreed on; do not talk about evidence.

MR ACHIA: Thank you, Mr Speaker for your guidance. My point is, those who go on radios sometimes misuse the fora in the way they talk to create anxiety among us who cannot read and write, but are good at listening to the radio -(Interjections)- let me go to the specifics of the arrest.

One of the concerns raised on the arrests is the issue of the 48 hours. Our Constitution is clear on the 48 hours. I went further ahead to read the Constitution together with the law that operationalises the 48 hours, that is the Police Act, and I beg to read it. Section 25 of the Police Act, 2006 as amended, reads as follows: “A police officer, on arresting a suspect without a warrant, shall produce the suspect so arrested before a magistrate’s court within 48 hours unless earlier released on bond.” 

Sub-section (2) goes on to state: “Sub-section (1) shall not apply to a person who is arrested in an area and is not to be questioned within that area in which he or she was arrested until he or she is transferred to the area where the offence was committed within seven days.” (Interjections) Mr Speaker, I beg to be protected. Is it information or order? 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, I think it would be in the interest of all honourable members and indeed this House that if you are citing a law to be sure of what you are talking about. (Applause) I would like to let this House know that the very section of the Police Act my colleague is citing, Section 25, sub-section (2), was declared unconstitutional by the Constitutional Court. (Applause) And it is, therefore, no longer law. I would like to ask the hon. Attorney-General, I can see he is in this Chamber, can the hon. Attorney-General guide this House as to the constitutionality of the said section because, I think, it is out of order for my colleague to read a non-existing law. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue of 48 hours is clear. I think the main complaint in this particular case is that there was a Saturday and there was a Sunday but that could be excused. The question is what happened on Monday? (Applause) Because the other days are excusable because the courts were not on; but their concern is Monday. I think you should bear that in mind. 

MR ACHIA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank Abdu Katuntu for that information but not being a lawyer, as far as I am concerned, despite the ruling of the Constitutional Court, it is still in the statute books. (Laughter) It is still in the statute books.

The second issue of concern is the arrest of the three people. One of the issues that have been very popular in the media is that the three officials were arrested and that there was use of excessive force. But how many ministers in this government have been arrested? Omara Atubo was arrested, not only once but twice; Muhwezi was arrested; Mukula was arrested; so what about the arrest of these officials? Nobody is above the law -(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, I beg to be protected.

The issue of the arrest of these people has been stretched far and sensationalised without understanding the basis and allowing even the security institutions to do their work. The idea that we sensationalise and politicise issues beyond what is practicable is not an issue that should be of concern to anybody. It is for the security of our country. If anybody has committed an offence, let the laws of Uganda proceed. Why sensationalise? Why abuse? Why name? These are the issues that we should address. The issue of stretching issues beyond what is even - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, as I told you, members are entitled to invoke the provisions of Article 95, and the intention was to hear from government what happened. So, there is no question of sensationalizing; it does not arise. I give the Floor to hon. Beti Kamya.

11.11
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity – 

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, should we agree on the time somebody should spend on their contribution? How much? Five minutes.

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to discuss this matter of grave national importance. 

I wish to thank all the honourable members who appended their signatures to this petition. Particularly, I wish to thank hon. Kaddunabbi Lubega, the lead petitioner, for leading this exercise. (Applause)

For those who may not know it, hon. Kaddunabbi Lubega has been a victim of strong unflattering sentiments expressed by some of the victims named in this petition. But he has risen above personal grievances for which he was entitled and stood tall literally to oppose the ugly head of unconstitutionalism and police brutality. Hon. Kaddunabbi Lubega has proved that he is a son of his father, the late -(Laughter)- gallant Kaddunabbi Lubega who must be smiling wherever he is lying in Butambala. Inna lillahi wa inna ilayihi rajiuun. (Applause) 

Mr Speaker, I am very disappointed by the minister’s statement.

THE SPEAKER: You know that language! (Laughter) 

MS KAMYA: I think it is the spirit of the former Speaker of Buganda that is descending on this House. I found myself speaking inna lillahi wa inna ilayihi rajiuun.

I am very disappointed by the minister’s statement, which lacks seriousness in substance and in appreciation of the matter before this House. There is nothing that the minister has said in this so-called ministerial statement that I could not have picked from the papers and written in 10 minutes just before I came to this House. From the ministerial statement, we were expecting to hear what the lawful manner or procedure of arrests are in this country. Why were they violated, why arrest well known, unarmed, public figures in the manner in which they were arrested at midnight by plain clothes people who looked like armed night robbers with guns jumping about from their cars waylaying a frail woman like Betty Nambooze?  

They could have summoned these people to go to the police station like they have done before. And smashing her car; for the information of this House, the car is still held at Jinja Road Police Station and getting it out is a whole procedure that they need to go through. 

We want to know why they were subjected to inhuman and degrading behaviour. We want to know from government why there is selective administration of the law in Uganda. Why some people like me, for instance, I was summoned to police for the same charges and others are waylaid and captured and abducted in the middle of the night for the very same charges!

We would like to know why police should send six men to capture a woman and spend with her -(Interjection)- please hon. Government Whip you are a woman. I would like -(Ms Kabakumba rose_) Okay, I take it back, Mr Speaker -(Interruption)  

MRS MASIKO KABAKUMBA: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the hon. Beti Kamya to attack me directly when I was seated, listening to her submission attentively and then she attacks me that I am a woman? Yes I am, and when actually she was relating me to her contribution? How does this woman, Kabakumba come in her contribution? Is she in order? (Laughter) I am not a policewoman, I was not arrested, how do I come in? Is she in order to attack me?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us maximally use our time and when you make a contribution, address the Chair rather than individuals. 

MS KAMYA: I thank you for your guidance, Mr Speaker. I expected the minister’s statement to tell this House what government is doing about police brutality that has become a matter of serious concern in this country. I would have expected the ministerial statement to tell this country what government is going to do to the individuals that were involved in the heinous acts under discussion this morning. I would like to have heard what measures are being taken to ensure that this does not happen again!

I expected this statement to give us government assurance that it will not happen again and an official government apology to the aggrieved parties, their families and this House. We would have expected government to tell us what compensation there will be to the victims and their families and also whether we have a government in place and what its obligations are to both supporters and non-supporters of government. Those are the minimum expectations I had of the ministerial statement that caused the convening of this House. 

In this summary, Mr Speaker, Betty Nambooze was subjected to a very humiliating experience. At Jinja road she was absolutely stripped naked; she was searched in a manner that I could not repeat in this House, and there are witnesses. In Bundibugyo, Kyenjojo and Kagadi, she was mentally and physically tortured. She was taken to Semliki National Park in the middle of the night and told that she would be fed to the wild animals -(Member timed out)

11.21
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Hussein Kyanjo): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank honourable members for gathering here on this important occasion. I want to present a dimension that is not directly to the core of the debate outside this House. The purpose for which this House was convened was to get an explanation from my colleague, the Minister of Internal affairs. The gist of this explanation was not entirely to dwell on Mengo ministers or Baganda. It is an explanation on the issue of basic human rights.

I, therefore, expected the minister to explain in precision whether or not human rights of these individuals were violated. Mr Speaker, we have been involved as members of this community and in my own capacity as the Shadow Minister of Internal Affairs, in calls together with the Police for the promotion of community policing. This project is not going to succeed with these practices parallel to it. Community policing means that you work with the communities as police. 

When this matter was brought to our attention, I called the Minister of Internal Affairs, and his telephone was off. I called Mr Kaihura, I got his assistant and he told me he was in Masindi. I called the Chief of Professional Standards Unit in the Police, Mr Ndunguse, he told me he was unaware of any exercise to that effect. This is the Police and this is the Chief of Professional Standards Unit in the Police!

He referred me to Mr Ocong. When I called Mr Ocong, he said, “I don’t know what is going on.” He referred me later to Mr Ocula at CID. When I called Ocula he told me, “Oh, honourable; I am sick, I am at home.” Who was taking charge at that time? For the minister to come here and say that this was the Police is actually to force the Police to swallow vomit as the repercussions of this exercise and it is wrong. I have been working with the Police and the Police I must tell you, honourable members, are crying. The Police have been overthrown by individuals who are committing crimes in the name of the Police when they themselves are not policemen. Right across the road there are people held there incommunicado.

Mr Speaker, the Police was overthrown. I was with my elder brother the Minister of State for Internal Affairs, Hon. Matia Kasaija on a television show. He is here, he will explain to this House. If this House were free, it would be at liberty to travel right now and go to Summit View and see whether there is no detention centre and whether it was authorized ever in Uganda. Go to Clock Tower, right now - because these are easy places to access - and see how many people have been held there for weeks without being produced in court. Forget about people who can be talked about because they have big names. There are smaller people suffering everywhere. Go to Buganda! What he said on screen - he will explain to this House what he explained when he was before the public. And I felt sad.

The manner in which people are hijacked by plain-clothed individuals is going to cause danger to smaller individuals in the country and they have no way out. In fact, there is a risk to MPs like my colleague who may not be known by these same individuals. They will go in the night and they will hijack them and nobody will raise a finger because it is the practice. Let the minister not defend this exercise. 

Mr Speaker, when we talk about the law stipulating 48 hours there is no African time about 48 hours. 48 hours is 48 hours. And it was a shame for the state to release and recapture the individuals. The law knew that you were able to do that. It meant absolute independence, not mockery that you release a person and, therefore, you get this person again and you have abided by the law.

Honourable minister, I want to put it to you that the Police are not in charge. You are forcing the Police to accept difficult situations that have been created by individuals in this government. I thank you.

11.27
MR ALEX ONZIMA (FDC, Maracha County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We all support the constitutional mandate of the Government of the Republic of Uganda to enforce law and order for all citizens of this country and the foreigners who are living in Uganda. However, we are perturbed by the manner in which this law or this mandate is being applied by the executive arm of government. If a citizen is suspected for any wrong doing, we would expect the National Resistance Government, the Movement Government that has lasted nearly a quarter of a century, to exhibit a civilized manner of public administration in this country and in this part of the world. I think nearly 25 years is enough for the NRM to have gained the method by which to apply the rule of law, the manner it is applied in exemplary countries in the world.

On the issue of the arrests, there is no way those individuals or officers who executed the arrest of the three officials of the Mengo government - first of all, these are recognised citizens who have established residences and addresses; why couldn’t the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Police in that case summon them to the CID office as the hon. Beti Kamya most elaborately stated here? 

We do not want a repeat of this manner of public administration in this country. We want stability for this country not only for us but for many years to come. If this government is respected for so many other good things it has done from where we have come from, it should also be respected for dignified public administration. I believe the victims on whose behalf we are voicing our concerns are in the gallery listening to the proceedings of this House because this is a matter of national importance.

The other point I want to raise here is the issue of 48 hours. Until recently, if my memory is still clear, in Britain the time limit for remanding terrorist suspects was up to four weeks. But then when they found out that this was not applicable, government went to Parliament and they extended the four weeks to six weeks now. If the Government of the Republic of Uganda sees that the 48-hour limit is not feasible in this country, why don’t you come up with a motion and even ask for one year? (Laughter)

11.34
MRS MARGARET MUHANGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As a representative of the people, I am one of the petitioners. I want to give two scenarios so that this issue does not look like an issue of the Opposition v NRM or Buganda against all of us. It is a national issue. Some of us will remember last year when respected members of the NRM: hon. Mike Mukula, hon. Alex Kamugisha and hon. Jim Muhwezi - senior citizens of this country - were picked like they were picking Osama Bin Laden. Mike Mukula was picked by Mambas and all the military artillery you can think about and not by the Police. We did not recall this Parliament to talk about it. They went to Jim Muhwezi’s house and fortunately or unfortunately he was not in the house but they checked up to the vents looking for him as if he were a needle and they never found him. They picked Alex Kamugisha in the same manner.

My own brother Andrew Mwenda was picked this year and very recently so he was picked up worse than a chicken thief. Three cars were ahead of him and two cars behind him. He actually was kidnapped. His captors handcuffed him when he tried to shout to the people walking on the road that, “Please, this is Andrew Mwenda; I am being kidnapped.” He was stopped from speaking or doing anything. Had he not spoken to those two or three people who were walking on the roadside, maybe he would have disappeared. 

Even as a member of the NRM, my heart bleeds at the way we are doing things and I want to appeal as a national leader that let us change these methods. We can do better. If I am not even armed with a safety pin, why do you come with 20 guns to pick poor me? Let me tell you that it goes beyond just picking people and arresting them. Who knew Betty Nambooze here; did anybody do? I knew her because we worked together when she was in Bukedde and I was working with The New Vision. That is how I knew her. She is just a simple person but she is a heroine now in this country. Just open Google and write the name Betty Nambooze, you will download a person who was known by no one but is now known to the whole world.  Yes, we create heroines.

When Andrew was arrested recently, he had started his Independent and was printing 10,000 copies, but do you know you boosted his business? He now prints 20,000 copies because now everybody says, “This is the man”. 

I really respect hon. Matia Kasaija, hon. Ruhakana Rugunda; they are close to me and I speak to them a lot but I tell them slow down. This is not the best way of doing things. Gen. Aronda just next to me here - his boys are the ones who actually picked Andrew. It was not the Police. The Police showed up much later. (Laughter) If you restrain these people - I respect this government so highly for having fought to bring back the rule of law. We went through turmoil during Amin’s time, mayhem! I never saw it very well but experienced the one of Obote II. I was chased by a soldier; I ran through a banana plantation and a man saved me. But the soldier chased me while shooting in the air. I was a teenager and I feared a roadblock so I tried to dodge it. That mayhem had stopped. Let us not bring it back. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

11.38
DR SAM LYOMOKI (Independent, Workers’ Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity to contribute. I am one of the petitioners who signed asking you to convene this sitting and I therefore thank you for having convened it. At the time we signed this petition and passed it to your office, there was a very serious situation and I can just read a section of our petition. We said at that time that people who were the concern of this petition were being unlawfully held incommunicado in unknown places. 

We also stated that there was contradictory information from the responsible ministries and therefore we did not know the truth. You can see from the grounds of that petition that the situation has substantially changed in the sense that we are now getting a statement and I can see that Government is now talking the same thing. I can see that court has come in because by the time we signed the petition there was nothing before court. 

I am medical doctor and I am seeing this situation as one where there is an emergency and you are called as a doctor to go to theatre and you find that the patient has either died or is healed. Therefore there would be no ground for you to continue to operate that patient because he has improved and if he has died, you should go for post mortem in the theatre. That is what we are doing here because the grounds have substantially changed. This is to the extent that we are even limited on what we should say lest we subjudice certain provisions of the law. If for instance this petition were to be signed today, some of us would not have signed it under the circumstances because they have changed. We are only debating now because of a technicality that we had already started a process of law and therefore we have to come and debate. That is why this is very good but there is no way we can debate as if the circumstances under which – we shall be just lamenting.

Mr Speaker, you are aware that I have been a victim of this type of brutality and this Parliament formed a committee, which is now discussing these issues of police brutality. As a Parliament, isn’t it wise for us to wait for the findings of that committee so that we can debate? Because of that, I therefore, move a motion under rule 46(1)(k) of the Rules of Procedure.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I know your intention of moving that motion and I will allow you to do so. But I think let us have some more Members debating and then at another stage you will come in. I have appreciated that you have an intention to move that motion. 

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Speaker, the Constitution of Uganda provides that if Members feel there is a matter of urgent importance, they petition you to call Parliament. You did exactly that. It would be most absurd if we Members of Parliament who asked for Parliament to be called so that we express ourselves are again stifled and stopped from making our contribution. The perspective that each one of us has, whether for or against what happened, is a right of each one of us but we also have the right to express ourselves. And I think those who are so anxious to kill this process will not do themselves any good. They will not do this country any good because you will merely be sweeping matters under the carpet. 

Mr Speaker, I thank you for insisting that Members be allowed to speak. This is a special sitting; the fact that we are here does not change even if we sat here for the whole day. Let us just proceed and allow everybody to express themselves and then we can move a motion. 

THE SPEAKER: Normally, a ministerial statement should be debated for not more than an hour. But because of the special nature of this session, I had decided to extend to one and a half hours to enable as many people as possible to make their contributions. I think hon. Lyomoki has concluded.

DR LYOMOKI: I have one point to make outside the motion. We are all aware that the circumstances surrounding this saga of arrest and release are very contentious. Yesterday, we had a meeting with some Members of Parliament, some of almost fought. That shows the type of situation that some of these events can cause to this country because if Members of Parliament can want to exchange blows over certain statements, how much damage can we cause to the public sometimes when we debate irresponsibly? Therefore, we want to call upon all stakeholders in future to be very careful so that this Parliament does not condone acts that will lead this country to degenerate into confusion. 

I was born in 1967 and by that time, the Kabaka crisis had just taken place but we have suffered the whole of my life trying to handle the implications of that crisis. Therefore, as we move forward, let us move in a manner that does not repeat history.

11.48
MS REBECCA LUKWAGO (Independent, Woman Representative, Luweero): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I am a Member of Parliament who stands very proudly in front of this House because I appended my signature to this matter of national importance. (Applause) As a Member of Parliament and a legislator, I feel that there are some issues, which go beyond party lines and when we are talking about issues of human rights, I am sure we should not think about parties. 

Allow me to tell a small story as I go through my remarks so that colleagues can think about it and learn a lesson from it. It is very short. There were two old women staying in the same house and they forgot to close the door at night. When a hyena came in, it grabbed the first old woman. The second one said, “As you are taking that one out, make sure that you pull her in such a way that you don’t destroy my crops”. After eating the first old woman, it came back for the second one. 

As I am saying this I ask myself, who is bewitching my government? This is the government, which my people of Luweero and many Ugandans supported in the fight against all past regimes, which were abusing the Constitution. I would like also to ask my minister who has presented to us a good statement, is this statement detailed and comprehensive enough to satisfy the Ugandans that we represent and to assure them that this government will never defy the Constitution? Is this statement rich enough to tell my fellow Ugandans and the people in Luweero who fought for and supported this Government that we respect the Constitution that we made? 

Why were these people denied access to their families? Why were they denied access to their doctors, not forgetting that many of us here rely on drugs every time? Why were they denied access to their lawyers? Is this statement answering questions like, why were they arrested before investigations were made? Will this statement make other citizens feel secure that if they commit an offence they will not be arrested in the manner these citizens were arrested? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

11.52
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): I add my voice to that of my colleagues who have already spoken on the statement. I must thank you, Mr Speaker and all members of Parliament who appended their signatures. They have made me feel a true Member of Parliament and have restored my sense of belonging. I must thank you Members for your support.

I would like to look at the genesis of this problem that we have had. We have two routes: we either choose to take the path of constitutionalism or the path of anarchy. I think that we are safer taking, upholding and maintaining the path of constitutionalism.

I would like to use this opportunity to condemn statements that are intended to incite because it is these that are inflammatory and that have made all of us lose our heads; statements from officials in Mengo, the public, interest groups and at the same time, government officials who are also culprits in this act. 

We are not here to say that this was right or wrong but we know that amongst us, a cabinet minister said Mengo is an NGO. Gen. David Tinyefuza also stood up to talk about partisan politics - all these were inciting. I would really like us to take note of that. It is not fair. Individuals both in the public domain, in government and across Mengo have been notorious and have been making these provocative and inflammatory statements, which in a way provoke the kind of reaction we have now. 

I feel sad because my government has tested methods. I don’t know which chaps have come to take over the management and direction of this country, particularly the security organs. NRM had strong and tested methods and now do you come up and kidnap people, when you are expected to produce them in court you abandon them and then you bring up flimsy charges against them at the end of the day, which charges are not serious. 

I would like to call on members of society to come together. This is our country. Government, we should guard against these provocations. Government, you are provoked and you have fallen into a trap. This is very unfortunate. I must tell you that those against government must be celebrating our weaknesses and that is why I will use my strongest language to castigate you when I see you erring.

I would like to end by giving Members one scenario because there has been talk that security agencies have just been doing their job and that government is not aware. In 1964, there was a cabinet sitting where four ministers were arrested and the argument by the then President, Dr Apollo Milton Obote, was that security agencies were doing their job. Now, as Odongkara came with his handcuffs and arrested Barak Kirya, Grace Ibingira and others, he also wanted to arrest Dr Lumu but Dr Lumu and Luyimbaazi Zaake were a bit similar in appearance. So, Odongkara went and grabbed Luyimbaazi Zaake and the late President Obote said, “No, not that one; it is the other one.” (Laughter) That is how everybody knew that indeed Obote knew what was going on yet at first he had claimed –(Laughter) 

MR KIVEJINJA: Thank you very much. I would like to inform the contributing Member that first of all, the year is not 1964; it was 1966 -(Interjection) - I was not there; I was not in Cabinet. 

Secondly, that the incident took place in a cabinet meeting in Entebbe and those who are not allergic to reading, I assume, should have had at least a review of that. They should have used my book to be able to educate themselves more about it. Thank you. (Mr Okello-Okello rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, is it information again?

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I did not intend to derail this debate and I beg honourable members who have an intention of diverting this debate to refrain themselves. UPC is not in the dock today; the matter we are discussing is a different matter. The situation –(Laughter)– in 1966 was totally different from the one of today. I came to this House prepared; I have a copy of the Hansard here:

“The Hansard, Parliamentary debates, second series, Volume 59, National Assembly Official Report, fourth Session, 1966. Emergency meeting, 15 April, 1966.” The price at that time was Shs 1. Mr Speaker, I beg the indulgence of this House that if a Member is not well informed, please, keep quiet. All the details are here. That day, the then Prime Minister, the late Dr Apollo Milton Obote addressed this Parliament for 4 hours and 15 minutes express, uninterrupted and explained chronologically the events that led to the 1966 crisis. The Hansard is here. It is the property of this Parliament but I can still help by tabling it for those who are not well informed to get well informed. I am prepared to lay this on the Table. (Applause)

Before I lay this document on the Table, I want us to see how I am dressed. I am mourning the nation by the way I am dressed. The nation is dead; let us all mourn -(Laughter) Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the document on the Table. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we continue, in the distinguished strangers’ gallery today we have got senior staff from the Parliament of Rwanda. These are: Mr Fidel Rwigamba, Clerk of the Senate, Mr Habarurema, Clerk of Chamber of deputies and Ms Elizabeth Balinda, Director of Protocol and Public Relations. You are most welcome. Please, conclude.  

MR SSEKIKUBO: As I wind up, I appreciate my colleague, hon. Okello-Okello, because he is doing that in good faith although I wanted to say that - for the purposes of record, not that I was not informed – the arrests were in February and that Hansard was in April, brought in to justify as indeed the minister here has brought his statement to justify. So your Hansard and his statement could be the same and one document. (Laughter) [MR AKENA: “Information”.]

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo, would you be courteous to hear the information from hon. Akena?

MR AKENA: I thank you, honourable member for giving way. I wish to share information with those who wish to distort history. [HON. MEMBERS: “You were not born.”] I know I was not there. (Laughter) The Hansard provides us a clear record and there were two statements, which were issued prior to the statement made in this House. If you so wish, and with the permission of the hon. Speaker, I can provide those statements in due course; both at the time of the events that happened, and both are extensively quoted in the Hansard. It would do you good to read that Hansard before you start manipulating the history of this country. Thank you. 

MS NAMAYANJA: Mr Speaker, I just want to thank the honourable colleague for giving way. He is saying that the arrests took place in February and the honourable member has laid on Table the Hansard of April; what I have read about April 1966 is that this is when the Lubiri was stormed [HON. MEMBERS: “That was May”] - so perhaps the Member is laying that on the Table.

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, there was a factual error. No President ever caused the arrest of any ministers in 1966. That is a factual error. The President then was Sir Edward Mutesa. (Laughter) 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I appreciate. However, I know that by that time it was the Executive Prime Minister who was the equivalent of the President today. 

I would like to commend the efforts of all Members of Parliament. I also call upon government, through the Minister of Internal Affairs, to do us justice and come out and say that there has been a problem but we need to move forward, united as a country, rather than justifying the unjustifiable. We do not need that. There is no time to look back now. We have time to move forward with a strong commitment that this will not happen again. I would like to hear that. However, it is lacking. If we do not do that, we have lost all the moral high ground of castigating the so-called swine governments. We do not have any moral high ground anymore if we continue in this manner. 

Mr Speaker, I thank you so much and I thank Members for this opportunity to contribute to the progress of this country. I thank you.

12.08
MR AKBAR GODI (FDC, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. A strong man is not one who overwhelms others by the strength of his weight but one who can control himself when angry. 

Pursuant to Article 20 of the Constitution, fundamental human rights are inherent and not granted by the state. I condemn, in the strongest terms possible, the manner in which those arrests were executed. The way the suspects were treated contravened Article 24 of the Constitution which talks about human dignity. By shifting them from this station to that station, the laymen in this country concluded that Gen. Kayihura was perhaps promoting local tourism. According to Article 23 (2), when you are arrested you must be detained in a gazetted place. However, I am surprised that the Police Spokesperson, Judith Nabakooba, was saying, “We do not know where they are arrested but I believe where they are, they are safe.” This statement did not even give any confidence to the relatives of those people who were arrested.

The Dalai Lama, a reputable Buddhist, one time said, “There are many degrees but there are still little senses”. There are facts which must be brought to record. This is a very special sitting. Just like my colleague from Kabarole said, sometimes government, through its acts, can magnify somebody who has not been known to the highest zenith in the politics of this country. Government has even fanned the flames and blown them beyond proportion and given the three Mengo officials unrivalled publicity. Everyone knows and would agree with me that the three officials of Mengo, even by the Local Governments Act, are not bigger than a councillor of a sub-county in this country. This is a fact. 

There are issues we must bring up today since this is a special session. There are a lot of equations between Central Government and the Buganda seat of Mengo that have not been balanced. Since 1993, during the arrangement of restoring the Kingdom, many issues that were agreed on have not been adhered to. They have not been respected by either party. That is why the meaning of Article 246, which establishes cultural institutions in this country, has been tampered with here and there. On many occasions you will find a kingdom official will go beyond the provisions of the Constitution and find himself or herself involved in partisan politics, which is restricted under that Article.  

Everybody knows about the bush war. I was not part of the war but I had relatives who were and one of them was the late Col. Izaruku who died recently. According to one story the Colonel told me before he died – Col. Izaruku, rest in peace - by the time John Nagenda, the Senior Advisor on Media Affairs to His Excellency, paraded the then Prince Mutebi who is currently the Kabaka in the jungles in Luweero to get the attention and support of Buganda, there were many issues, which were agreed upon when they come to power. Those issues have not been solved today and that is why politics has been fused in and are erupting in a different way.  

Today I am surprised at the minister; they know all this information and they are sitting on it. I met one professor who had been part of this Cabinet the last time and he told me he is even regretting being part of the traitors who negotiated for the return of the Kabaka. That is why today he says the institutions have outlived their usefulness. That is according to that professor. He said because of that, the kingdom officials now look at themselves entering politics and they contradict the meaning of cultural institutions -(Member timed out)

12.14
MR JOSEPH BALIKUDEMBE (DP, Busiro County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I stand here because from the eighteenth day of this month, I was part of the team that went round to ensure that our mandate as Members of Parliament is kept. As enshrined in Article 79(3), we are supposed to guard against violation of what is written in the Constitution; that is our mandate.

I have been moved by the honourable member, Margaret Muhanga, because that is what is expected of Members of Parliament today. Article 2 of our Constitution talks about the Constitution being supreme, and as mandated in Article 79(3), we are supposed to guard against violation of what is in the Constitution. Article 3 of the Constitution says that we should defend the Constitution jealously. I might not have been around or I was still a minor when the National Resistance Movement was ushered into government, but I remember that it came with a trend that we were supposed to follow - there were supposed to be fundamental changes – (Interjections)- where are the fundamental changes?

We came with Legal Notice No. 1 of 1986, which was supposed to be the Constitution then. Later on, we wrote the 1995 Constitution. In Article 20 of this Constitution, like my learned colleague has said, it is clearly laid out that every Ugandan has got an inherent right from birth, which inherent right is not granted by the state neither is it granted by individuals.

On the 18th, some Members were arrested. Ms Nambooze was arrested at 11.30, Peter Mayiga was arrested at 15 minutes to mid-night and Medard Lubega was arrested at 10.30 a.m. I happened to keep trail of these arrests. What I found out was the violation and abuse of the Police Force. 

Honourable minister, I have to say that when this thing happened, the very first person I called was Maj. Gen. Kale Kayihura. However, when I called him, he said he did not have a brief on what was going on. I drove to Parliamentary Avenue and met Francis Rwego and asked him to give me a sense of direction. He said that he did not even have a flimsy idea of what was going on. He directed us to CPS. When we got to CPS, we went to room 42 where the O/C CID of Central Police Station sits. On meeting him, he told us that he was not aware of anything. He referred us to room 62. When we got to room 62, we met the Regional CID for Kampala Extra, Mr Musana. Like the others, he asked: “Gentlemen, what are you talking about?” He told us that the best person to go to was the O/C of Central Police Station. I sincerely stand for the fight against violation of human rights so I proceeded to the room I had been directed to go to. In there, I met some police officer who said he did not know Medard Lubega was in the cells. From there, I proceeded to the divisional Police Commander of Central Police Station who told said thus: “We do not have a single idea of what is going on.”

Honourable minister, like I said the other time, we are supposed to set a precedent as Members of Parliament for this generation. The Eighth Parliament should come out and speak boldly against violation of human rights because we are going to take such a trend that we shall slide back. We should not take the Constitution as a mere piece of paper; that is why we are here. We are not here to make noise about things that did not happen; we are talking about things that did happen. 

A police officer did tell us when we were at Nakawa court that we are shouldering other people’s problems and when we shoulder other people’s problems, it brings us to such things as we are seeing right now. I told him that that had come to an end, but what would the way forward be. Like we ushered in our Constitution, let us keep that right dimension and course.

12.21
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank you for giving me this opportunity as a petitioner. 

I would like to request members of this House that when it comes to matters like these, we should be a little bit serious. I have been a victim of arrest. A statement was delivered on the Floor of this House by the State Minister of Internal Affairs when I was locked up, alluding to the fact that investigations were complete, only for me to appear in court and for court to be told that government needed more time to carry out investigations.

There have been a series of statements from the Minister of Internal Affairs; sometimes I really sympathise and wonder whether he does not think that history will judge him harshly because all these things are being recorded together with all these statements. Just a few months ago, we debated Police conduct on the Floor of this House, but that is up to him.

Mr Speaker, this thing has been in newspapers, we have been reading and seeing pictures; what was it about the release of these Mengo officials? If they had committed any crime, should there be negotiations for crime? We have seen in the newspapers that negotiations were going on. I saw the picture of the Army Commander, the CDF together with the Coordinator of Intelligence - the two generals - what were they doing there? What have they to do with laws of this country? This is where we go wrong. Let us know what you were negotiating about.

THE SPEAKER: Now, hon. Reagan, why do we have peace talks with LRA?

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, the two are different. You may have peace talks with people who have accepted that they are rebels but these people have not accepted that they are criminals. Rebels are known, they have their addresses and you can reach out to them and that is why they select venues that are out of the control of government. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, I thank hon. Okumu for giving way. I am not a lawyer but I have been in this world long enough to know some elements of law. The information or the knowledge I have is that you cannot contract to avoid or negotiate for crimes, particularly the more serious ones like those being peddled here. So I really wonder whether the Minister of Internal Affairs was advised by the Attorney-General to go and negotiate for crimes.

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I hope my contributions will not be misunderstood to mean that the Mengo officials were rebels and that they were, therefore, negotiating with them. That is not what I said. 

At the time I was arrested, there was one police officer called Womanya who I went before. When I asked him, “What is it that you want to write a statement about?” He told me, “Reagan, I am just doing a duty. Your problem is coming from somewhere else. Just let me do my work.” Before he even proceeded with me to court, files came from somewhere else. Honestly speaking, are the police in charge? I want to get one little thing from the minister on why that negotiation was taking place and why these officials were charged.

I want to end with a short story. Once upon a time, an old woman put a trap for a rat in her bedroom. When the rat saw the trap, it went and told the cock, “You have long legs, come and kick this trap” but the cock refused. The rat went to the goat and said, “Come and help me remove this trap”, but the goat refused. The rat went to the cow and said “You have a big hoof, come and kick this rat for me”, but the cow refused. Unfortunately, the trap got a snake and when the woman went to see if it had got a rat, the snake bit her and she died. As ceremonies demand, before burial, the cock was the first victim –(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: We shall have the honourable member for Ruhama, hon. Museveni, then hon. Otekat, Karooro, Otada, Lagada and Kamba. I will cover all of you, honourable members. 

12.26 
MRS JANET MUSEVENI (NRM, Ruhama County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise up to say that I agreed with hon. Onzima partially because he made a statement that was right. However, what I observed was that it was merely partial because he left out the genesis of why we are really here. 

I think that when we leave out the genesis of this problem, then it seems like our concerns do not have meaning. Our concerns only become important when we already have a problem - people are arrested and then we start debating with such vitality about the 48 hours and the process and procedure of arrest - I think there is a genesis to all this. If all of us are as honest as we sound now, if we want peace and harmony in our country, it is very difficult to make sense of this debate if we take away the genesis of it –(Interruption)

MR KAWUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have carefully heard the hon. Member for Ruhama saying that we only wake up sporadically when such events erupt, specifically citing the 48 hours before a person appears in court. Our Constitution is clear; these laws were promulgated in 1995 and the Constitution is standing. Is the honourable member, therefore, in order to say that we merely wake up in the event of the happening of these problems?

THE SPEAKER: The honourable member had just started making her contribution. Why don’t you allow her to develop it and then you come in?

MRS MUSEVENI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. If you had waited, what I was trying to say would make sense, I hope even to you, because I think that it is good to discuss human rights and to put the government to task about what we demand of the standards of our government. However, I think it is also very important for this House and the Members of Parliament to honestly begin to tackle issues that bring disharmony and disunity in this country before we come to prison and the procedures of imprisonment. 

My colleague from Karamoja was shouted down as if what he was saying was irrelevant, but it was not irrelevant. It was actually relevant to what we are discussing here today. I wanted to remind all of us that there was a government minister who was reported in the print media in the past years about what she said that was disrespectful to the Kabaka of Buganda, and the government actually dismissed her from government because leaders should not be seen to have the audacity to bring disharmony into government or in the community in this country.

When that happens and nothing stops it, government has the mandate, as my brother hon. Onzima said, to enforce law and order in the country. What the minister said today about the 48 hours I think makes sense because if they had to take these people to all these places they had to take them, that is what run over the 48 hours. That is what makes sense to me. I think it is very important to bring the genesis of this problem in order to make sense of our debate right here. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

12.35
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity you have given me and I thank the honourable minister for this statement to which we are reacting. What has befallen us as a country is important and it is important that as leaders we come out clearly and pronounce ourselves on such events that literally violate the human rights of all Ugandans. 

What has befallen the three officials of Mengo is not an isolated case that has just happened. As Members of Parliament, we are seeking to know whether we shall ever have a stop to this. I am one of the victims that have also suffered human rights violations and I think more of us, if we let it go on, shall be subjected to the same. I was only lucky that on 15 April 2007, I escaped what could have happened contrary. The situation at CPS, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, is so appalling and this is one of the things we are saying that our dear ministry should listen to us and correct. As a country, we move together. 

However, according to his statement, I would like to find out from the honourable minister whether as a country we have set procedures on how suspects are arrested and detained. If so, what is the problem?

Secondly, I would also like to find out from the minister whether the Ministry of Internal Affairs is gender sensitive. This touches us as the mothers of this country. If it is really gender sensitive, do mothers of this country have to be undressed while being arrested for any suspected crime? As we have seen, not only Betty Nambooze but even hon. Nabillah and others have been subjected to this. A woman’s body is sacred; even according to our Bible, for us who believe. It is so sacred that subjecting the mothers of this nation to this humiliating act is an act, which is unacceptable and it should be condemned in no uncertain terms. 

It is not only happening to the mothers of this country; I heard from my brother, Mukasa Mbidde, who was almost sodomised while he was in the cells. Is this process of undressing the mothers or suspects not a procedure of raping them? I would like the minister to have this clarified. We women are scared of these methods. We are arrested and subjected to actions, which we think infringe on our rights, beyond the suspicions you have on us. Can this be explained and corrected immediately.

Thirdly, I would like to find out from the minister; does this country ever consider the rights of children and suckling children for that matter? Should a suckling child be deprived of his or her own livelihood? Nambooze’s child was denied suckling for seven days. While I was in Luzira, I saw many of the mothers being either imprisoned without their children or imprisoned with their own children -(Member timed out)

12.40
CAPT. EMILLY OTEKAT (Independent, Serere County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for his statement but add also to what my colleagues have said.

THE SPEAKER: Do we agree that we end this debate by half past one? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

CAPT. OTEKAT: Mr Speaker, I would like to agree with the comments of my colleagues, particularly hon. Onzima and hon. Janet Museveni, that whenever there is a problem there must be a cause. We have a problem at hand and this is the problem that we are now discussing. However, if you tried to solve that problem without understanding the cause, then we shall not have solved the problem because the problem will reoccur. So, I totally agree with my colleagues who say that as Parliament, other than trying to solve the problem we should be able to understand the cause of the problem.

The honourable minister has given the statement and all of us have got different views about the statement - 48 hours; why were they arrested; because of this way or that. If we do not – (Interruption) 

MS AKIROR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek your guidance and the guidance of the whole House and I will raise a point of order but I want to give a preamble. Hon. Otekat, you know one of the issues we are discussing in this House today is that of the violation of human rights and human dignity. When we talk about that, we know that the honourable member holding the Floor has been caning teachers openly. (Laughter) So, is he really in order to talk about human rights? (Applause) Where does he get the moral authority to stand before this House to talk about human rights? Is he in order? (Laughter) Where did he get the authority? 

THE SPEAKER: Well, honourable member, I think I have said this very many times; when it becomes an issue of verifying facts, of saying that what you have said is correct or the other one, you never raise a point of order because I will have to verify it before I make a ruling. (Laughter) 

CAPT. OTEKAT: Mr Speaker, thank you very much for that wise ruling. What I wanted to say is that the causes of some of the problems we look at as Parliament must be looked at very seriously. My colleagues have talked and we have all understood what is happening. We know what happened in some of our neighbouring countries; it was because of some uncontrolled utterances through radio. I have heard over and over on a number of radio stations not only here in Kampala, leaders inciting violence amongst society.   

Let me talk about what hon. Dr Lyomoki mentioned. Just yesterday there could have been a very big problem if all of us were in a certain meeting that we had, simply because one of us made a statement that could have caused violence and there was violence between Members. So, I think what we need to do as leaders is to be very careful with what we say. Even here at Parliament we should be careful; we may be immune but it is very good to be careful with what we say. 

Many of us seem to be pointing a finger at the Police. I have interacted with the Police because they are the arm of government that is supposed to ensure that there is law and order. Even in my own constituency, I interact with them quite a lot. Even the victims themselves declared - I read it in the papers – that they were treated very well by the Police. I think that we should not actually be pointing fingers continuously at a body that has been given the opportunity to ensure that there is law and order. We should actually work with Police to ensure that there is law and order. So, I would like to say that as leaders we should desist from making statements that will cause violence within our society. 

One time I was with my children - small children, around P 4, P 5 - and I heard a responsible leader, I will not mention names here, say on radio that if the Land Bill passes in Parliament, the non-Baganda should leave Buganda -(Member timed out)

12.47
MRS MARY OKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the minister for this statement because he has allayed the fears of some of us. We were being asked, “How come these people were not charged within the stipulated 48 hours?” At least we have an explanation here. The Police must adhere to the law, it goes without saying - and do not clap before I finish - but this country, the government and everybody must get up and stop these alarmist statements. I am not talking about the condemned; those ones who are in court are not condemned. 

When you listen to some of these radios, there is incitement of violence, there is ethnic uprising but there are also other crimes. You find radios virtually raping women, verbally raping women. They present cases of gang rape and when young men without anything to do are listening, they feel like getting involved. They present it in such a way that it is enticing rather than condemning. 

This country belongs to all of us. We know the role of radios in the Rwanda genocide in 1994; we should not have a repeat here. Apart from all of us, the government must swing into action before these things happen -(Interjections)– Yes, it can easily happen here.  

Our people have a saying; there was this woman who was in the market with her daughter and she sat badly and the daughter did not have a way of telling her politely. So she said, “Mother, let us stand up and sell our wares as we are standing because apparently we are being cheated.” Let us get up, Ugandans, and sell our goods when we are standing, otherwise we shall all go into chaos. Further, our people say that because a snake does not bite, you do not push your finger in its mouth. Let us stop pushing these fingers. Let us stop inciting violence and ethnic hatred on the radio waves otherwise we shall all perish like fools. I thank you.

12.51
MR OWOR OTADA (NRM, Kibanda County, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I want to thank you for having reconvened and compressed the 21 days, which you had at liberty within which to convene. You chose to reconvene at the earliest opportunity when the matter is still relevant and when other matters have not yet overtaken this very concern. I want to thank my colleagues who appended their signatures because I am one of them. When we were collecting these signatures, there were some people who were not for it. However, I think the whole country has seen that we have provided a very good opportunity for this country to receive an official statement from government other than just newspaper stories from different quarters.

This is not a Buganda affair. Again we encountered the same dissenting voices who were saying, “Why are you people over enthusiastic this time round when it has touched on Buganda Kingdom?” I had two reasons personally for signing and I want to speak for myself. Many people had started seeing signs of history wanting to repeat itself. However, for some action to be taken on a particular subject there must be a build-up to it. Many people have been arrested before and the Government has been given the benefit of doubt. However, when we have seen that the trend is taking a different toll, we then thought that we must get an explanation about some of these misgivings. Also, when I watched my colleague, hon. Matia Kasaija, almost going speechless on WBS, I thought that I should get an opportunity to get a clearer explanation from government.  

Mr Speaker, I cannot see my government having misgivings and then I take a back seat. I will be unfair, first of all to myself because it is my cardinal role to call my government to order every time that Ugandans must be explained to. We are accountable to Ugandans and we are not accountable to ourselves. Keeping within the law goes without saying. 

Personally, I was not worried because I have always known my government for having clear methods of work and I did not think that my government would be at any task to explain these goings-on. So, I would like to say that whereas inflammatory statements can disorganize the state, which I also condemn by the way, I would like to say that the only thing that can ensure stability is uniform use and application of the law (Applause). If the law is applied selectively, then you are the one actually who is going to cause insecurity. (Applause)

I may be time constrained so let me say what I actually wanted to say last. For all of us who are believers, I would like to state that leadership comes from God and I would like all of you, my friends, to read Exodus 23:1-9. My party’s leadership is being tested by some of these dissenting views, that is for sure. What is important then is how we react when our leadership is being put to the test. If we react in a knee-jerk kind of manner then probably some people can score their points and we get a minus.

My concern was also drawn to the point which hon. Okumu Reagan had mentioned inter alia that there are charges of criminal nature that were being preferred to individuals and when an offence is committed then the rule of law must be applied. However, if negotiations then come in between, then that leaves a lot of room for doubt. I want that statement to be clarified to us. Why should negotiations take place with somebody or a group of people who have broken the law?  

12.57
MRS BEATRICE LAGADA (NRM, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I would like to appreciate the statement of the minister to the House. I am glad that this House is agreed that the problem was not the arrest of the three officials of Mengo but actually the manner in which the arrests were carried out.

I also want to know whether the Police Act actually prescribes how a person is to be arrested. I have heard complaints during the debate this morning about people not in uniform carrying out arrests. I have also heard complaints about other people being arrested with cars blocking them. So, it seems to me that there is no specified way in which a person is arrested; at least it appears not to be spelt out. What I do know is that the Police are supposed to apply reasonable force. What reasonable is, is left to whoever is carrying out the arrest. So maybe it should be spelt out then we will know.

Since honourable members have referred to an incident that I did not want to talk about on the Floor of this House but it has been referred to, I also wanted to take this opportunity to state that yesterday, we had something, which would have been a serious war in the Movement Caucus because of recklessness, the sort of recklessness we are talking about in this House. I want to agree with hon. Museveni that if we are debating about the arrest of these three officials and we do not look at the genesis of what has brought us to where we are, then I think we are just cleaning the surface of a wound, which has got pus inside; we are not talking about the pus and we are pretending that we are making the wound clean. I want to say that I will not be party to cleaning a wound, which has pus inside and we do not break the wound so that pus comes out.

I have lived in Buganda since 1981. I have property in Buganda including a farm but because of the reckless statements that have been going on since this Land (Amendment) Bill came into being I am now having problems on my farm. All these years I have been existing in peace with my neighbours since I acquired the land in a legal manner, but because of what has been going on, I have started losing animals. There are statements of the villagers saying, “This land is Buganda’s land so you will leave it anyway”. So, even as we stand here and we are very reasonable and saying there are basic human rights that must be observed, I want us as leaders to tell the other people who are trying to trample on my basic human right to settle and move anywhere in Uganda to stop it. (Applause) We cannot pretend that we are protecting the basic human rights of some people while other people’s basic human rights are being threatened. I have no wish to be cut into pieces like people were cut into pieces in Kenya or in Rwanda. The challenge for us as leaders is to stand up and be counted and stop genocide from coming into Uganda. Otherwise, which one of us will be there to tell the story? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

1.03
MR SALEH KAMBA (NRM, Kibuku County, Pallisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to submit as one of the petitioners in this matter. Whereas we appreciate the circumstances and the concerns of the many parties, it is important that we analyse the genesis of the issue we always discuss. Wherever there is a problem, it is important that we define that problem, look at its causes and then we try to look at the possible solutions. Much as we may blame the government here and there, we need to analyse the genesis of the issue and its causes and then we shall look at the possible solutions.

I take this opportunity to inform this House and the country at large that Uganda, like many African countries, has a problem of politicising each and every issue. The moment you politicise an issue, there is always a problem of creating two sides and people end up losing track of the real issue. You may even end up losing your closest allies because of politicising an issue. Therefore, we need to look at the possible situation when we are trying to politicise issues. It is our duty as representatives of the people to help the country or the nation at large in the preservation of the integrity of the various institutions, traditional, cultural and central government institutions.

At this point, I would like the House to observe the following: in the process of trying to preserve these institutions, most especially the cultural institutions, we need to differentiate the following. It is very important that seated here as a House we need to differentiate between the word “Baganda” and the word “Buganda.” When you talk of the Buganda, almost all of us here are part of it, and we are the majority, but when you talk of Baganda, they are few. So, we need to differentiate the two things. Also we need to take a serious appreciation -(Interruption)

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. At the beginning of this session, you did guide the House that in our debate we should concentrate on the manner in which the three officials were arrested, their subsequent confinement and who the arresting officers were. However, for quite some time now, there are those colleagues who have insisted on the genesis of the matter. When we go into the genesis, then we are bordering on injuring our rule 60 because that is the matter, which is in court. May I be guided whether it is proper for us to start talking about why the people were arrested rather than talking about the manner in which they were arrested?

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether by dealing with the genesis without going into the evidence, there is anything improper. In any case, I think he was developing a point. Why don’t you allow him to do that?

MR KAMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. I am a well trained man; I cannot just talk about something, which I do not understand well. I must analyse it before I say something. As various regions in this country, we must appreciate that for purposes of pushing for our interests, we need serious allies and therefore we need each other. There is no need for us to say this one does not qualify here. 

There is also a problem; we seem to be failing to differentiate between honour and power. It is also one of the causes of this problem. There is a need for us to internalise the difference between cultural and national politics. The conflict of the two is one of the geneses of these problems we are debating today. 

We are talking of officials who were arrested for saying something which was defined according to the law as seditious, defamatory, etc. However, before we talk about those who said something, what do we say about the facilitators of the platform where something is said? It is very important. In this country, we have national laws guiding the operation of private businesses. We are all aware that there is an allegation that the officials who were arrested made statements on CBS Radio. There is information available indicating that CBS Radio is a private business. Although it is said to be “radio yo’bujjaja”, it is somebody’s business. I would like to seek clarification from the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Attorney-General; what does our law say about a private business being used for negative intentions?

1.11
MS HUDA OLERU (Independent, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to contribute to this national important issue. Allow me to say that it is very difficult to attain democracy and to remove the tyranny which we had experienced in this country. This democracy we are enjoying today made many Ugandans lose their lives. Because of this, I appeal to the government to manage this democracy very well and not to use Amin’s type of administration. 

As a woman, arresting Nambooze and leaving her baby, which was less than a year old and was breastfeeding, was completely unconstitutional and undemocratic. That shows how some people are heartless for the future of this country. For Nambooze, I do not know whether she is a criminal or not –(Interjections)- that is not my problem, but my concern is the baby. In any case, did that baby commit any crime or anything bad for which he should suffer and not enjoy his right to breastfeeding? As a nation, we know the importance of breastfeeding, which we denied that baby. I believe Nambooze has a home and is a settled citizen of this country. What would it cost the government to summon her democratically and then come and investigate whatever she had done wrong? 

The liberation we are enjoying today has made Uganda a pilot project for many other countries that are coming up young democracies. We are receiving many people from outside this country coming to learn about the democracy in Uganda and that is our pride. I feel we must maintain this democracy, protect it and use it rightly so that we continue to enjoy the pride which we have. If it was not because of this democracy, I do not think today our President would still be the chairman of OIC and CHOGM in which Uganda is now known internationally. If some of these petty issues come and they are on the Internet and in the papers, they will make other countries doubt our democracy. I feel we must protect it and be exemplary to other countries which are still learning the democracy we are attaining. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

1.15
GEN. ARONDA NYAKAIRIMA (UPDF Representative): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing me to make a few clarifications. I have been sitting here listening and my message to the honourable petitioners is that let there be no uncertainty concerning the arrests of these individuals. The arrest of these individuals was carried out by Uganda Police Force and not the UPDF. The Police Force, as was contained in the minister’s statement, acted in the interests of the state. There is no politics in this, no land matter and no unlawful activity as was contained in the minister’s statement.

Let there be no confusion about the role of the UPDF and the Uganda Police Force. As a reminder, the role of the UPDF, according to the Constitution, is to protect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of this country and come to the aid of civil authority when called upon in the event of a disaster like we had recently in Teso. When called upon, we come to support the Police Force like we did during the national elections in 2006. On this matter, however, the Police did not call upon us because they knew that they had the capacity and professionalism to do this job alone and they did it. We did not participate.

Mr Speaker, the other issue is that there is some talk that we may not be conscious enough about upholding, protecting and promoting the Constitution of this state. We are on record that the UPDF, the Police Force and the intelligence units are totally committed to upholding and protecting the Constitution. In the event that individuals in those institutions breach the Constitution, action has always been taken. 

Concerning this matter, I saw in the papers today that an individual admitted that the Uganda Police Force was very professional and exemplary in the way they conducted these arrests. An honourable member had made a statement here but I want to put it on record that I did not send soldiers to arrest the honourable member’s brother at all. This should be corrected. In the matter of arrests and operations, it is not absolutely necessary that every individual of that institution has to know. There is a principle of need-to-know. There are special operations and when an operation is conducted, some members may know while others may not. So under the circumstances, some members of the Police Force may not have known but the Police Force conducted this operation and they did their best.

Let me also assure the petitioners that our state is in an excellent state and that the UPDF are carrying out their mandate of protecting the country. This is the reason why the country is peaceful from one corner to the other. Also, we have the Police Force and they are doing their best to maintain law and order. I want to report that recently, they expanded their operations to the area of Karamoja and I have found the situation being restored to normalcy in that area of our country. Therefore, the arrests were conducted by the Police Force as stated in the statement by the minister. I thank you, Mr Speaker and Members of Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when you stand for clarification or information, it is up to the honourable member holding the Floor to allow you. It is not the Speaker to do so. 

MR MWESIGE: Motion.

THE SPEAKER: Motion; for what? Let me allow the people I had already mentioned then you will come in.

1.20
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to talk notwithstanding the attempt of my senior grandson, hon. Adolf Mwesige. I think the Ministry of Internal Affairs, and particularly the ministers, are standing the test of their leadership. They have made this statement, which has been presented to us with a lot of uncoordinated seriousness. 

I have very high regard for Ndugu Rugunda and hon. Matia Kasaija. Many times I keep telling hon. Kasaija that in whatever he does, he must first and foremost put his faith forward and say nothing but the truth. I have told him that every time we interact. However, I am afraid that this time they have portrayed to us that they are not in charge of the institutional mandate of the Ministry of Internal Affairs that they have been bestowed with. What is before us is comparable to the common African saying that when you see your co-wife being beaten and your husband has thrown the stick nearby, if you are a sensible co-wife, you should act very fast, get that stick and destroy it because tomorrow the same stick will work on you.

I am not a lawyer but I am a paralegal; for 20 years I served as an officer of court. There are certain legal jargons that derive their origin from the Latin language with which I am very familiar, and there are a few people here who will agree with me that in the course of executing an arrest, there is what is referred to as prima facie evidence, which means first face of evidence. You cannot arrest a suspect when you are not sure whether there are enough grounds for you to arraign him in a court of law. 

In this particular case, did one have to parade these people for five or six years –(Interjection)- today you can call them terrorists but tomorrow it will be you. Be very careful with your statements. You are here saying that these are terrorists but tomorrow it will be your turn. I think the most important thing, even when we talk about what the hon. Member for Ruhama, hon. Janet Museveni, said that we must talk about the causes, is not the causes only. If it were about the causes, the Constitution would have given specific provisions for every speculated cause. That is why it has come up with straight lines. Regardless of the cause of the crime, you should be arraigned before a competent court within 48 hours whether you have committed a murder or not. The most important thing is the prima facie evidence that something wrong has happened and I think if we cannot do that, then we are not ourselves. 

Why do I say that my friend, Ndugu Rugunda, seems not to be in charge of that ministry? You remember in this very House, we were concerned about the Black Mambas having overrun the High Court and this was still in the ambit of the Ministry of Internal Affairs. In this country, we have degenerated into people who are not in army or police uniform - Kiboko Squad - beating up people on the streets near police officers and the Police do not swing into action. Ndugu Rugunda, are you still in charge?

Police brutality in this country is something that we cannot keep quiet about. I know that you are the only person in this country who was supposed to give national guidance about arrests during those days, but when it comes to this issue of brutality, believe you or me, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, these are issues of national importance. If it were not because of my relationship with Ndugu Rugunda, I would have even asked as to why Article 118 should not be instituted against him. However, because I know you mean well and that you are not in charge, I am not about to move that yet. (Mr Mwesige rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, if you have a motion, permit at least these people then after they have made their contributions, you will come in. 

1.26
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Central, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker -(Interruptions)- be patient, I am the one on the Floor -(Mr Mwesige rose_)- I request the minister to restrain himself. Let the minister exercise restraint. He should observe the parliamentary code of conduct.

THE SPEAKER: Order! Please, both of you sit down. Honourable members, I want to give as many Members as possible an opportunity to say what they wanted to say. I have already identified some Members on this side. After they have made their contributions, I will allow you to move your motion. (Applause)

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the protection you have given me against the minister. 

I call upon honourable members to critically reflect on the oath we took. None of us appeared and entered this House without taking an oath. We took an oath, which is enshrined in this Constitution, to jealously guard and defend this Constitution. I shudder when I see Members standing up here to vehemently defend deviation from the path of the Constitution. I really shudder. They say, “The 48-hour rule could not be complied with and, therefore, I am happy the minister has explained; the minister has allayed our fears.” Oh my God!

This rule enshrined in Article 23 is couched in mandatory language. It is absolute. This rule has no rule deviation. The only rule that was available under section 2 of section 25 of the Police Act, which hon. Remigio Achia talked about, was nullified by court as hon. Katuntu rightly put it, in the case of Foundation for Human Rights Initiative v the Attorney-General. Let me read this rule for clarity purposes. It is rule 23(4)(b): “Any person arrested or detained shall be brought to court as soon as possible but in any case not later than 48 hours from the time of his or her arrest.” So, it is couched in a mandatory term; it is absolute. 

When you look at Article 79 of the Constitution, our mandate as Parliament is to jealously guard this Constitution. Article 2 of the Constitution is very clear; Uganda is a constitutional supremacy. Article 3 of the Constitution, Mr Speaker, should now be invoked. Article 3(2) provides as follows: “Any person who singly or in consult with others abrogates or attempts to abrogate this Constitution commits the offence of treason.”

The Constitution is like a chain; once you remove one joint from that chain, the whole thing collapses. Article 1 is very clear to that effect. However, what I am saying is that the people who violated the Constitution by detaining the suspect beyond 48 hours committed treason. This is under Article 3(2). Those people should now be arraigned and the honourable minister here should not give any justification for that. 

There are also other provisions which are coached in mandatory terms, which are non-derogable; the right to protection against inhuman, degrading and cruel treatment under Article 24 of the Constitution. When you go to Article 44 of the Constitution, it is also absolute. It is not conditioned to Article 43 which talks about matters of security. Hon. Aronda Nyakairima, I am telling this to you and other Members.

As I wind up, those who are saying we should abrogate the Constitution, we should violate the rights at the altar of security, I implore you to read the preamble to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which was promulgated on 10 December 1948 and we are signatory to this. This is what it says in brief: “Whereas it is essential, if man is not to be compelled to have recourse, as a last resort, to rebellion against tyranny and oppression, that human rights should be protected by the rule of law…” So, the rule of law takes precedence over all those matters you are talking about of security and what not. It is the rule of law. We have constitutional supremacy in this country. The Leadership Code is very clear. Section 15 provides that whoever uses his office to abuse another person’s rights or even directs another person to use that person’s powers to abuse people’s rights commits an offence under the Leadership Code. Section 35 of the Leadership code is very clear that you should vacate your office. Today, I should be hearing resignations. Honourable minister, the moment you accepted, politically you took responsibility that you deviated from the Constitution. You ought to have told us, “I am sorry and I am resigning”.

1.33
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank you for having convened this special session of Parliament to discuss the rather ugly development that has unfolded in our country. I would like to remind all honourable members that the first function you perform as a Member of Parliament is to swear in; to take an oath and I would like to remind all of you that that oath obliges you to protect and defend the Constitution. During that ceremony, I saw all of you travelling with hundreds of your supporters and swearing to the Almighty and to the entire country that you would protect and defend the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. 

Unfortunately, it seems that some people look at it as a ceremony and not as an oath where you swear to the Almighty God and the entire nation that you will protect and defend that Constitution. When you are defending and protecting the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, you have no option. There can never be any justification when the Constitution of Uganda is being violated. No justification whatsoever! That would tantamount to somebody who commits rape and I am sorry to say this. I say, well after all, you also had your own fun about it, a rape is a rape and once it happens, you must condemn it. 

But I will say this. During my 17 years of practising as a lawyer, I have dealt with the Police quite closely. I have almost seen most of these officers who are now assistant commissioners from the time when they were assistant superintendents of Police and I know how Police officers act in these situations. I have also seen that during these years I have been engaged in defending most of my colleagues involved in some of these cases including the last case that when you are dealing with a professional policeman, you have no doubt that they are very professional, disciplined and follow the rules. I must say that there are many of them in the Police Force.

I really must disagree with Gen. Aronda because I have seen your officers literally taking over Police stations; I have seen your officers literally taking over investigations and I have seen your officers arresting people and taking them to CMI. I have been in touch with your own officers who say, “Wait at the police station” and eventually they take them to Rugunda’s police officers to clean up, including this particular case, Gen. Aronda. Most of those officers were your own CMI officers and I am ready - because they arrested people in broad daylight - we know their vehicles and I will go into the details. So let us not hide the truth.

I know sometimes virtue is a rare commodity but to acknowledge a mistake is decency. People make mistakes. Officers make mistakes including the government. Why don’t you say, “That was a mistake; it was wrong” and you assure the country that it will not happen again.

On a personal note, I grew up in a UPC family. My late father was one of the directors of security during the UPC regime and one of his officers is a minister but he has just moved out - the hon. Nsaba Buturo. He was one of my father’s officers. (Laughter) One of his other members of the party – they are looking at me across the Front Bench but I can tell you that UPC is not in power. Do you know why UPC is not in power? Because some of the mistakes that they were committing went on accumulating and they did not acknowledge this.

1.40
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Independent, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As a member of the caucus of God, it must be the power of God that has shifted your eye to catch me so that I have an opportunity to contribute to this very important motion. I want to thank the petitioners for this motion.  I have not heard any Member of Parliament thanking the Minister of Internal Affairs for this statement. I want to thank you, sir, for this statement. I know that this is the best you can offer under the circumstances. 

Hon. Members, you must appreciate that it is very difficult to be a Minister of Internal Affairs under President Museveni. Thank you very much, honourable minister for this statement. 

My eyes are drawn to hon. Aronda and all the other officers; honourable members in uniform. We have got Members of Parliament wearing uniforms for one symbol, because of our ugly past. Commonwealth Parliaments do not have soldiers in their Parliaments, but the Ugandan Parliament is unique and it is because of our ugly past that we have these honourable members. 

When I look at the Front Bench, half of the Members have been in exile –(Laughter)– and when I look at the second row, there is a very prominent Member who lived in Sweden for a very long time because of our ugly past. After 22 years in Government, surely, the National Resistance Movement should do better! We must outgrow our bush tendencies and start behaving and belonging to a society of civilized nations and governments.

Mr Speaker, there is no justification whatsoever by any one to defend the illegal arrests and detention of the three members in question. Because of our ugly past, the framers of this Constitution wrote a whole chapter dealing, fundamentally, with human rights. Uganda is a signatory to several human rights conventions: the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the CEDEAW, the Harare Declaration; the African Charter on Human Rights and so on. So, in this era, as Members of Parliament, we cannot be seen to condone the ugly incidents involving the trio of Mengo.

I want, on behalf of my people, to deplore and denounce all acts that are extra constitutional. And I want to wind up by giving a way forward. Mr Speaker, let this Parliament not pretend that they do not know the Buganda problem. The Buganda question has been a thorn in Uganda’s history for such a long time since colonialism. Why are you pretending that you do not know the problem? This country had a chance to redress this problem in the CA in 1994 –(Interjections)- yes, this is a very serious Parliament, it is not the Parliament for hecklers and to the hon. Members of the Front Bench, you are honourable ministers; you are not football fans. Please, do not heckle because this is not Namboole. (Laughter)

The bottom line and why we had all these arrests is because Buganda is concerned about the way the NRM is managing the land problem. For a long time, Buganda has been demanding for a federal status -(Member time out)

1.46
MR ISSA KIKUNGWE (DP, Kyadondo South, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have listened very carefully and maybe, there is only one issue I would like to add to the debate. This is an issue – the Minister’s statement is talking about secteranianism, but in this country there are people who practice secteranianism. However, those who come out to point at secteranianism or elements of sectarianism are more criminalised than those who do the act. This is very unfortunate. Taking me to court will not solve the problem. The problem can only be solved by reconsidering your position and doing the right thing. 

One of the people in my constituency is right now in detention because of one thing - he told me – of being a Muganda. [HON. MEMBERS: “Aaah!”] Wait! Do not just say ah! I can stand by this. The DPC signed a detention order for this man on allegations that he usually brings secrets to me. For four days now, the young man has not been charged. This is the kind of selective application of the law, which hon. Otada was talking about.

I, therefore, wish to move a motion for a resolution of –(Interjections)– condemning the arrest –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kikungwe, I do not want to contradict myself. There is somebody who wanted to move a motion and I stopped him. So, I do not see the reason I should allow you to move a motion. Please make your contribution the way others have done.

MR KIKUNGWE: Mr Speaker, I can see my honourable colleague, the minister very eager to move the motion. But I would like to find out from hon. Aronda whether Gen. Tinyefuza is going to be court martialled for making political statements because we have had this before. [HON. MEMBERS: “For inciting violence.”] Yes, because this kind of selective application of the law is going to cause more problems.

As we talk now over 20 criminal cases have been labelled against hon. Members of Parliament. And day in, day out as they go to court, they accumulate more anger. One day this anger is likely to – they may contain it no more. 

What is the problem? Is this what you fought for? Have you forgotten about the Ten Points Programme, constitutionalism and rule of law restoration? What is the problem? How many of you are going to be lucky to switch from one regime to another, being a comfortable man like my hon. colleague Mallinga, or hon. Nsaba Buturo or hon. Atubo? You may not be that lucky. So what we need is to accommodate one another. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

1.51
MS SUSAN NAKAWUKI (FDC, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here as a woman and a lady. I am also standing as a representative of the people, a Member of the Committee on Gender, a learned friend and a human rights advocate. When I joined this Parliament, I took an oath to safe guard the Constitution of this country jealously under Article 79(3) of the Constitution. 

Allow me to read some of the provisions of the Constitutions verbatim. Objective 15 of the Constitution states that: “The state shall recognise the significant role of the women in society -” and Article 33 Clause 3 states that: “The state shall protect woman and their rights taking into account their unique status and natural maternal functions in society”. 

We are really observing gross violation of human rights, especially the rights of the vulnerable, the rights of the women. At this point, I am talking about the ordinary citizens of Uganda who are not known. We have heard ministers being arrested, those ones are known and every one is going to speak about them. We have the likes of Nambooze who are known, but how about the ordinary people of Busiro who are going to be arrested in the same way and it is going to go unnoticed? 

I really have a lot of questions to ask the Cabinet. It is really bad that the hon. Minister for Ethics has gone out because he has always strategised on soft targets. He only comes out to speak of these weak things like Kimansulo, homosexuality; which sometimes do not even matter a lot and he does not come out on such issues when government is causing gross violation of human rights; when women are being manhandled – (Interruption)

MR ANGIRO: Thank you honourable member for giving way. What the honourable member is labouring about is that she is not aware that in the management of the Constitution and laws of this country, the order which has been followed is as follows. First of all you are arrested, whether dead or alive, then secondly, a crime is pinned on you, thirdly, you become a suspect. After becoming a suspect, the fourth stage is that you are taken to court and charged, and then the fifth is that investigations begin. Then sixth, the court either frees you or you are condemned to death. Thank you very much.  (Laughter)

MS NAKAWUKI: Just to add on what I was saying, I would urge the hon. Minister for Ethics and Integrity to call his government to order. This is the time he should come up. When they were talking about issues of human rights violation, I saw the hon. Deputy Attorney-General smiling sheepishly. You are the last person I expected to smile. Hon. Attorney-General, I do not know how you advise your government; you would have been the first person to come out and advise them that the way they were conducting this thing was illegal and ultra vires. It is inconsistent with the Constitution. I would like to ask the minister that in this country – I am reliably informed because I informed you that I am a learned friend, so I have all the information I need for my presentation. 

Honourable minister, there are no cells for women in this country. When women are arrested, they sleep in toilets in CPS and your officers do not come up. I am reliably informed –(Interruption)

MR TINKASIMIRE: Thank you honourable member for giving way. You raised the issue that in this country if there are any cells for women, then I have not met them. I would like to concur with you. When I was arrested and taken to CPS, the cells in which they put me, the women were right here, just separated by a small door, which I know suspects could easily break into and the situation was that nasty. And when I came back to the House, I came with petitions from those women saying that they wanted independent cells –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think your information clearly talks about proximity rather than the same cell. 

MS NAKAWUKI: Thank you, honourable member for that information. I would like this to be taken seriously because women are vulnerable and so they should be given extra care. I would like to express my dismay at my honourable colleague from Ruhama because I thought she is an advocate for the vulnerable. In Article 44 of this Constitution, which is the supreme law of the land, the right to personal liberty, including the right to habeus corpus is non-derogable. So I call upon government, tomorrow it will be me as the President, I am coming for it –(Laughter)– and if you do not take care now, it might be you the next day. 

1.58
MR JOHN KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Mr Speaker, I will just make a very short statement. My political and legal mentor, the late Benedicto Kiwanuka told me that, “Never support an injustice even if it is being committed against your enemy because next it might be you”.

You, Mr Speaker, and the hon. Attorney General, had the opportunity to go around this country investigating violations of human rights of all the former regimes, and we made a report. And one of the most obvious things that came out was that the violation of human rights was always the basis of all the tragedies that befell this country, including the regimes themselves. And that is the reason why we included in the Constitution a whole chapter on human rights, set up a commission on human rights and that is why you even put there the 48 hours because of the atrocities that we saw that were being committed against people who are put in custody. 

And one thing you will discover is that violations were always committed by people who said they were protecting the state and that they were acting in the interests of government. It is always the same but unfortunately, those governments never stood; they all fell. But by the time they fell, this country had wept. The problem I am seeing with a lot of sadness is that we are actually going back to that situation. When we get a situation where you arrest a person and hide him; government had to literally hide the person it had arrested, an individual. It is so frightening that an individual has to be hidden by a whole state. 

In a situation where this government fears Nambooze so much so that for a whole week they have to keep going rounding with the poor lady because she is a threat to the state - a criminal. And when that has happened, you keep a whole advocate of the High Court of Uganda running around with you for a whole week, and after that you cannot even charge him; you have no charges against him! Then the minister, my dear colleagues comes and says, “Mr Peter Mayega was released on police bond at Jinja Road Police Station pending further investigations”. After arresting him for a whole week, running around with him in the whole country: to Bundibugyo and so on, and then you release him, “Pending investigations!” That is an indication that actually we are in a big problem because it means to me - I have been here long enough, it means other forces other than the Police took over, and the Police just came in to save the state. As it was in the beginning, so it is now and I do not want it to be so forever. My fear is that we are back in bondage. I wish I had a book around; we are from bondage and we are slowly going back to bondage, and what happens always is that people in government do not notice it, they think things are alright. 

I visited Nambooze in Rubaga Hospital; I want to tell you she is traumatized. But every simple Ugandan who goes there and sees her and comes back forms an opinion. You may not take it and just ignore it, but it is an opinion. I went to see hon. Peter Mayiga at his home. He is telling his story and every simple person who goes there forms an opinion.

Finally, I want to tell you that the people who joined the procession when these people were released also formed an opinion. I cry for my country. I thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Now this side – it should be hon. Mugyenyi and –(Prof. Latigo rose)- no, you finish what you want to say.

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I had initially thought that procedurally I would represent this side in winding up the debate and since you are still picking other Members from there, I beg your indulgence that I wait and make my contribution at the end.

THE SPEAKER: But why do you not speak? Okay, if you want to wait, then I take hon. Mugyenyi, hon. Guma and Minister Bright Rwamirama.

2.05
MRS MARY MUGYENYI (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): I want to start by thanking you for allowing this meeting. And I think this has shown how we are especially concerned about protecting the human rights of Ugandans. 

I think that the petitioners had certain concerns in their petition. One of them was that those who had been arrested were still in prison and their whereabouts were not known. Now that is no longer the case because they are out and they are with their families. 

Secondly, the petitioners were concerned that government has not come up with a statement. I now want to thank and congratulate government, particularly the Minister in charge of Internal Affairs for a very clear precise statement. Thank you, Sir –(Applause)- because when things are not clear, we all get concerned and indeed I would like to encourage government that when there is a matter of concern like this one, government comes out very quickly before it is pre-emptied. 

I would like to support this statement; it is clear and for the first time I think I have come to appreciate the role of the armed forces being in Parliament because the hon. Gen. Nyakirima has been able to clarify on behalf of the security forces. (Applause) 

Actually, at another point in time, when I get an opportunity I would like to rise that the Uganda Police forces also get represented here. (Applause) The reason being that sometimes we are not sure; there are so many claims, allegations, but when the person that is in charge gets up and makes a clarification, it sheds a lot of light on the issue. Whether we agree or we do not agree, at least we get information that is first hand information. So, I would like to congratulate the Commander of the Armed Forces for the statement that he has made.  

I would like to support the minister’s statement on the position of government more especially because I condemn inciting violence. And I am concerned that we colleagues sometimes condemn violence or we want to protect the rights of our people selectively and not on principle. Sometimes it occurs to me that you speak for human rights and the defence of the Constitution when it benefits you. We need to be objective when it comes to defending the Constitution and the rights of our people. It does not matter where they are, they are our people. 

I happen to be representing this country in the Pan African Parliament, an opportunity that you have given me honourable members. I am, therefore, in touch with what is happening around our continent. Our region is in trouble because of violence; because of tribal incitement of violence by leaders, and we can quote examples, by example, by example. Therefore, when we talk about defending the human rights, defending the Constitution, it has to be broad based; it has to be objective so that our people can know that they are represented by people who are objective. We have all heard statements on radios, the Kimeezas, where even certain communities in this country have been singled out and condemned and vindictively selectively made to be evil. We feel insecure. The Members who have talked about insecurity are right and if you are not feeling insecure, you then are not in touch with what is happening. And I want to assert that when violence comes, it is not going to affect one community. Just look at what has just happened to Kenya. It started with the Kikuyus but how many Luos or other tribes died? 

Honourable colleagues, I want to end by calling on all of us to objectively defend the Constitution by rejecting violence; by rejecting statements that incite violence that divide our people because the price is heavy and we all will have to pay it. I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I would like to move that the minister moves a motion and we conclude. Thank you. (Applause)

2.11
CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for giving me an opportunity to say one or two things. As hon. Mugyenyi has said, you hear on radio, in newspapers, some people condemning each other; some people condemning Baganda. You see, it is extremely necessary, especially for people at our level, to understand our history; to read so that you are knowledgeable. Some of us who are not Baganda should understand the nationalism in Buganda; we should understand the nationality called Buganda, it is extremely necessary rather than condemning a group of people and saying, “Baganda are sectarian”.

My understanding is that Baganda are not sectarian –(Applause)- because when you look at the geographical region of this region called Buganda and its consequent expansion through history, it shows that there are many groups of Ugandans who do not speak the local dialect, Luganda, who have been accommodated in Buganda. I do not have time to illustrate but you know. So, it is extremely - because you read in papers, you hear it on radios; when one or two Baganda make a mistake, then you generalise it to all Baganda. I do not understand what is happening; and these are people who have been to school! (Applause) But you must be careful however, that not everybody who speaks Luganda is a Muganda; that one I must rub it in. Not everybody who speaks Luganda is a Muganda. In fact the Baganda have their – because we are friends, we have gone to schools with them; we have married each other and so on and we interact. They have in this language of theirs something they call, empisa ensiwufu, something like “bad manners”, “bad discipline”. The traditional Muganda does not abuse; they do not. So, this business of going on radio and abusing people, “people with long noses”, is not so quite traditional in Buganda. (Applause) So be careful about people who talk Luganda and you mistake them for being Baganda; be very careful. 

We must be extremely careful. Hon. Kawanga, for whom I have a lot of regard, has spoken very passionately. And when he was talking about people who were going to Lubaga to see madam Nambooze and other people - the other day we were watching television and there was a scene of people who were prostrating themselves before the portrait of the Kabaka; that they were forming an opinion. Hon. Kawanga, you are older than I am and you have a rich experience of this country politically. I can assure you that the 1966 crisis is not about to repeat itself. These statements I read that the arrest of Charles Peter Mayiga, who is my very good friend incidentally and his wife Margaret - that the arrest was meant for the Kabaka. You people, all people are here contesting for political power. Do not mix up things to cause another round of confusion. Compete for political power but refrain from using inflammatory statements that can cause another round of bloodshed. (Applause) Who restrained the President from arresting the Kabaka if that were true? 

There are political forces in this country bent on ensuring that the central government gets on a collision course with the traditional leadership of this region so that there is a breakdown. This is a very serious matter. And some of our colleagues who have the right to say what they want to say, minus abusing people, can go and take refuge in the traditional institutions, which incidentally were in the constituency conference in 1994/1995. We did say that traditional kingship or institutions are apolitical. So when colleagues here are holding a Constitution and saying what the Constitution says, is it the government that must implement the Constitution alone, or it is all of us Ugandans?  Because we did say that cultural institutions are apolitical. So, why can colleagues of this country who are in traditional leadership like the Kyabazinga, like Bunyoro, like Buganda, not respect that provision, why?  

Let me tell you, hon. Members, once you join politics - I do not know whether quite a number of you have read the book of the late Sir Edward Mutesa, The Consecration of my Kingdom. Once you join politics or you bring politics into your domain, you know what you harvest especially in the third world; you know. So, I am praying that the Kabakaship, which institution some of us respect, although we are biologically not Baganda, the king should not be dragged into politics because we respect that institution. I saw the Magulu Nyondo, as he is popularly called, in 1985 when we were in charge of the Western region when he returned in Kasese. We would not want to see a repeat of this confusion. So we pray that please, let us resist the use of inflammatory language to frame this country. The peace we are enjoying came out of blood. There are few mistakes being made here and there; nobody is perfect. Arrests can be done, but the point is, that at least they have been released and they are available and the law is taking its course. So hon. Members, let us behave responsibly.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.19
MAJ. (RTD) BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (NRM, Isingiro County North, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members. I have experience in security forces and my experience does not live behind me but lives with me. Experience is not what happens to man, but what man does is what happens to him.  

When we started this debate, you guided us very properly that we confine our area of debate to the manner of arrest and the 48 hours’ rule. I will observe my contribution on this. What I expected in this debate is for some people to come up and mention about people who resist arrest. We have had policemen here dying in the course of executing their duties. They are not here to speak for themselves but I happen to have that experience and I want to speak on their behaviour.

We have people who go to arrest criminals and they resist. So when it happens, the issue of reasonable force is appreciated from the issues and circumstances on the ground. (Applause) I have watched a film in recent times on TV: when somebody was going to be arrested, he decided to lie down and the Police decided to lift him. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, when we come to this august House and we are referred to as “honourable”, if we want to cure the problem, we must be frank. So if I were a policeman at the scene, what do I do? It is to ask my colleague to lift this person and take him safely.

In the Police they arrest both the living and the dead. If you commit suicide, they treat your body in a manner that is not the usual way of dealing with people who have died naturally. So when we are dealing with Police and in the manner in which they were arrested, really I think we should look at the other side of ‘what are the circumstances’?  

The other issue about the mode of arrest. When I came here, you saw I was limping because I am a casualty of an accident. When it rains here in Parliament, I do not come to Parliament because the floor is very slippery. If I fall, given the condition of my legs, then I will have a problem permanently. When you have a child, for God’s sake, when you are breastfeeding, you go to Kiboga, you go to Kibale, you go to Kasese, and you go to Bundibugyo –(Interruptions).

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, the honourable minister in his submission is alluding to a human right of a mother and a child who is entitled to a normal living and you must not deny any of them their survival. The honourable minister went ahead to insinuate that mothers leave their children and meander in different places while it is a right for any human being, if it is not for any crime, to make movements in line with even feeding the child.  Is the honourable minister in order to confine the mothers of this country not to do other jobs because they have to feed, and yet part of their movement is to ensure that their children survive, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, from this debate there are a number of issues that we have to consider as Parliament and as government. What happens when a mother who is breastfeeding is confined - because is suspected of having done something - what facilities do you give her? I think these are policies we need to think about.  

The other thing, which I have been thinking about here, is these 48 hours, which we put in the Constitution. How do we stop it being violated? Think of this scenario: on Wednesday 24th December, somebody suspected of having committed an offence, say robbery is arrested. Thursday 25th is Christmas and it is not a working day for court. 26th, which is a Friday, is a Boxing Day and courts are not working. 27th is a Saturday, courts are not working, 28th is a Sunday, courts are not working. You may find a person being confined contrary to the Constitution for five days. What happens? I think these are things, which we have to examine and address this issue so that the Constitution is not violated but real –(Mr Lukwago rose_)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: But he is eating into my time -

THE SPEAKER: No, I only came in because of the breast feeding factor and I think we have to find a solution to it as a House -(Mr Lukwago rose_) But maybe you could allow him to comment on what I said and then you proceed.

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You have raised that scenario and that is why we are talking about it. That is the reason we created a provision in the Constitution and the Police Act that the police should give a police bond. If it is not possible to take somebody to court the dictates of the law is that please admit him to a bond especially like people here who have a clear record in society, they have permanent places of aboard -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukwago, police bonds are not - for instance for armed robbery, you give somebody a police bond? What we have to do, I think even lawyers or the legal community, is to examine this scenario because it may happen and you find somebody being confined for five days because the courts are not there. So, we have to examine it and also the scenario of breast feeding mothers. [MR LUKWAGO: “It is a right.”] You cannot give bond for armed robbery; no way! Unless you say you do not arrest him until the weekend has passed. (Laughter)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Anywar should have waited to listen because that is what I wanted to say. When you are breastfeeding, you must provide for your child. Even before you are arrested, if you go to fight with a child, you know the dangers of fighting. If you go for campaigns even when we are campaigning you must make provision for your children.

Having said that, I want to talk about the 48 hours. You have talked about the 25th December but if you look at the charges of these people, the charges are of very serious offences -(Interjections)- when people talk I listen and I request my honourable colleague, hon. Lukwago to also listen because when you move I sit down and you talk.

When you look at the way we provide for police here, we do not have helicopters to move in a split second from where the crimes were committed. When you look at Kiboga, Kibaale, Kyenjojo, Kasese, Bundibugyo and who knows if there was need even to go beyond Bundibugyo? So in these 48 hours, we must appreciate the constraint that the Police are working within. 

My considered view as somebody who knows the security consequences, if you look at the cost benefit or the trade off, if something was likely to happen, God forbid, like what happened in Kenya and keeping these people in a professional manner that has been aired by not any other person other than the suspects themselves that they were handled in a professional manner; I want to propose a way forward. I share with the proposal made by hon. Onzima but only that it is on the higher side. This is an area we need to revisit as Parliament. The 48 hour rule may not be applicable in some of the circumstances. (Laughter) 

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, thank you. The dictates of the Constitution are very clear. You must take somebody to court within 48 hours and the honourable minister took an oath to defend the Constitution. Is he, therefore, in order to stand on the Floor of the House here and say that you can circumvent the Constitution? Is he in order that there is room to circumvent the Constitution?

THE SPEAKER: No, you cannot but there are realities, which you have to address. I have told you the scenario, which I have given you. If it happens, what happens? There are certain things, which we have to really review and provide a solution.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, I want to conclude my submission. There was an issue raised about the rule on handling suspects. I want to congratulate the Police because actually the suspects themselves have testified that they were handled in a professional manner. We should not castigate and really demonise Police, which protects us. If there are actions of individuals we should deal with them individually without compromising the security of this country. Thank you very much.

2.33
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me the opportunity to make a contribution to this sensitive debate. I am one of those who appended my signature to the petition. [HON. MEMBERS: “As usual”] They are saying as usual. Yes. It is expected of a Member of Parliament who took an oath to defend, uphold and protect the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. I had to do that. The Cabinet and our beloved Minister, Ruhakana Rugunda, all take the same oath and I would urge them to respect the Constitution and the rule of law. 

When hon. Katuntu was submitting, he was making a point and I think I could finish it for him. He said the UPC Government was toppled because it was making mistakes consistently, cumulatively and it was not recognising the mistakes it did. In the same spirit, I have said it here before and I am saying it again, when we make mistakes, let us say, “Sorry, things were done in a wrong way but we shall not repeat it.” But some of the institutions like the one which hon. Rugunda superintends over to keep even giving wrong statements - I saw hon. Matia Kasaija my good friend having a statement, which he could not even believe in himself and even today, if you gave him the same statement, he would say, “I have never read this statement before the press”. He would deny what he said on TV because all that he said is not pertaining as of now.

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, as minister responsible for this sector together with my Ndugu Rugunda, we get briefs, statements and information from the security forces we are mandated to look after. Is my honourable colleague in order to insinuate that I was scared to read a statement? Who manages the other? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, can you substantiate?

MR BANYENZAKI: Yes, Mr Speaker, I can. I saw the minister on TV and he submitted that they have not acted according to the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and they are not ready to abide by the Constitution of Uganda. Can he repeat it here again? He said it.

THE SPEAKER: What impression did you have about what you saw on the TV? My impression from the report you are giving is that he is candid.

MR BANYENZAKI: Maybe let me continue with my submission - it was seen by the whole country. I respect hon. Ruhakana Rugunda very much and he has actually mentored me. He has even told me how in 1980 he could have won Kabale Municipality without any opposition but he stood on the ticket of UPM because he saw UPC was doing wrong things and he could not agree with them. I want us in the NRM to do the right things at the right time so that Ugandans, politicians and leaders are not forced to denounce our own party and government. It would be very wrong if we sat here as Members of Parliament and leaders in this country, see the Constitution being disrespected, the rule of law not being adhered to and we just say an explanation has been given and it is okay. It would be wrong. 

One of our colleagues intimated about the use of reasonable force. Hon. Members, do not think that this issue is only for the wanainchi. Kakooza has a story to tell. He passed through it all and he is from the NRM side. Tinkasimire went through the same experience and recently we saw what happened to hon. Nabillah and others - the list is long. What is happening to others today can easily happen to any of us. We must stop these things before they creep in and we find that we cannot contain them anymore.

2.40
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Thank you, Mr Speaker and colleagues. I stand to make my personal contribution to this debate but also on behalf of my colleagues on this side to thank all Members who have made their contributions in a sincere desire to see that the wrongs that we make in the course of our responsibilities are not swept under the carpet to become moles that will infect us and kill us. 

Allow me to correct – my young brother from Karamoja is not here. I neighbour Karamoja and I was extremely disappointed that he said something, which is not true when you are in Karamoja. A lot of the debates on these matters and even the cry about the radio stations are about CBS and FM stations. None of these FM stations that are being pinned for these wild statements are heard in Karamoja –(Interjections)- let me proceed, please.

Secondly –(Interjection)- I am not taking that information, please. Secondly, when Nambooze discusses on her Luganda program, the ordinary Karimojong in Karamoja don’t understand. Therefore, to say that the Karimojong always hear this and that is a terrible lie.

Mr Speaker, today’s sitting of Parliament is something that is extremely important for us in Parliament. When our honourable colleagues, hon. Nampijja and hon. Nabillah made statements in this House and we made our contributions and expressed our displeasure, I remember that the Monitor newspaper had an editorial, which reflected the views of many people that Parliament only acts when it is affected and not on behalf of the people. Therefore, I thank the people who initiated this request for Parliament to meet and discuss a matter that affected people who were not members of Parliament. If people had doubts that Parliament can actually act and does act on behalf of the people, I think that this is good evidence.

I have heard many things being said and many others being brought forward to divert the debate but if we go back to the guidance that you gave us, then those who are saying that after all these people have been released and therefore the matter is ended would have second thoughts. This is because in January last year when there were invasions of the High Court, we the Opposition came on a matter of human rights and expressed our displeasure; we walked out of Parliament for three weeks. At that time, the people involved could have been said to be the Opposition but we cautioned. 

When we were out, we went to the Judiciary and initially, they thought we were going to cause them problems but we went and talked and when we came back to the House, it did not take long before the courts were again invaded. The Judiciary did what has never happened in Uganda before. They downed their tools and said, “We cannot accept this abuse of legal processes and the undermining of the Constitution that gives the Judiciary equal protection with the Executive”. It remained upon Parliament to recognise that these things that are piling slowly are realities that we must deal with before they bring our country down. Therefore, I would like to thank hon. Kaddunabbi and all Members who signed on both sides of the House because the same problem that saw people walk on the streets and beaten by the kiboko squad, the same problem that saw the Opposition leave Parliament and stay out for three weeks and the same problem that made the Judiciary lay down their tools are now the same problems that we are confronted with. If we don’t deal with them, history will not judge us fairly. So I thank every member for this.

Again like other people, I am not a lawyer but at least I am a professor. (Laughter) I always heard that when people are dealing with criminals, they talk about presumption of innocence. It is that cardinal principle that allows you to demand that you are treated as a decent human being. Because you have not been convicted, nobody can impose his or her will on you. Where has this presumption of innocence gone because I heard some ministers saying that these people were guilty even before they were arraigned before court? 

The other thing that I used to hear very frequently was the prosecutor saying, “My Lord, this is a holding charge”. I don’t know whether those things have now gone out of Uganda that one cannot take somebody to court, charge him and say that this is merely a holding charge and the charges will be amended to allow for decency to operate in our judicial system.

The other matter that really shocks me and that we pretend is not deliberate – when you want to arrest MPs, you call them on Friday afternoon. At 5 O’clock, they will call a magistrate, take you to court and the magistrate says you can go after paying bail. By that time, the banks are closed and the people arresting you know that if they were to be fair to you, they would have allowed for a time when you could actually get bail. This is not something that is unknown. Therefore, these arrests with all the excuses that we give do not help us.

What is the real challenge? It is actually with government. Government has been in power consistently since 1986. I would like members on the government side to reflect on how they were treated on the radio and in public functions in 1986 and what has happened since. You may talk about those who are inciting others, but if you refuse to see that you are walking in this direction and they are walking in another one, you pay a political price. And so, if you are the politicians that you used to be who would go to Makerere and tackle issues in public debates, who would go to the media houses and tackle issues in public debates, you would not have this kind of problem. But I can tell you that the last time I was on radio, I was accosted that I was alone in the studio and it was not the first time. And they will tell you, “No, we called the minister and the minister refused to come”. So, what do you want the public to do if you are not willing to go and guide them and instead you turn around and blame them for conditions, which you create and allow them to slide out?

Mr Speaker, we have a fundamental problem in this country that increasingly, we have stopped talking to each other and I can assure you that no matter how much silence you have and no matter how much you blame the radio stations, the ultimate challenge even when conflicts arise is that you will still talk. So, it is proper for you to talk before conflicts arise. Fear, as I hear in the voices of some people on the government side including my colleague the honourable minister for agriculture, does not help us. We must recognise that we have problems. We must have the courage to talk to one another and that is the only way we can resolve our problem. 

Lastly, you know when President Museveni went to the bush in the 1990s some of us counselled, - I was a UPC member by then - one of the suggestions some of us gave was that let us give him a seat as a special elect in Parliament -(Interjection)- yes, at that time but people did not see the relevance of this because you would be able to engage within and see what to do. Later on, the same kind of accusations keep coming and I can assure you, one of the most difficult things is to be from the home of a president because you get pressures that don’t go to him and you become the immediate target, and people will come and tell you how you people are finishing them - it is normal. You do not have to react to that; instead you should ask how we can solve this, because we do not want to finish you and we do not want you to finish us. How can we resolve this? It comes to the same thing, talking. You can hide but there is nowhere to hide, you can try to run but this country is a very small place and you can try to pretend but the truth will always prevail. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let me have the last one because we have gone on for four and a half hours. 

2.55
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, the Rt. Hon. Speaker of Parliament. In 1986, there was only one radio station but now we have 200 radio stations, according to the minister in charge. So, the opportunities are many and those opportunities must be used correctly and responsibly. We could for example disagree on a bill but let us make proposals to improve it without abusing each other. What is the way forward? We must realise that we have all made mistakes –(Applause)- and, therefore, we must all repent of our constitutional, political and other mistakes. 

Secondly, we must negotiate with each other. (Applause) Being confrontational is not useful and I am happy to inform you that I met the Katikkiro of Buganda, the Prime Minister - and we discussed many things. He is not a confrontational person. So, he must be assisted to negotiate and his Excellency the President has made it clear that he is available to negotiate, but it is not enough to negotiate with his Excellency the President. We must negotiate with each other and market our requirements to each other. May the almighty bless us all, Amen. 

THE SPEAKER: This concludes the handling of this matter. With this, we come to the end of the proceedings. The House is adjourned until 05 August 2008, when we shall start processing the Budget. 

(The House rose at 2.58 p.m. and adjourned to Tuesday, 05 August at 2.00 p.m.)


