Wednesday, 28th July, 1993

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice-Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair).

The Council was called to order.


THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I apologise for the delay but I am sure everything will go on very well.  Thank you.

LAYING OF PAPERS

The following Papers were laid by the Minister for Land, Housing and Urban Development. The Annual Report of the National Housing and Construction Corporation for the Year 1991, covering the National Housing and Construction Corporation accounts for the Year ending 31st December, 1991, together with the report by the Auditor General.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MOTION

“That the National Resistance Council do resolve itself into a Committee of Supply for the consideration and approval of:

(1)    The Revised Revenue and Expenditure Estimates for the Fiscal Year 1992/93.
(11) The Budgetary Proposals for the Fiscal Year 1993/94 Estimates for Revenue and 
       Expenditure.”

(Debate continues from 27th July 1993).

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE (Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I stand to support the Motion and I also wish to than the Minister of Finance together with the whole Government for having done whatever they could to reduce the level of inflation to manageable levels. I also wish to thank the Government and the Minister of Finance in particular for having given us a comprehensive Finance Bill for the year 1993.  However, I wish to beg that the Finance - between 1974 be up-dated and be given to us so that together we, have got the attachments to the main Bill and are able to follow very quickly.

While appreciating and thanking the Government for having reduced inflation, it is necessary and economically true that reduction of inflation to one digit is necessarily developmental because development entails structural adjustments.  In the process of development, the economy has got to be jilted and keen in order for you to move to higher level.  Therefore, while we try to reduce inflation, we must keep in mind that we need some inflation to stimulate production again.  However, what level will be the best?  I do not think a two to three per cent inflation is necessary in the development of a country nor is it more than 15 per cent necessary but somewhere in between.  We would be able to do something.  

I want to comment on the question of tax base.  We are told that the tax base in Uganda is very narrow and we are trying to widen the tax base.  But, by increasing the tax rates, that is tax rate depending, it is not tax base widening. We should therefore, distinguish the two.  If you keep increasing the tax rates, you are actually deepening the structure of the tax system and yet tax base widening should mean widening the number of people, the number of sectors that are brought into the tax make.  It is also true that tax revenues quite often depend on tax elasticities, on income elasticities and price elasticities of demand. It is not also true that some commodity can be completely priced in perfectly priced elastic.  The thinking that you can increase the prices or taxation on beer permanently and get more money is not necessarily true because there are alternatives to be and some of them are dangerous ones.

I have been able to get some figures to prove my case on beer.  I could have done the same thing for drinks and others but I only give the case for beer. One, in the month of January to March, while Uganda Revenue Authority seems to have reported to the Minister of Finance that they actually collected Shs.3.5 billion in taxation; the reports from the two breweries show that the collection were actually shs.4.3 billion. Therefore, there is a difference of Shs.800 million. I would request the Minister of Finance to investigate that and see whether those receipts were either received or if they were not received, where did they go?  Or if the receipts were paid and not received, I think it is something to investigate. I have got receipts from those breweries payable to Uganda Revenue Authority. I also have got figures of the Revenue Authority reporting to the Minister of Finance how much was received.  

Another report of the figures which I have indicated that while from September to November, the average take in of the Government from taxation of the beer industry wash Shs.1,162.  December to March, after the reduction of taxation from 70 per cent to 30 per cent sales tax take in was Shs.1, 239 on the average per month, that gives us an average increase on the average.  An increase in three months of shs.307 million that means therefore, if we reduce taxation, it does not necessary follow that we do not reduce revenue for the government.  The facts can be shown and in fact in the case of one company, Nile Breweries, while the average for the first three months was Shs.383 million; their next average after the reduction of taxation, the average of payment was Shs.779 million.  That goes to show that it is possible to have low taxes but have higher revenues. (Applause) 

The other problem of high taxes is that you increase the level of smuggling.  It is no use sitting here and believing that the business community will be so nationalist that they will not smuggle when the prices are prohibitive. Taxes should be such that to avoid to pay is more expensive than actually to pay, because if you avoid to pay which is cheaper. (Interruption)

MR. BUTAGIRA:  Point of order.  Is it in order for the hon. Deputy Minister of Finance to sit and behave as if nothing has happened -(Laughter)- in view of the fact that hon. Tumubweine has given figures which prove that if you reduce taxation, you can collect more revenue, he is seated there keeping quiet -(Laughter and Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: He will get time to reply.  He is in order.

MR. RUKIKAIRE: Point of order.  Is it in order for the hon. Member to insinuate that the Deputy Minister is sitting and not taking note of what is happening when hon. Manzi Tumubweine has pointed out discrepancies of figures between those given by URA and those given by the Uganda Manufacturers Association or manufacturers, when I have been taking down notes and making sure that I am going to cross check them and come back with an appropriate answer.

THE CHAIRMAN:  He is quite in order, proceed please.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Mr. Chairman, the current problem -(Interruption) 

MR. KARUHANGA: Point of information. I thank hon. Manzi for giving way.  I just wanted to inform and request hon. Manzi that the allegation he has made of Shs.800 million not being acknowledged by Government but having been collected from breweries is very serious.  It is a very expensive allegation.  Since he says that he has got figures and papers to prove this, I think his evidence should be laid on the Table so that proper investigation is carried and this type of discrepancy is properly established.  If this allegation is correct, then it means that this Budget is based on wrong figures and therefore, the projection for collection of tax from beer are grossly wrong.  Therefore, we as a House, have a duty to make sure that the correct facts are given and the correct assessment of tax is therefore, imposed when we come to passing the specific provision on beer.  Thank you.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have the figures with me. I will make them available to the Minister as soon as -(Interjections)- I am still using them but as soon as I finish I will get them ready for the Minister.  I do appreciate that the problem of taxation and high taxes is also a function of capacity and utilisation, but what can we do to capacity and utilisation?  It means we must provide logistics and all facilities for manufacturers to increase their capacity utilisation because every time they produce under capacity and impose a tax it means that you are taxing on a higher per unit cost.  Therefore, you increase the tax-biting element. 

Leaving that, there is one other problem that we must tackle in this current year.  That is - is true that our tax levels are very low compared to our GDP?  We all say, yes it is, but we have got a GDP which has got two sectors.  One is a subsistence sector and the other one is a monetary sector.  If you take the years 1988,1989 to 1991/92, and you take monetary sector, the taxation element on GDP was Shs.8.4 in 1988.89, 11.1 1989/90; 12.1 1991/92, and 10.8 1992/93 that was improving.  However, you may take total GDP inclusive of the subsistence sector.  The taxation element on our GDP was 5.3 per cent in 1988/89 and 7 per cent 1991/92! Why?  Because the subsistence sector is not necessarily taxable unless we find out ways and means of taxing on the subsistence sector.  Our tax capacity is and will still remain low as percentage of total GDP.  It is, therefore, not true that we should say, we tax basing on our tax levels and on economics that are highly monetised.  Because if we do, we shall be milking the small group.  We would be creating a worse problem for them and therefore, leading to a situation where they will want to evade taxation.  The best option would be to first look for areas that can help us to monetise the economy, commercialise the economy, and be able to tax.  Now which one comes first, the chicken or an egg?  

If you increase taxes on the subsistence sector, people will not produce.  If you monetise it, people will produce.  So, I think ways and means have got to be found.  I hope the committee that will sit with Ministry of Finance will look for ways of ensuring that the subsistence sector increases production.  

The other aspect that we have got to look at -(Interruption)

MR. KASAIJA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to stand and give information regarding the taxation based on the GDP. It seems that my Colleague, hon. Manzi is misleading the House.  First of all, his argument is contradictory.  He is saying the subsistence sector contributes 5.3 per cent then the monetary sector as he was giving, 8.4 in 1990, 11.2 and so on. But if he says that we should increase taxation to the subsistence sector, he should also know that the biggest part of the subsistence sector is within agriculture.  Most of our people are peasants and it is agriculture, if you really look at our Budget, which is not being taxed heavily because it contributes 50 per cent of the GDP.  So, it is now going to be difficult if we are going to raise taxes on a sector that we are trying, first of all, to give the leaf so that it picks up.  As it picks up, then the taxation comes one; that is why you are finding exports on agriculture not being taxed.  So, the information he is giving is actually contradictory, and it is better when we know of these things.  We should give proper information.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Mr. Chairman, I wish to thank the hon. Member for giving me that information but I want to say that he did not listen to me.  I repeat for him, that if you take GDP, the monetary GDP only, the level of taxation as a percentage is high.  If you include GDP inclusive of our subsistence’s sector it is very high and therefore, reduces the level of taxation in the percentage terms.  I was proposing that the best way we can actually hit the subsistence sector and bring it into the taxable zone I do not see any contradiction because as long as the majority of producers in the economy are producing for self sustenance, and yet we value them in terms of part of GDP, then when we tax those who are in the monetary sector and relate this to the total GDP; the percentage level is very low.  It is, therefore, not possible to raise this per cent of the GDP when a bigger sector of 40 per cent is not yet in the monetary sector -(Interruption)

MR. RUKIKAIRE:  Point of information, Mr. Chairman. I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor and the House as a whole that when the hon. Minister of Finance read his speech to this House, one of the points he made very clear was to draw the attention of the Members that parallel analogies between Uganda and some of the neighbouring countries.  These countries have economic structures similar to ones including the proportional of the subsistence sector as opposed to the economy sectors and to show that although those economies were similar; the proportions of taxation being collected as proportional of GDP was much higher than it was in Uganda.  He pointed out that Kenya and Tanzania have already reached more that 14 per cent.  

So, while I accept the point that has been made by hon. Members, it is important to point out that when everything else has been said and done, the proportion of the tax collection as a percentage of our GDP is still miserably below the level.  Our entire micro-economic policy thrust is to make sure that we improve the economy so that a bigger chunk of the subsistence sector can be brought into the economy.  While that is going on, one must even at this stage, recognise the fact that what we are collecting is still much below what should be expected.

MR. KANYOMOZI: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, the Minister of State for Finance is labouring at paragraphs 80 of the Minister’s speech.  What the hon. Manzi is talking about is that there is a need, a need to structure the change, the economy so as to enable these people to collect enough parts. Now only that the countries which are compared to that paragraphs 80; if you look at farming in Kenya, it is already commercialised more than ours.  Even in Malawi, even in Tanzania, even in Ethiopia.  So, really the issues at stake are, we need to change structurally, the structure of our economy so as to enable the Government and the Revenue Authority to collect more money.  We cannot really say because we are taxing to increase the revenue in relation to the GDP just as a criterion for collecting more tax.  

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Mr. Chairman, I thank the two hon. Members for the information and I do not see any contradiction.  Why? Because, in the countries that we are compared if you look (and I wish we could have the statistics now) at the export sector of those economies as a percentage, the GDP is higher than ours.  They may have the same subsistence sector but if you have got an export sector that is higher than the export sector of ours, and if you have got commodities in that exports sector which attract taxation; you are able to have higher tax revenue. Two, if you look at the money supply and compare the money supply vis-a-vis the percentage of the total GDP, otherwise, you look at how much money is being used to move the economy forward, they you can tell how the level of commercialisation is.  You must also look at the banking sector, are these economies more banked than ours? If ours is 50 per cent not banked and the other one is 80 per cent banked, even if we have got the same subsistence sector, then they are better off because the availability of funds to loosen the ground is higher. (Interruption)

MR. OBWANGOR: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I think we should bring the Debate down to earth.  You see, we represent farmers. I come from the rural area.  We grow cotton -(Interjections)- I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor of the House that since his speech is about paragraph 78 - 79 of the Budget Speech by the Minister, we assimilated it.  What we want in the bush is this in the rural areas.  We want tools to produce the necessary things before revenue.  We want ploughs, axes, pangas that is why all those guys are complaining -(Laughter)- because some of the cotton, somebody produces, simsim - we bring here from Apac, Soroti you refuse, tell us.  The Minister of Marketing and Trade does nothing about it except merely, announcing weekly prices.  What we want is to tell us to produce and make the money flow, circulate but not just be sitting in Kampala and talk nonsense. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please. Okay, proceed, please.  Try to wind up.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Mr. Chairman, I wish to thank the hon. Member for that point of information but when I am talking of commercialization of the subsistence sector that is exactly what I mean - to bring agriculture into a commercial zone.

I wish to comment on just one thing.  On money supply, money supply has been increasing.  From March 1992, the money supply was Shs.209 billion; it increased to Shs.259 billion in March 1993.  However, the government was able to contain inflation, even with that increase in money supply.  What does that mean to us? It means that as they increase the money supply in the system, they took out goods and they did not pay for them.  If they were paying for the goods, we would not have had the level of inflation being brought to that level. May I request this Financial Year that the goods taken be paid for because the more we take out goods and do not pay for them, the more we cripple the economy.  This is because the loanable funds become less and as they become less, production falls.  

Finally, let me comment on the case for a living wage.  In 1989, there was a household survey which found out that the average consumption levels of Ugandans was Shs.53, 000 per month -(Interjection)- yes, the household survey which calculated all that we eat found that the monthly average consumption was Shs.15, 000.  Now, we have a certain half per cent increase inflation in 1992 that would give us that it is Shs.53, 000.  Is it logical therefore, to pay a salary that is less than 20,000 when you know very well that the consumption level of a human being is 70?  I think we should address the issue of a living wage because if we do not, we shall have more problems.  Although people may not embezzle because they are not well paid, they will embezzle time because they are not well paid.  Every time they embezzle time you produce less because money is partly how much manpower you put in.  

I wish to propose to whatever sectoral committee that handles finance to really address issues that will help us increase production in this economy because we must have, although there are two objectives of taxation; namely, development objective and revenue collection.  Unless the two are well balanced, we shall end up by killing the other and the moment we kill development, then even the revenue effort will not be made possible.  This can be shown that the level of poverty in the economy is probably increasing. Why?  I will give just one example of education.  If you look at the figures from 1985 to 1992 of how the population was removed from 14.2 - and I am quoting the economic indicators provided by the Minister of Planning - to 17.2 in 1992 and you look at the number of students in schools who have moved from 2.276 million to 2.59 million, the percentage has been frustrating from 16 to 17 and then back to 15.  In fact, the number of students in schools in the year 1992 was 15 per cent of the total population.  However, if you go backwards, the total population of the people who should be in school, that is the one who are between 0 or between 4 and 19, the total levels have been increasing.  That means, that we have got more people out of school as the population increase, although the number of students is increasing.  In relative terms, the number is falling and that means that levels of poverty as calculated by World Bank statistics as one of the elements of look at development is also falling.  We can do the same for energy consumption, post office consumption, and health consumption. All these seem to be falling, although in absolute terms they are increasing but in relative terms, they are falling.  

Therefore, unless we address production and that is that why I am saying, the tax - the problem that I see, the Minister has is that they must raise the money to provide the services but at the same time, they must also provide logistics to increase production.  They must find a level that actually balances the two, and I think this is where I call upon all Members in this House to really think seriously how we can increase production while at the same time not foregoing the services.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to support.

MR. ODONG (Kole County, Apac) Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for giving me this opportunity to discuss this very important agreement.  This year’s Budget has been the longest.  It took the Minister two and a half hours to read it in the Conference Centre. The Budget is well elaborated but I have been sitting down listening very carefully and you will find that people are just concentrating on the last part of the Budget.  Why?  That is taxation.  That is the part that almost everybody is talking about.  Why? The Minister of Finance should straight away know that people are concentrating on that because of non-practical economic policy envisaged in that Budget.  

It will not, therefore, be wrong if I say that the House is almost looking at the Budget as a document explaining a taxation system in Uganda.  The high graduated tax that is not even affordable by most of the people will make it very difficult for the Minister of Finance to raise this money.  I am only consoled by the statement that the Deputy Minister of Finance made yesterday, that they have not increased the lowest level of graduated tax.  It remains 6,500/=. That is what consoles me but if it was a fact of 100 per cent increment, that would have meant that the lowest tax will be 13,000/=.  Already, even the 6,500/= which is being paid, very few have afforded it and if it was so that the lowest will be 13,000; I would have asked the Minister of State for Internal Affairs to build more prisons because many of going to be arrested.  He should have concentrated on building more prisons than claiming Lake Katwe from Kasese District -(Interruption)

MR. MAYENGO:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, if the hon. Member would look through the Budget once again, he will realize that one of the priorities that have to be achieved in this Budget is the improvement of prisons.  (Laughter)

MR. ODONG: Mr. Chairman, I thank you for that and Mr. Chairman, you will realise because you are with us in the House that people have not even discussed anything about fiscal policy, monetary policy, external debts and public debts.  Nobody is bothering about the overview of 1992/93 Budget and even this year’s Budget focus because people are hurt with the levels of taxation.  

In the Background of the Budget the GDP is supposed to grow by 5 per cent and we are aware that the population growth is 2 and half per cent.  It is therefore, common sense that if that is true, if those two factors are true, then the employment opportunity should increase.  It should increase because the GDP is growing at a higher rate than the population rate.  Then the employment opportunity should increase but I am surprised that it is lowering instead.  The employment opportunity instead is lowering this a contradiction.  If these are paper figures, then let us know about that. 

Government should explain how public debts have been accommodated in this Budget.  We should understand.  UEB, National Water and Sewage Corporation have increased their tariffs and some of these have been government’s contribution.  Government has not been paying these parastatal bodies and in turn because the parastatal bodies want to exist, they have to tax the common man like us.  This is how the tariffs have been increased -(Interruption)

MR. ORYANG: Point of information. Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor and the House that National Water and Sewerage Corporation tariff increase has been forced upon it by the increasing tariff by the UEB.  While National Water and Sewage Corporation has developed what we know as block-making - block-mapping of all the towns where we have water.  National Water and Sewage Corporation knows exactly how many consumers there are and the billing is accurate.  In the case of UEB, the billing is not accurate.  There are consumers who get away without paying anything and UEB, therefore, turns to an institution like National Water Sewage Corporation that pays up to about 43 per cent of the Corporation’s operating expenses in paying UEB bills.  When that payment is made, UEB forgets the smaller consumers and continues going because those are not known.  Many of them are not known.  This is the information I wanted to pass, Mr. Chairman.

MR. ODONG: Thank you for the information. Mr. Chairman, that information actually is confirming what I am saying.  Government is not paying UEB, but UEB wants to exist. So it turned to us to increase its tariff to sustain those who are there.

Last year there was an increment of 22 per cent if I remember, in salaries of employees of Uganda.  I want to inform the Minister of Finance that up to now, some people never got that increment until when that Financial Year elapsed.  This year, the Budget is proposing 33 per cent increment and I hope that this money will be paid. I am also hoping to hear from the Minister of Education that the teachers’ salaries have been increased to 35,000/= from 6,500/=. This is an increment of 500 per cent. I do not know whether this has been accommodated in the figures that we have in the Budget or it was an announcement just to solicit votes for Constituent Assembly Elections because the truth is, in 1992/93 Budget the wage bill - that is money meant for paying salaries and wages was 65 billion.  In this Budget it is 89 billion.  I want to be assured by the Minister of Finance whether this increment for teachers’ salaries of 500 per cent has been accommodated here.  If not, I do not know, all the same, what I am saying is this.  If an increment is supposed to be that or the mini budget is supposed to be announced, it is an individual Minister to do it or the Minister of Finance or Minister of Public - if it is the Minister of Public Service, which I think it should be according to the Finance Act unless it is reviewed, or if it was reviewed last night but up to yesterday, I read it.  It is not accommodated that any Minister can do that -(Interruption)

MR. KANYOMOZI; Point of information.  Just to add on to the - to give the hon. Member more information, in paragraph 38 of the Budget Speech, in fact the Minister did indicate that he is likely to have problem. If you read that one with paragraph 37 of the same Budget Speech about containing the wage bill.  It is indicated that it appears necessary to exercise some caution in implementation of wage increases and initial wage increase should be implemented, a very conservative assumption regarding retrenchment. the Government is not going to provide more than 5 billion in total global wage in this Budget.  

So, while I am trying to give information to the hon. Member, in fact, unless something else is going to be done like increasing fees, I do not see as being able to pay 500 per cent more salaries to teachers. Once you pay teachers, the others also want to be paid more.  So, I am saying, whether the intention given in that paragraph and the proceeding paragraphs on which the wage bill is dependent on getting funds from outside up to the tune of $.15 million, I am wondering whether it was opportune even to announce that when we have been failing to pay shs.6, 000. 

MR. EKWARU: Point of information. Mr. Chairman, additional; as much as salaries are going to be increased, it also appears up-country that many teachers have not been paid up to date the Shs.6, 500.  Supposing now this one is increased, how are they going to meet it.  How is the government going to meet it?

MRS. KALEMA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that while we wait for the Minister - unfortunately, the Deputy Minister is not here to inform us whether the 35 per cent has been incorporated in the Estimates. We have 31 billion for Primary and Secondary School teachers’ salaries against the other Estimates that are much lower than that.

MR. ODONG: Okay, I thank you all who have given information.  Some of them were okay and relevant, while others live not to be desired.

While I am one of those advocates of the increment of teachers’ salary, I would like it to be practical.  The increment should be real; it should not be circumstantial.  Otherwise, if we encourage each Minister to go and announce anything anywhere, the Minister of Local Government one of these days will say; even my chiefs and RCs, their salaries have been increased by 700 per cent.  This will not help the nation at all.  You will be just deceiving the nation.

I will find it very difficult to say no about that because even in the Estimates, you cannot estimate without establishment.  I cannot say that even in my own house, you get so much pay the people who are working with us or I tell my wife to get so much pay the people who are working in my - how many people are working in my house?  It is very important.  That is establishment. So, in this Budget it is only estimates.  How many people are you paying? This is how they will go and just pay themselves those who are authentic. This also is leaving loopholes.  That is why I find it difficult to disagree with hon. Obwangor in this.

I now turn a little bit to banking. I am happy that there is retrenchment going on and on.  Now, let me not call it retrenchment.  It is actually structural read adjustment programme in the Uganda Commercial Bank.  I hope the idea is to improve on efficiency. One thing with the Uganda Commercial Bank is this.  This Bank has been overburdened because Uganda Commercial Bank being a people’s own bank, was doing almost all the donkey work and therefore, found itself unable to do anything effective.  You can imagine any Commercial Bank to be mortgage finance, an agricultural bank, development finance, a commercial bank, a building society, and a credit institution. This entire burden was accommodated by UCB.  So, rendering it ineffective, I hope during the structural adjustment it should not be only dismissing people.  It should be also improving on relevant activities or operations that any commercial bank should do.  Uganda Commercial Bank is not working in isolation.  It is like other commercial banks all over the world.  Why should it do all these irrelevant operations that would be transferred to relevant institutions? 

Therefore, I am asking the Minister of Finance since he falls there, to handle and see that there are structural adjustments not only on reducing the number of jobs for Ugandans but also for improving services of the banks.  A thing like mortgage finance should go elsewhere; agricultural banks should go elsewhere, Development Finance should have its own institutions, Building Society, now we have just enacted a law accommodating even Building Societies among the Financial Institutions.  Why should Uganda Commercial Bank operate the activities of a building society?  It should not even be just a mere credit institution.  This is a Uganda Commercial Bank and that is that.  I am also happy if the Co-operative Bank according to the Budget is going to be recapitulated and then be an agricultural bank.  I do not know whether the farmers have accepted.  If it is true, then it will be very good because we really need an Agricultural Bank.  Most of these -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN; Try to wind up, please.

MR. ODONG:  I am winding up. Most of these loans which any Commercial Bank gives - commercial banks are supposed to give short term loans.  If there were an agricultural bank, it would help the farmers more. But getting a bank loan of one year from any commercial - by one year, the farmer has not done much with it and the interest has accommodated so much that you find it is no longer useful for them. 

I wanted just to comment on hon. Rwakakooko’s statement on the subsidies that the Government gets from the Central Bank.  It is true that the profit and loss account of Bank of Uganda will reflect better in terms of profit than what it is there because of the subsidy that the government gets from the Central Bank.  If Bank of Uganda was getting some commission on the Letter of Credit which it opens for the Government, bonds which it keeps for a Government ledger free and others which I am not going to mention, then the profit and loss account will reflect a better figure on the profit side than what it is reflecting today.  Our brothers, advisers, the IMF, is also actually saying that since this august House has said that the Central Bank is going to be an autonomy, it was sharing, it was a pattern with government that is the Ministry of Finance, on matters pertaining to monetary policies.  Now that you are giving the Central Bank an authority of its own on monetary policies, it should be in practice not in theory.  Therefore, I would expect that now that the Central Bank is an autonomous body, it should be able to charge these people all these commission of bonds, ledger fees.  Otherwise, if this is not done with the inter-bank market on foreign exchange, the Central Bank is going to collapse.  

I would like to end by commenting on the National Society Security Fund.  Why should we keep this National Social Security Fund when its purpose is completely defeated because it is actually removing the little that the employees get and the money is eaten away by the employers! Why should we keep it? National Social Security Fund should be scrapped off, because it is actually a den of thieves -(Interruption)

MR. MAYENGO: Point information.  Mr. Chairman, permit me to inform the House that the National Social Security Fund is really a cumbersome institution.  for three months I have been chasing payments for my Luwero people.  Therefore, the information which the hon. Member on the Floor if giving is valid and I think those who are in charge of the National Social Security Fund should check on this.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I want to give information both the hon. Members who I think are really expressing concern but I think it is an unfair accusation on the National Social Security Fund. First, I want to say that it is one year ago when I was chairman there.  Our term ended and since that time, nobody has been appointed to be in place for one year but there is one thing that I am very sure about at the time when we were there as Members of the board.  We left the Social Security Fund on a very, very firm financial footing to the extent that they even paid money on the lost zeros that were taken away in 1987, on the general reduction of money.  That money was put on and the members have not suffered that loss of the dropping of the two zeros.  I also know that the computerization process is now in real gear.  I know that the management that we appointed is still very, very able and is doing a very good job.  Yes, indeed when I was there, the hon. Member from Luwero used to bring a number of people to me to go and make sure that they are paid and they were being paid.  I know also now that the situation has not changed.  In fact, if anything, I am sure the situation has improved.  So, the only thing we can call upon the government is to find another board to send there so that they continue this good job that our board had done.  Thank you.

MRS. OKWIR: Point of information.  I would like to inform the House that - National Social Security Fund is a very good enterprise.  We are doing very well now and we are at the moment collecting about Shs.180, 000,000 a month.  We have already started building the workers’ house which will be 20 storeys, and from that house alone, out of and employment of workers, we shall be able to raise money which will give interest to workers who would have actually given in money to the National Social Security Fund.  Such enterprises, we cannot afford scrapping them out in our system.  If anything, the ministry is so much marginalised and that is the only thing we hold on to.  If there is -(Interruption)

MR. CHAIRMAN: Order please.

MRS. OKWIR:  We are trying everything possible to improve on what has been damaged in the past and we are appealing to the Members here and others to give us support.  What we are doing now, you have already heard from hon. Elly Karuhanga that there has been a lot of improvement.  Why do you not give us a chance now because what has been damaged has been so much that we cannot improve it in a day?  Why do you not give us support and we shall do our best and I promise you, we are going to do it to the best of our ability. You give us support we shall do the rest.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Wind, up please.

MR. ODONG: I am winding up, if it has not been because of this information, I would have wound up, Mr. Chairman, (Interruption)

MR. OBWANGOR: Point of information.  I would like to give the hon. Member holding the Floor of the House who is the Deputy Minister of Labour and Social Services who has stated that that the ministry is marginalised.  Reading on page 1 in the roman figure, Vote 20, on labour, last year that is 1992/93 fiscal year it was Shs.1, 633,190,000/=.  Now this year 1,896,039,000.  So, we should not cheat the House.  We know we stated these things.  When you delay them it means that the minister has power.  We told her in the morning she could get a good deal out of the National Social Security Services, even to spread them to the 40 districts.

MR. ODONG:  Thank you very much. 

THE CHAIRMAN:  Wind up, wind up please.

MR. ODONG:  I am winding up.  Thank you very much I want to conclude by saying that the sophistication which is there in any Budget most of the common men do not understand it.  I want to explain it and sit down.  Even Members of the House do not know that it is the Public debts, over view, fiscal, monetary, public debts and all this sophistication.  What people want to know are the prices of a beer, price of sugar, transport costs, market dues - these are what actually most Ugandan want to know.  The other sophistication even Members of Parliament most of them do not know, I want to give one example and sit down.  Many of them got their salaries this month Members of this Parliament knowing very well if they had understood the Budget, no Member of this Parliament got a salary which is taxable because they get less than Shs.850, 000 a year but they have been taxed and they have taken away their cheques very happy banked them and eaten them already.  This shows that even Members here do not understand the sophistication of the Budget.  How about the common man?  I thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE (Historical Member): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I stand to support and I would like to start by saying that the reason why we are here, and what the people expect is that we represent their interests wherever, they are.  That is why people are now very much concerned about taxation.  More than that, in situation where we are dealing with national economy, after we have dealt with exciting things like ebyaffe, I think we need to be a little bit more serious in analysing what lies within this Budget.  I would like to say that since we started the Sectoral Committees, I who is not an economist, has been in a way enlightened much more than ever before about what goes on in our Budget and within our economy.  I will support and strongly recommend that the sectoral committees really work hand in hand with the relevant Ministries if this country is to develop.  I would like to give examples. 

In the past Budgets of the few things that I have observed which sometimes though unnoticed, just by the way the Budget is presented and by the way Members are not able to deliberately and consciously -- unless these Budgets.  I will just take a few examples, for the purpose of making our people who are peasants in the village and elsewhere, who do not have a chance to know what goes on with this little cake that is being distributed or utilised in the different ministries is to give them confidence that when we are here, we are scrutinising this Budget and we can speak for them.  I will take a few example of what I have observed in the Budget, simple examples.  I have looked through the Estimates of 1991/92 and there I found a few things called unallocated funds in a few areas, especially in the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning and in the Ministry of Agriculture.  I did not know what these unallocated funds really go for because some the amounts were actually huge, while other detailed amounts were being elaborated.  I looked at the one of 1992/93.  There was a new word introduced called other expenditure and then miscellaneous.  I observed that in that one, the amounts were even becoming bigger in some of the projects and some of Estimates and Votes.  If I may just use an example, these mainly appear -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Proceed, please.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. These mainly appear in the Ministry of Finance and in the Ministry of Agriculture on projects like what they call PAPSCA. For example, for last year, there was a project in the Estimates of RDP project development expenditure.  Especially Part A, there is a project called ASAT where unclassified unallocated funds were out of Shs.354, 500,000/=, Shs.124, 200,000/= went to unallocated funds.  In a similar way, there was a project in the Ministry of Agriculture for coffee farming system support where contingencies of Shs.5.7 million, Shs.1.2 million were contingent, 

We looked in this year’s Budget and a more serious situation has developed in that view. I would like the hon. Minister of Finance and the Deputy Minister this time to listen rather than quickly answer because sometimes these things should be explained.  If you turn on page - in the Estimates of Development Expenditure 1993/94 Part A RDP page (A) 12, there is one example in PAPSCA. A new word now has come up on almost all the votes called other goods and services; other goods and services, out of Shs.7, 000,000, Shs.532.3 million is other goods and services.  That is not bad enough as compared to what is coming.  

On page (a) 16 there is technical assistance 3.  Out of a total of Shs.1, 230,000/= other goods and services amounts Shs.235, 000,000/= then if you continue and look on page (A) 19,there is another project, Government Execution Unit, where out of Shs.218, 000,000/= Shs.73, 000,000 is for other goods and services. This one is coming up more in this Budget than in all the other Budgets before because in the one arrear it was very difficult even to find this contingence - other goods and services like in this particular Budget. If you go further on page (A) 21 population secretariat, out of Shs.729, 000,000/=, Shs.169, 000,000 million is other goods and services.  This is the situation where another item of Shs.5, 000,000 was being put in details.  If you continue, there is a ginnery project on page (A) 22 where out of Shs.530, 000,000/=, Shs.360, 000,000 other goods and services.  There is a cash project below that out of Shs.12, 000,000/-, Shs.4.8 is other goods and services. 

On page (A) 26, you can go on and on.  There is even one where there is completely almost, the one for technical assistance in the Ministry of Finance where 3.6 million and 3.4 is other goods and services.  So, I would like the hon. Minister really to explain what is the problem in budgeting that makes these projects not possible to elaborate.

MR. RUKIKAIRE:  Mr. Chairman, with due respect to the hon. Member holding the Floor, I must point out that the issues being raised now are issues which should rightly be raised in the Sectoral Committee where we shall be prepared with the details which you will be furnished with.  So, I would suggest that at this stage and I am saying with due respect that at that point in time, we should be able to give you the details why some of these items may have grown the way they have grown.

MR. WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Committee on Economy requested all the Ministries to send in their budgetary proposals and performance for the year that ended, that is as at 30th June 1993.  Most of the Ministries sent in their figures but the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Agriculture are some of the seven that did not send in some of those details - details of the budget as a whole. This is a very serious point which the Ministry of Finance should look at in order to give us comprehensive information because some of these figures in the budget seem to be out of place and, therefore, should be properly scrutinised.  Thank you.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. While I agree with the hon. Minister of State for Finance and Economic Planning, I was saying that the important reason why we are here is really to analyze and monitor the expenditure so that when Members go for Sectoral Committees, they should be alerted.  They are not to just look at the figures of this year, but also to check in the first budgetary estimates and see the performance of our last year’s budget.  

If you go further, hon. Members, you will find that there are some votes which were either not utilised, or removed or were misallocated without the knowledge of this House or without any good reason.  I think that one should be found more on the Sectoral Committees but what I am saying is that if we are to play our role here, we should look from a historical point of view of how our budget has been performing.  I said I found this very unusual because all the budgets we have had before have not had this expense of unallocated funds.  It is really expensive as regards to other goods and services.

On that same note, I would like to move to the question of strategy.  We have been discussing the economy in a general way and we only come here to discuss it mainly during the budget session.  We have been presented with promises in budget speeches that sometimes give a dead line that by this time, we shall have done this and this and we have also been given policy statements that give us a hope of where we are going.  

That is why the people would like to know that we are actually consistent.  We have been consistent with the strategy of the economy and I was glad to see that there was a paper which was circulated to us last year which was “That Way for our Microeconomic strategy One and then there was the way Forward, Two, Medium Term Sectoral Strategy, 1991 to 1995.”  I have been trying to look through the budget to see how consistent the budget has been in line with what was said in that statement.  If I may just briefly outline the objectives in the existing summary of The Way Forward of the Medium Term Sectoral Strategy.  In the objectives they say that the movement for this strategy is towards these objectives and implied increased emphasis on, this is on page 1, promotion of inter-sectoral linkages, especially for Agro-Processing and the use of local mineral resources in manufacturing.  I think Members should look out for how this budget has been used to accomplish that objective.  Secondly, Efficient Import Substitution.  The other day we were hearing that there is an increase in importation of even second-hand clothes when there is Jinja all around which could have been utilised.  Thirdly, efficient and sustain investment in export oriented industries and expansion of external markets.  

One of the most important things that we have not done, and I would like the economy to take serious note of, is the utilisation of the human resources and of the handicrafts that the people are making in this country which are very marketable abroad, but they have not been marketed.  I would like to give what I found in Washington. I went to one museum and I found they were selling these banana fibre rings, I think ‘Enkata.’  I do not know how they call it in English, the ones we use to carry water on our heads.  The banana fibre, heaps of them, three dollars each, as an example and most of the products were coming from one country.  

As an example, if you go to most of the countries, they have created a local industry markets which feed the outside industries.  Here you find that many women in Uganda are busy doing the same thing and they do not have the market outside or even locally here.  There is no major known crafts market around Kampala that is even involved in export and this is an area that has not been thoroughly investigated.  It has not been capitalised or helped to develop because our people are capable of doing things that are competitive at the international level while the outside world is mainly concerned with the labour costs. Our labour cost is still cheap and that is what has encouraged countries like South Korea, India and others to develop because they relied more on their human resource and developed those industries and skills which were already within their means.  

In this respect, I would like to point out the capacity of textiles that we have in this country that has not been tapped.  Hon. Wanendeya’s wife as we speak, has gone to Zimbabwe to market ‘Bikoyi’ like the one I was putting on yesterday -(Laughter)- because there is a market outside for hand produced items, hand made things.  There is a place in Europe and other developed countries for hand made things and this is done by transforming cotton into yarn using their hand-looms to a finished product and what has happened is that there is no linkage between the production of cotton, the making of the textile, the finishing of that textile and the marketing of it.  The Government has not laid emphasis on that capacity.  This can turnout into a very big export market and it is environmentally friendly.  It is not going to destroy our soil with heavy machineries, it does not require a lot of capitalization, it just needs to mobilise the people and especially the women who can benefit most. 

Another objective that was pointed in the strategy which I would like Members to look for when they are discussing the budget is the development of a viable and resilient banking sector as a source of development, etc.  I am not very good at the banking sector.  Now, in addition to developing indigenous technology, a programme to induce inflows of research and technology, I am trying to point out this that we should read these books which are programmed to see whether they are related to the real cash that we are spending.  The final one is the rehabilitation expansion and maintenance of the economic infrastructure.  I think that one is going on.

Now, to come to the Ten Point Programme.  I am talking about consistency in what we are planning and whether the budget is supporting it. Point No.5 talks of building an independent, integrated self-sustaining national economy.  An independent, economy is described as one that is able to obtain locally, and which can be transformed into goods that will be consumed locally here and which can be exported? I want to go again on to the point of cotton. There are a lot of problems of cotton because we have to compete with countries that produce their own cotton, manufacture it and transform it into finished products but they still want more and therefore, they determine the price for us.  If there should be a relationship, a deliberate effort should be made to make this cotton turn into textile here.  As we speak now, UGIL has a capacity to produce 64 tons of yarn form 18, but there is no relationship between the buying of cotton and delivery to UGIL so that it can make enough T-Shirts that can cover the whole country -(Interruption) 

MRS. SEKITOLEKO: Mr. Chairman, if I can give information in a way of strengthening what hon. Tumwine is saying.  I want to request this House to make up its mind exactly what it wants as far as cotton is concerned.  When it does we should be prepared to finance cotton ourselves basically because the biggest growers of cotton namely U.S.A. and China are also the biggest in every way.  They are not going to encourage competition. So, I had to come out clearly because you may be wondering why we are having this problem with cotton.  Cotton is important to us. Make up your mind as legislators, implementers and mobilisers about what we do and how we do it and how we finance cotton production. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Thank you very much for that information and I would like the Minister of Finance to take note of that.  In the 3.4 million project for Small Scale projects which is in this budget of which three point something is other goods and services, should be directed specifically in the area of local textile making here.  I would like to explain that there could be a good relationship between the people who are producing cotton and the manufacturers or those industries that are involved in finishing cotton like UGIL and NYTIL. I have discussed with the hon. Members around from those areas that produce cotton to see whether they can have an arrangement with UGIL.  They deliver their cotton and they are paid back in T-Shirts that can be sold to primary schools. In this way, there can be a relationship between the producer of cotton and his ability to dress the child in school because one kilo of cotton can make a T-Shirt and a half -(Interruption)

MR. NDEGE:  Mr. Chairman, I think what hon. Tumwine is raising is very important.  In the case of the T-shirts that he is talking about which were exported by UGIL, I have had the occasion of talking to UGIL. These were sold at a loss and UGIL is in financial trouble because of this.  I want to give a red signal to the Minister of Finance that I think very soon we will have to go back and rely on coffee as the only export from Uganda because of the policies that he has put in place.  It is impossible now to export anything from cotton, simsim, now to beans, to maize, to anything.  So, if you are expecting any foreign currency this year, forget about exports of non-traditional items because of the exchange rate mechanism.  When I get the chance, I will expand on that and other related factors relating to inputs. (Interruption)

MR. RWAKAKOOKO: Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. speaker on the Floor and the entire House that the problem of cotton is a function of two problems.  One is working capital. The second problem is the problem of the very, very expensive nature of textile machinery.  Right now, the textile industries in Uganda, particularly UGIL, NYTIL and ATM in Mbale, can only gin up to count 24 economically.  The world market requires count 30 at the bare minimum to count 120.  Now, the count, the higher you go the finer a material is. So, in fact even if you grew all the - the country grew cotton, you still will have the problem of adding value unless you prepared to invest in the conversion.  Now, NYTIL alone for the just upgrading up to a level where it was before, to produce 29 million metres of good count requires 40 million dollars, just for rehabilitation. This is not the machinery that can take a long time before it becomes obsolete

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: I thank the hon. Members for making my point even more important in two aspects.  One, on the point that there is not much hope in the export of cotton finished goods that are competitive with outside markets but there is a hope.  I would like to inform hon. Ndege that there is a hope.  I am  trying to provide that there is enough local market for cotton products at the finished level at that count that hon. Rwakakooko has talked here about in the form of a Kikoyi like the one I was putting on yesterday -(Laughter.) On the question of machinery, those Bikoyis are produced by a handloom that many women groups are already using in the country. It can, therefore, dress the whole nation using that material. That is why I am saying that a lot of effort should be put in transforming that capacity that we have in order to avoid expensive, uneconomical, unviable heavy machinery that we spend a lot of money on and which money is borrowed that we cannot recoup back nor can we satisfy our local or our export markets.

I would like to go on another point that is related to education.  I would have gone on the question of the local capacity but I can elaborate on it further.  On the education, I think the most important way of economic development is based with education.  When I hear people saying that teachers should be paid less or the money that has been given should not be found, what I am saying is that when I see that in the budget a lot of money is not being put in for increasing teachers wages and increasing more teachers country wide; I think our planning is faulty.  Our planning is faulty in the following way.  All of us who are here are not here because of the loans that the government got in the 1950s and in the 1960s.  We are here because of the simple savings of our parents who sacrificed to send us to schools.  The transformation that has gone through us and our relatives, who are close to us, is greater than the amount of money the government has received or the public has received or the community has received from those loans or that machinery that was imported long time ago.  

So, I would like to make a point that our biggest investment should be in the education not only of the children but also of the adults.  There is a lot of unemployment going on now.  I would like to propose that we orientate this budget.  All those unallocated funds, other goods and services should go to the adults who have ever left schools, who are not employed, to use under the trees.  This would help to train the people, the adults and the children to improve their level of understanding so that at least they can understand all other things.  

During the Heroes’ Day when we were coming from Lwamata, as we were driving along, I went observing clusters of young children.  If I may use the word ‘clusters’ to explain nine, eight, six, seven years. They were along the road and ranged between the ages of nine and three.  I could not predict their future, because I could not see them going to school out of that small plot of land that the parents had.  That cast across the whole country and I started wondering at what we can do about those children.  The most important thing that I found that we could do was just to give them education and that is the only investment they could have  -(Interruption)

MR. BUTAGIRA:  Point of information.  Thank you Mr. Chairman.  Maj. Gen Tumwine is making a very important point on education, especially literacy campaigns on literacy education.  In the past there were efforts directed at teaching adults how to read and write but right now, despite the fact that the hon. Minister concerned is seated in front of me, I have not heard any efforts from the Minister of Youth, Culture and Sports on the serious issue of literacy campaign. We are soon going into elections that are based, I am told on even identification of pictures. There is need for our people - our peasants, to be literate and a lot of effort on government should be really directed at that literacy campaign; much as we have done with mchaka mchaka. It should be done also on the same thing. (Laughter)

Dr. S. WANDIRA KAZIBWE: Thank you for allowing me to give this information. I would have hoped that the hon. Member who was giving the information would have been in a better position to know the structure of government.  The duty of adult literacy education is not with my Ministry.  My Ministry has the role of making sure the women and youth are there.  That is why you passed the bill and the Minister for Local Government through the department of community development is the one charged with adult literacy.  So, Mr. Chairman, I just hope -(Laughter)- my Colleague responsible for that is here.  He should tell us what he aims to do because I have the women and the youth there.

MR. CHEBROT: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. First of all, I would like to correct the impression that has been created by hon. Butagira that there are no education programmes going on for adults.  This is not true.  Under the Minister of Local Government, the sector for community development is engaged in adult education and this is going in the countryside.  Just a moment.  Hon Manzi will realise that this was a department that was very active in the 1970s and throughout the early 1970 up to 1980.  It was never allocated any funds to function.  It is only now that it is beginning and this year as you see from your budget, some funds have been allocated to improve the functional education of adults.  So, it is in this regard that education will start very soon.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. BUTAGIRA:  Mr. Chairman, you can see how grave the situation is, when Ministers do not know who is actually in charge of adult education -(Laughter)- I am saying this because even yesterday, when we were discussing the question of who should take care of the retrenchees, there was also a tossing of Ministries, saying it is Public Service.  Another one saying they belong to Labour and Social Welfare.  Now, sure we are seeing that somebody is saying very little money was allocated for that budget.  What I would like to say is that if Members here are asking, where is this literacy education.  Where is it indeed? Therefore, I would like to take this seriously that if anybody is going to campaign to join the CA and of all the projects you are campaigning for, and you do not campaign for literacy; adult literacy education, they are not fit to be in the Constituent Assembly. (Laughter) Why I am saying this is that-(Interruption)

MRS. MUGARURA: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to inform the hon. Member that he should not forget that an ignorant society is easy to lead but not productive.  So, if the emphasis of this government and this budget is of increased production, the two are contradictory. An ignorant population is less productive.  Two, the facilities for adult literacy are available in the rural areas.  I see community centres rotting off and if you say that the Ministry of Women in Development is in charge, it is not facilitated.  It has the minimum budget. What a contradiction! The government needs to address these issues very seriously.  Thank you.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: All I am emphasizing, Mr. Chairman, is that every -(Interruption)

MISS WEKIYA: Thank you very much Mr. Chairman.  I would like to inform the speaker on the Floor that the issue of adult literacy is not completely ignored.  If he wants to prove it, he can go to Jinja where women are even competing in adult literacy.  Thank you.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Mr. Chairman, I recognise that there are some efforts being made in different small individual areas.  We thank those who are doing it and we praise them.  But as I was saying, there should be a national policy, there should be a budget specifically put out.  There should be in this budget, not that of next year, any money that should be saved.  It should be used into turning the ignorant society into an educated society.

MR. NTIMBA: Point of information. I would like to contribute by giving information to the hon. Member on the Floor that a new education policy talks about out-of-school education that will help us in contributing towards that.  Additionally, under that, there is what is going to be called under the new policy, community service.  Through this community service, the students will be expected during their holidays especially during -(Interruption)

MR. BUTAGIRA: Point of order.  Is my hon. Friend in order to raise matters in the white paper which has not even been discussed here and made part of our national programme to refer to it that matters are being catered for in the White Paper which is not before us?  Is he in order to tell lies?

THE CHAIRMAN: He is not in order, please. (Laughter)

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Mr. Chairman, what I am proposing is that we should not theorize any more. We should put money in this budget.  If the government does not have the money, every CM should have the responsibility on a voluntary basis, using all the organisations in his constituency, be it the church, be it the mosques, be it the women organisations, to put up a policy or programme for adult education.  For the education of the children who are there, we can use the people in the villages.  We do not even have to import teachers from elsewhere.  We can fundraise for that particular aspect of education for our people.  The children have a right to demand in future -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Finish, please.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Mr. Chairman, in winding up, I would like to say that -(Interjections) Mr. Chairman, what I was saying was that I have a bigger constituency than hon. Babu that is not only covering the whole country but it has been doing a great job in point called ‘mchaka, mchaka.’  I think the few people who have been educated have been - who have been educated in the adult education of recent can only be those who have perhaps had that chance on general information.  But what I am saying is that we do not have to depend on other resources.  The resources we have in those constituencies can improve on the education of the people there.  Finally, in the same way of educating our masses in terms of simple things, even simple things like -(Interruption)- I will take the information.

THE CHAIRMAN: Finish, please.

MAJ GEN. TUMWINE: Even simple things like dress, Mr. Chairman, I am proposing that I intend to bring a Motion to discuss the question of dress in this House for the following reasons: one, is a dress that we recognise appropriate for our weather?  Is the dress that we have approved appropriate for our weather?  Is it encouraging our local production? (Laughter)  Does it suit this heated place?  But on information, I would like to tell you that I have carried out a research why people put on ties.  The reason for a tie was to cover the inner dressing for the cold areas.  That is why they had to tie up to the neck so that you do not see what is inside and those who actually did not have strange cultures of their own, to stand by themselves only adopted it.  Reason being, those countries which have had a strong culture, who have protected their cultures  -(Interruption)

DR. S. WANDIRA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to support hon. Tumwine on this issue of dress because if one is to have a visible cultural identity, they should also be seen by the way they dress.  Most times I really sympathise with our men, especially when we are out there mobilising the people. They are sweating in a three-piece outfit, very uncomfortable -(Interruptions) Mr. Chairman, protect me.  

If we are to have Ugandan men who believe in being Ugandan men and not caricatures of the white man, then we should come up with an identity in dress for our men.  I really support the cultural move which hon. Elly Tumwine has taken.  Thank you.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Mr. Chairman, finally, the last sentence is that what one dresses -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Turn to the budget, please.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Yes, Mr. Chairman, I was going to say that what we put on is related to the economy and to this budget.  Now, this budget -(Laughter)- depends on marketing and if the decision-makers do not market what is appropriate for our society, then we shall be giving wrong signals. First of all, our people cannot afford these suits.  The other day we were hearing that we are putting on Mivumba and I would like to say that, Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)

MR. SIBO:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, is the hon. Member in order to try and plead against your ruling on his dress?

THE CHAIRMAN: No, no, he is in order, please.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  You see in this House, we should tolerate all views. (Laughter) I was going to call upon Members to carry out a census within their constituencies as to how many people can afford the dresses that are being marketed in those shops.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. WASSWA NKALUBO (Nominated member): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First of all, of late, the Minister has been looking for money to finance the budget.  I am very much concerned about the new imports of cars that come in and run on our roads without proper registration.  It is not only dangerous to us, it has caused a lot of insecurity.  We have a lot of cars that come in without numbers, they are driven on our roads and where we have some numbers, you find that it is Japanese.  You cannot read Japanese.  I do not know why the Minister has permitted that.  Even if it knocks you, you cannot tell which vehicle it was.  In some cases, we see vehicles running on these roads with garage number plates turned upside down.  You can find the vehicle with only the front number.  There is no rear number and then these have been involved in some malpractice and we have seen vehicles foreign registered year in, year out.  I do not know how he can permit this when he is looking for money.  Because of our own security and the fact that he requires money as he has been impounding commodities from Busia, he should also do the same with these vehicles.  They should go to bonded warehouse and thereby we should encourage people to pay for these vehicles.  But we see people, as soon as the vehicles leave Busia, they are given to their owners and they continue driving them around the countryside.  You see them being driven over the weekends.  I do not know whether that ban that unregistered vehicles should not run after six is in force.  I do not know whether it is the Minister of Internal Affairs or the Minister of Finance but I am concerned that these vehicles which are not properly registered encourage even those which are properly registered to forge the number plates as if they have no number plates at all.

I was reading through the papers of the incident that happened last Saturday.  Now, if we all knew that unregistered vehicles do not move, at least each Ugandan would be conscious when we see one but now we do not know what policy we have in the country. 

Having said that, I am turning on another serious question of corruption. As chairman of PAC, I have presented already three reports of the findings of the committee on PAC. All the time, I am told we do not have enough time to debate these reports.  But our findings, I think if we had debated these reports, maybe we would minimize the corruption.  What are the sources of this corruption? Hon. Members, what do you not know? There is conflict of interest.  What do we mean? 

You find a big man running the Ministry, he has his own company supplying the same Ministry and then - when I mean man, I also mean a woman.  Now we find that he has to do the purchasing, he has to award the tender and he has to decide who should be paid.  Recently, the committee was considering the Ministry of Education.  There was a sad affair where the Under Secretary had his own company supplying his own Ministry and then he was the one to decide who should be paid first and he was receiving the items.  What else could you expect? He was being paid every week and maybe the genuine suppliers are still lining up.  

This conflict of interest should be stopped.  I think this committee has already recommended in one of its reports that where senior officer or an employee works, he should not be engaged in the same Ministry.  What do we not hear? We hear of big people who are having consultancy for the same Ministries and people are complaining, we need transparency.  Maybe tomorrow or next week, we are due to table an interim report of the Ministry of Education whereby one department: we have the budgets approved for that department of the Ministry of Education of 1.2 million.  Out of that Shs.800/= has not been accounted for and that department has managed to go through the year which means that we had over-budgeted for that department.  Maybe, if we had not, if we had controlled corruption, it would not have required all that amount of money.  I think it is high time we all come out to fight corruption.  I think it is high time we all came out to fight corruption.  I have seen this morning in our pigeon holes the Minister for Justice/Attorney General has proposed an amendment to the Magistrates Bill, the Statute.  Among that, he is proposing that whoever embezzles any amount above one million shillings, should not be granted bail.  I think it is necessary if we want to protect this country, to consider that amendment with speed with which we considered ebyaffe because this is also part of ebyaffe where people embezzle public funds.  This Bill was gazetted on the 26th of April but then it has not found its way here.  It has not been tabled.  Why not? When we have tabled bills that were gazetted in June, we have debated that and we are through.  Why do we not want to handle the corrupt officials? I would request that once we finish with the appropriation, we should handle the question of corruption.  It is one of the Ten-Point Programmes that NRM said we should handle.  If we are going for election next year, that point we would have handled in nine, the tenth will have remained. But time is still there, we should fight this corruption.

When we speak of corruption, you can see the parents have been paying a lot of money under PTA. I would challenge the Ministry of Education if there is any school where proper audit has ever been done.  There has not been any audit in all schools and it is only Headmaster and the chairman to decide on spending the money and they are accountable to themselves.  Now, what will happen with decentralisation? I would request and I am now happy with the Minister for Finance who has promised that he is going to improve on the audit.  - Auditor General’s Department because the Auditor General has been marginalised for a long time.  Whereas you find a sweeper in Revenue Authority getting money, the Auditor General does not get even a half of what is paid to a sweeper in the Uganda Revenue Authority and it is the Auditor General to check on Uganda Revenue Authority.  What do you expect?  

Then, there is a Friend here who says that the sweeper bribes the Auditor General.  Maybe, it is not true.  Mr. Chairman, some time last year, I was looking at the Budget.  The Minister for Energy requested this House and he had a Budget for our exploration.  It would all be in my own interest if he would come and tell us how far he has gone with the oil.  It is because of this that we find that we have been complaining of UEB, we have been complaining of this and that.  If the Minister could tell us. I heard he had read it through one of these local papers that it is no longer functioning because of insecurity but he should come and tell us why he has failed.  

When we look at the proposal of the Minister, he has proposed that with effect from August 1st, all goods coming will have to be inspected by SGS or any other inspection company.  That sounds nice but then, for those who have done International Trade, it may take a container over three months from the supplier up to here.  I would request the Minister to extend the grace period so that it covers all goods that are already in transit.  This is so that Ugandans do not get stranded at the border because once you say that all those goods - more than $.2,500 dollars have to be inspected I know that there are importers whose goods are already in the high seas, there re goods which have already arrived in Mombasa.  Now, what will happen? What are you proposing to do? Are you likely to carry out inspection at the border or it will be carried out in Nakawa?  I wish the Minister to come out clearly with what he intends to do once the goods are here and they are not inspected.  Should the importers expect them to go back?  Now, that is worrying the importers.

Another point, when we speak of SGS, of the pre-shipment inspection, we know of most of our importers that they get - they know how they get their money now that foreign exchange is liberalised.  Now, who is to determine whether a container is 2,500 or less?  You see, we should not create loopholes for those people to eat.  We should come out clearly and some of these importers, if the Minister has cared to carry out a survey, you find about then importers filling one container of different assorted items - Muchanganyiko. Now, I do not know how you can get SGS for an sorted container.  Normally, SGS can work where you have one supplier in one place, especially manufacturers.  But if you go to Dubai, you move from one shop to another, you put in pipes, pins, needless, shirts and what have you, how will it carry out the inspection?  I think we should try and come out with a clear policy.  

I have already appealed that we have goods that are already in transit.  I appeal to the Minister to extend the dead line from the 1st of August, maybe, to September.  I know we want money but let us be realistic. Sometime last year, the Minister had to inform this House that for the goods supplied to the Ministry, the Ministries are going to operate Letters of Credit.  I do not know what has happened and I do not know whether there is any Ministry where the Letters of Credit can work; because right now, we are operating a cash Budget.  

Now, with a cash Budget, you find that by the time you receive the money, you need the items.  You cannot go to the bank and what have you. By the time cash is released, you find all your accounting officers, the Permanent Secretaries, say they cannot go in other formalities.  They go straight to buy.  That is why even the Central Purchasing Corporation has been frustrated.  I do not know how we can operate - whether he can assure us that he will be releasing money in advance so that Letters of Credit can be opened.  You see, when you tell the public that say, it was your fault, you should get a letter of credit before you supply the Ministry you are not being realistic.  Can he tell us where Letters of Credit have been operated?  And most of these suppliers -(Interruption)

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: Point of information. Mr. Chairman, I want to inform hon. Nkalubo that Ministries operate Local Letters of Credit.  The difference is, if you deliver your goods you should get a cheque normally but since it has been proven that officers try to dodge suppliers and do not pay them after they have supplied. The system now in operation is that they open for you a Letter of Credit; this money is deposited with Bank of Uganda so that when you perform, you no longer have another dialogue with officers in the Ministry.  You present your Letter of Credit to your Bank and the Bank cashes with Central Bank.  So, if there is no money that will pay, there will be no Letter of Credit that will be opened.  Therefore, you are wiser not to have supplied.  

Secondly, Sir, on the issue of inspection it the interest of the people Uganda who import from outside that they get confirmation that the goods supplied to them are of the value they have paid.  Secondly, there has been also dispute on valuation. When goods arrive in Uganda, what is the value of these goods for the purpose of customs?  We have agreed that an independent party should professionally determine the value of these goods and we shall take that valuation as honest and acceptable to us for the purpose of calculating customs.  For those people whose goods have already left, there is allowance for the goods to be inspected on arrival.  So, I want these two not to be confused.  This is at the request of imports.  They have been saying, customs are arbitrarily - fixed the value.  Now, we are saying, can someone in the middle who is professionally competent determine the values so that the disputes stops?

MR. WASSWA NKALUBO: Mr. Chairman, I thank the Deputy Minister for that information. When you say about the pre-shipment inspection and you say you want an independent, competent, arbitrator, that comes to the question whether they are competent; because we have and I have the information that you can get a certificate of clean finding of any item you want to import before it is manufactured.  So, when you say that you have them, for them they are doing business.  They do not owe us a living.  Instead of increasing the cost of SGS, we should try and see whether we can improve on the inspection ourselves.  SGS is not serving this country -(Interruption)

MR. WANENDEYA: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  May I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that before 1979, we used to import our goods from overseas without them being inspected overseas.  As a result, the country used to save 1 per cent that we were paying. The whole rationale behind direct importation and inspection in our country is that whoever is exporting goods overseas, would like to continue exporting to Uganda or any country.  Therefore, this money we are giving to SGS and another company which is being formed by one of our Permanent Secretaries is just money being thrown away on the baggage.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. WASSWA NKALUBO: Mr. Chairman, I take a brief touch on the Graduated Tax issue.  I remember when the Graduated Tax was started here, in Buganda, the then Government gave out guidelines of what constituted income.  They would tell you that if you have five goats, your income is so much.  If you have so many mvule trees of so much.  This idea of leaving the wanainchi to the assessors who are looking for money will not assist this nation.  I would request the Minister since he is going to participate in sharing of this Graduated Tax, he should come out with guidelines of what we expect of one’s trees of coffee, hon. much should yield and that of cotton, how much he should expect from an acre of cotton on the average; so that we give the guidelines and the wanainchi can tell whether he has been well assessed or not.  

Otherwise, we have had complaints and I remember there was time when the Ministry of Local Government has run from Busia town to what was requested.  Much running around over the country about the assessment of this tax was done and that we can avoid if we can explain what is constituting an income. Otherwise, wanainchi will be left with these assessors who will demand and say that if you do not want to pay Shs.80, 000/=, you give me my ten, and you pay twenty.  Obviously, you will accept giving the ten and then you pay twenty but we should come out with guidelines of what constitutes an income.  What do you expect from say, an acre of eucalyptus trees?  That one will assist.  Otherwise, assessment is not done fairly and scientifically.  

I have been appealing to this House that we find time and debate the reports of PAC. It has discouraged the Members so much that having put in so much, we are expanding your own library and we have not had chance to debate the findings of PAC Committee.  Lastly, it is because of that attitude that these committees have been marginalised. If you check on the proposed Budget, they have found a way of doing away with these committees, because it is a bother.  They have suspended all the money to run these standing committees of the House.  So, soon or later, we shall advise this House that we liquidate this committees if they are not going to be facilitated.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. OPIO (Busia County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to start by thanking the Minister for Finance and Economic Planning for having achieved some of the objectives which he failed to achieve in 1992/93 Budget.  As a Backbencher, I would like to start by saying that one of our roles is to give constructive objectives and constructive criticism.  Therefore, the Minister for Planning will look at that way and stop hopefully hitting at below the belt if you are saying something that might not be palatable.

I would like to leave that alone and look at the restructuring of UCB.  If you look at the Budget page 17 in the Budget Speech, we are told that the Government intends to create a trust under which the bad debts and doubtful debts are going for the purpose of recovery.  From what I understand, this will tantamount to say that the tax payers of this country are now going again to be asked to provide money to UCB if terms of payments of the loan and in terms of paying interest rates for the people who have borrowed money and have not paid.  I am saying that this is a very, very serious suggestion which would require a separate presentation to this House so that the custodians of the tax payers money, the legislature, must be given time to look into the institutions or the persons who have borrowed the money what their assets they pledged are and why they have not paid, other than asking the legislature here to say that Shs.32.2 billion which are now bad and doubtful must therefore, be turned into a trust with the objective of the trust collecting the money.  If not collecting, therefore, we have the taxpayers again being responsible for the losses that were incurred by individuals or institutions.  I think this is very serious.  Now, we must ask, who borrowed this money and what are the aspects they pledged? Why have they not paid in order for the tax payers to be called upon to say that the 32.2 billion shillings must now be turned into bonds which the Government now will be paying interest to the UCB.  We are happy to say that there will be restructuring but to restructure by basing ourselves on the advice of people who may not be having the concern of the tax payers; who are interested on only having a clean bank when they start, that is good for their interest but not to us.  As the people who are protecting the taxpayers, we must be in position to say the tax payers can accept to pay interest and have this money if for instance, the people do not pay, the tax payer has to pay in the bank.

MR. DRANI DRADIGA:  Point of information. May I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that what appears here is at the tip of the iceberg.  Uganda Commercial Bank has a very bad history that goes even as far as 1991, when a loan was granted to Uganda Government to be administered under the Rural Farmers Scheme.  All this money ended up in individuals building houses and very little of it was given out to the farmers.  It is for Government to come out to take practical steps to ensure that all those who borrowed money from UCB, including those who were given money in chits, must pay back this money.  The Government must set up machinery to recover this money by duress.  Thank you.

MR. OPIO:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank the hon. Member for the information. But it is bad enough for the people to cheat the bank and it is worse still to tell the people - the taxpayers to come in now and even add more for those people who have stolen. 

I would like to turn to the stock exchange. In the Budget, I am grateful that the Minister of Finance and Economic Planning has the insight of the stock exchange.  I would be very happy for him to make sure that this suggestion of his is implemented hopefully in this 1993/94 Financial Year.  However, I would like to state here that the Minister of Finance and Economic Planning should provide us a safety that - because there is a company that is parading around announcing that there is a Kampala Stock Exchange.  That may be a legal entity but as far as we are concerned there is no Kampala Stock Exchange because a stock exchange must have a legal framework within which to operate.  We hear so many meeting being called for the seminars for Kampala Stock Exchange.  We accept that there was naivety hopefully in the ministry in the Attorney General’s Chambers to allow a registration of a company called Kampala Stock Exchange that is increasing the problems by parading as if we have a Kampala Stock Exchange.  We do not have a Kampala Stock Exchange.

MR. WANENDEYA: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. May I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that when it comes to the Stock Exchange, there must be a registration of an organisation just like we would have real stock exchange or the Chicago Stock Exchange or the London Stock Exchange. It is not done in isolation, so that has been put in place pending, and I am saying, pending, the legal enactment of a law protecting savings of the general public.  Maybe, hon. Ssebagereka, may add more just in case I have fallen short of what I have said.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. OPIO: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  All I am saying is that there is a company called Kampala Stock Exchange.  When we come out as a legislature to have a Stock Exchange, it may not even be Kampala Stock Exchange.  We shall give it another name but what I am trying to protect the public from, is from the point of sound companies which go around saying that there is a Kampala Stock Exchange, which cannot transact any business as far as they are concerned. So, I am only happy that the Minister of Finance is working systematically, hopefully, to establish the Stock Exchange.  There should be no conflict of interest when the Stock Exchange comes and no one should say, oh, I started mine.  Okay, you started yours; it might have been a brokerage or another company but not a Kampala Stock Exchange, Mr. Chairman.  

Another point I would like to raise is about retrenchment. Members talked about the retrenchment in general, I am going to speak about retrenchment in the army in particular.  From my Constituency alone, I have about 300 of those who have been listened to and want to lead to mobilise.  Now, the point I am raising is that the package that we have is called retotalment package.  When I talked to these people, I found out that most of them are 20 years old, 18/19.  Now, when we talk about demobilisation, we usually hope that someone is ready to take up life where he is but these are very young.  

So, I am advising that within the Ministry of Defence or within the department, we should now have a department for alternative job opportunities, retrain them because these are very young people. We are not going to hope that when they go in the community, people of 18, of 19, are really to be trained for  -(Interjection)- just I am finishing this one, so that you can give the information. The people of 19, 20, I am not criticising.  My suggestion is that there should be a section or a department where these people are trained so that when they - they do not have to go home.  They can get jobs in town or at home, other than when they go for their package. They do not fit in properly because they have not had extra contact in training, they even gaggle the little they have come with and then after that, they become a problem.  So this is what I wanted to say about these people.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Point of information.  The point the hon. Member is raising is very important.  The purpose of the mobilisation of the soldiers was to enable them to be integrated in the society.  Now, we have written - the board has written to all ministries and that is why I am appealing to the ministers who are here and all the NGOs and Members who are here, that they should look out for ways and means of integrating these young active, motivated men and women to involve them in the different projects that you have in the country.  Some of the areas have done very well. For example, in Masindi the veterans there have contacted to maintain the road from Masindi to Hoima.  This is just an example of what total projects that are run by NGOs that are run by the ministries, some of which are in this budget that could be utilised to give these veterans jobs and to integrate them in the society.  

Another example where they have been usefully utilised not the veterans but a similar example of the former rebels in Teso.  They were shifted and given some simple packages to start with and the packages were ox-ploughs and oxen.  For those who come from there.  They can tell you that it has transformed the lives of those former rebels completely.  They now have a better income than even those who had not perhaps got a package.  So, I would like to say that if you have a project like Northern Uganda Reconstruction Programme, like in the South Western Programme, like in any other project in the different ministries and NGO Programmes, we should integrate these young people.  They are a good investment.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KYALIGONZA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. speaker holding the Floor that the demobilisation of soldiers, with the retrenchment exercise that is going on, similar to that one of Civil Servants.  That one of the military is largely different because there are three categories of people who are being retrenched.  There is a group or a category of those who have voluntarily complied to be retired.  There are those who have been retired because their services are no longer required and there is that group which is going to be retrenched because of age.  Now, when the hon. speaker holding the Floor implies that they are young boys who are helpless on the streets and so on, one needs to understand the category through which this young man was retrenched.  Sometimes, he could have gone out on his own through his own application to leave the army. So, this one you need to understand it before you raise the sentiments of people to assume that soldiers are on the streets, they are helpless and so on.

MR. OPIO:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to talk with authority because I have done research in my Constituency and I have got the ages of the people.  They were deployed maybe on a bad record but we have them in society now.  What do we do with them?  I am saying being young; there should be a programme for retraining, for integrating these people.  This is a point I am raising. You may be in the village for one reason or the other but we have them.  The government must take heed in making sure that these people - and we as the people in the constituencies have the obligations to make sure that these people are integrated in the society.

There is also a problem - the minister talked about rentals, and we know that - when we debate we can come out with a solution whether the houses within will pay rent or not.  But the point I would like to raise is on rents, especially the people in Kampala.  We know that the City Council - the employees went around attaching values on houses of people in Kampala.  Now, they were doing it at the time when the expectations from the - they thought that if they had a house they will get a lot of money.  So, they attached high values on them.  Now, people are finding that the bills in terms of rates are attached to 10 per cent of rental of what they expected. For instance, Mr. Chairman, if somebody thought that from your house you could receive a half of a million shillings per month, what they did, they multiplied a half million x 12, and arrived at what they call rental value.  Then they applied 10 per cent of that as rent.  Now that is becoming a problem.  

In Kampala here, you have residents who are in ‘Luganda’ I may call them people who used to have ‘Bibanjas,’ they happen now to be in Kampala.  They are staying there as their own houses, they are not expecting rent. Nature was that they were near Kampala and they have become part of Kampala.  Now, you go and access and say that house - you can pay, may I say, 150,000 at the end of - now what it means that you multiply 150,000 x 12 apply 10 per cent and say, you lady, although your husband died it was unfortunate.  You are staying in that house, you are within Kampala, you must therefore, pay so much.  The problem we are seeing is that it is almost becoming so bad for you to have built a house in Kampala.  May be, it is better if you are outside but this is not all in Kampala because the policy now applies to all the towns. Now the issue I am raising is that we have to look into the rates instead of saying may be we have to reduce.  We also have to train people who attach values.  People who are not exports attach a very high value and it becomes very difficult to argue your case out and you end up even being given a bill that is very high.  Eventually, they say get out of your house -(Interruption) 

CAPT. BABU:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.  First and foremost, I want to correct the impression that these values were just decided by individuals.  The government valuer did these values and permission was sought from the Ministry of Lands.  Now, within the City Council itself, Sir, we have a court of appeal that if you are given a rate you do not agree with, you do go and appeal and in most cases if it is found that there was a mistake done, these rates are revised to suit you.  But a impression seems to have been created here that workers of City Council just walked out there looked at the rent and decided on the value.  That is not true, Sir.  Satisfied valuers decided the value and they are government valuers approved.

MR. OPIO: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)

MR. MUTEBI MULWANILA: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to inform the Member holding the Floor that a revaluation in Kampala and other urban centres, they should know that the rates that are charged in urban centres are meant for tax.  If you choose to pay within Kampala boundary, City Council is supposed to render you service -(interruption)- that one you can claim for and City Council is given service.  So, they will continue evaluating rates and these have got to continue being reviewed. So, when you are having property within the city and you choose to sue in that property, the City Council is not going to raise the rate because you have chosen to stay within your property.  According to the law, they will continue evaluating property and as the city grows, beware the rates are also going to grow.  Thank you.

MR. OPIO: Mr. Chairman, I have not created an impression that the City Council does not have experts.  What I am saying is that the time they were around to value, at that time where was a lot of opportunity.  Many people were saying that the houses were very valuable and therefore, the values attached were not the value as now.  I would urge that the City Council does as second valuing if it does not cost them much so that they arrive at a value which is going to be - which is going to reflect the values of this House.  But if they go along with the values they got about a year and half ago, I am sure that very many people are going to fail to pay the rates.  

I would like to say that when I talk about the CTL, in the Minister of Finance’s proposals about the CTL, he is now suggesting that we move from taxation from the source to taxation of the consumption area.  I sympathise with the minister because it is relatively easier to tax from the source.  There is a lot of work which, the Minister of Finance and Economic Planning, we do to find out in the remote areas where people are drinking beer and soda and therefore, tax them.  So, I think that the idea he had in the previous budget of taxing from the source is more likely to be more useful to him.  (Applause)

About the Revenue Authority, in my Constituency, I am very glad that the Minister of Finance has now solved some of our problems.  The pre-shipment idea is very good because the problem we were having was that there was an argument on what is on the value on the proforma invoice.  Now, we are going to have pre-shipment and according to what I read, a beach also; those goods which will arrive after and they have not gone through the pre-shipment will be inspected at the boarder or at Nakawa.  My only problem on this point is that we are now - will start with effect from 1st of August.  1st of August is starting on Sunday.  I do not know whether the Minister has got logistics for making sure that inspection take place inland on the border because we are going to have now bureaucratic problems.  Your goods must be inspected and yet there is no much power for inspection.  So, I am only urging the minister that these people to inspect are there with effect from Monday even Sunday because they even work on Sunday.  Otherwise, we shall have confusion at the border because they are saying - the law says with effect from 1st August, there must be pre-shipment to inspect your goods.  You know what it means; that will create the problem.

MRS. MARY OKER:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to inform the speaker holding the Floor and the Deputy Minister of Finance, that our Malaba or Busia border points, the customs, are in upholding state.  If you compare the Kenya side and our side, it is really embarrassing.  There is even no proper sanitation, no proper offices, or a system in place and the surrounding area is appalling.  If we are really collecting revenue, we must improve this are and make it look like a place that is conducive for working.  Since it is a border, we should be competitive with our neighbours.  Thank you very much.

MR. OPIO: Thank you hon. Member.  Good enough, we have had the President on the area and that made us have improvement on Busia border.  There has been a lot of work going on and I hope the - so we shall take him back.  Pit latrines will have to be dug but there is some improvement since the President visited the area.  I would like also to thank the minister for having waved off 18 per cent per charge on the Kenyan goods which were - well, because the imports from Kenya at that time the value was more by 18 per cent.  Now, it is waived off with a provision that should they also not behave, we shall put on.  The people were thankful to the government for having listened and removed that 18 per cent. 

I would like also to say that the people in area are cooperative since one year ago, we have the money in terms of customs rising from 400,000,000/= to 1.2 billion shillings as tax.  I hope that the minister will now make sure that the people who go to the border are more disciplined; they know that the people are well educated and they want to pay tax.  What they need is to have people who also understand their problems and when there is a law being broken, there must be laws that are already set which they should use.  Other than some of the public - your servant turning to make laws on behalf of we the legislators.  If they find that there are loopholes, we are here to make the - improve on the law so that they do not become the legislature, the executive and the judiciary.  This is creating problems because people do not understand that they have areas where they can go and where they should not.

When it comes to confiscation of the goods, it is good that the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning has decided to have a warehouse bonds in Tororo. This will ease problems of the traders because when the goods are confiscated it is easier for the people within Tororo or from Mbale to go to Mbale to see how they can get their goods out instead of coming to Kampala and try to rescue their goods. The goods were signed off that the government had given, but let us improve on the behaviour of some of the people who are posted on the border.  For instance, the last incident that is very illustrative of what I am saying; the goods were ferried on the 9th of this month. A few days ago, there has not been a seizure notice given on the goods that were received.  Now, they destroyed the pick-up and the goods.  The question now is whether the customs were keeping those goods illegally.  I am sure there will be a case in court. A point I am raising before I leave is that there must be a situation where you seize goods.  If they have a seizure note, let the goods be handled by government so that when there is a situation of that nature, we know it’s the government that is responsible for the goods or the individuals are responsible for these goods.

MR. WAGGWAWABI GWAIVU: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that there is already an outcry on the confiscation of goods. There are two organs, one are the tax officers and civilians, those when they are found smuggling, is an anti-smuggling unit.  There is an outcry from traders that when the anti-smuggling unit confiscates your goods, they do not go to any warehouse and you may never see them.

MR. OPIO: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I take the information from the last speaker, any connection with the  -(Interruption)

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I am glad the way the MP has worked with us to solve to some extent the problems on the border.  But the second remark, I want to warn people about the law.  When you smuggle goods, it means you have not declared them to customs, it means they are in this country illegally.  Therefore, if they are confiscated when you are smuggling, you lose the legal right to those goods.  So, I want to advise - because since we studied this, and people are improving.  We should go on with education and bringing Busia for the people to war.  When you declare your goods, it does not necessarily mean that you are even going to pay tax to some goods.  There is no tax on them but, please, all countries respect their boarders by respecting the entry points and officials who are on those point, if they do not behave well; then we take action as we are already doing in Tororo. Please do not encourage them that you can smuggle, then you have your goods, then you think they are going to look for you to bring the goods.  This is the case when you use the word ‘smuggling.’

MR. OPIO: Mr. Chairman, on this point, I would like also to suggest to government something for the goods that are going to be sold if they are in border town.  These goods, when a person from Kampala or from Rukungiri comes to buy a commodity from Busia, it would be normal for such a person to buy that commodity and should not face a problem at the roadblock because Busia or Malaba or Mbale are within Uganda.  So, we either have those areas as the Customs Free Zone so that when the goods are there, they are not taken so that when someone buys that commodity and gets out of Busia or Mbale; then the tax person is right to tax that goods.  But when a person has already bought a commodity and is putting it in his/her shop in Malaba or Busia, then a customer from Kampala goes to Busia and buys that commodity.  I do not see why that customer should be asked to pay the tax again at the roadblock.  I am suggesting that either we have a customs free zone where those goods come and people who come from there buy and they are taxed; or once the goods are within the border, they are not subject to tax and that will reduce I think, the confusion at the road-blocks.  

Now, we know that the importance we would like to get from - we should urge the Central Bank to decentralise as I heard from the Director of Foreign Exchange that they are going to decentralise the issuing of these forms because it is cheaper for importers from up-country to get these forms and fill them and make sure that they import instead of making trips to the Central Bank every other day to check on the forms. So, it is a good defection for the Central Bank of decentralise the issuing of these forms since we want to do business in a very organised legal way.  

I would like to tackle a little on the 50 per cent Government contribution to primary schools. Unfortunately, the Minister is not here.  But we are all very happy that the 50 per cent contribution to primary schools has been decided upon except we are not in - this money has only reached some districts. Some districts are again trying to say that the primary schools have no capacity of utilising this money and that it should be utilised at the district headquarters. This is our local problem we shall sort out.  What I am saying is that when the Minister is sending some of these documents for money, we Members of N.R.C. should get some copies so as to monitor how this money is going to the primary schools.  Otherwise, we are now in darkness.  When you go to the District Education Officer he says, ‘Oh, the money has come but we are logistics.  We shall make you know,’ and at the same time they are soliciting the primary schools to make sure that they say, we do not want to get this money directly.  We want the commodities from the District Headquarters. At the same time, we are having a problem of the primary teachers - headmasters queuing up at the District Headquarters for their cheque.  As it was being done here, is now going to be done at the local headquarters and you know what it means?  You either pay me something and I give a cheque quickly or keep on coming.  So, who would like to make sure that this cheque we know we Members of Parliament so that we can assist in -(Interruption) 

MR. MUTEBI MULWANIRA:  Point of information.  Thank you Mr. Chairman.  In the absence of my Colleagues in education, I would like to inform the Member on the Floor, that even the Ministry of Local Government. In fact, the money he is talking about it from Local Government used to circulate to us here, the references of money sent to our relative constituencies.  The only thing I will do on your behalf is to remind them that NRM Members want to receive those circular once the money has been released.  But one of the problems that we are facing in the districts is accountability.  We are withholding funds to these schools when headmasters fail to account for money they have been given and this is punishing some of the schools.  Of course, in some instances, we have heard headmasters running away from schools after failing to account.  So, I think, Members of the NRC will help the districts to make sure that accountability is carried out.  Thank you very much.

MR. OPIO (Busia County): Lastly, Mr. Chairman, I would like to say that many people have talked about tax. I wanted to just add by saying one word on tax.  My complaint about taxes on alcoholic beverage is that the taxation has been very unsystematic and inconsistent.  If you look from January 1992 to July 1993, there have been four levels of taxation. There was 50 excise and 50 sales tax.  The revenue we had nothing to compare with.  Now, we move from excise 70 to sales 30. The total revenue went slightly down from when it was 50 excise and 50 sales.  Now, we moved to again through persuasion - we moved to 50 to lower, and then the revenue went up again.  Then it has gone up by 100.  

So, the point I am trying to raise is this, as if the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning is experimenting or is listening to advice without looking at what has happened in the past.  If you have no direction from 1992 and you want to use the graph-it was low; it went up; it went down.  It went up, as if there is no thinking in this. I am saying that if you want to give the industries some directions in planning, you reduce their thinking by removing some of these uncertainties by having directions on how you are going to tax and people will plan and they will at least know what they expect. This ad-hoc as they call it, is not helping us in the planning. You will realise that even now, you have raised the excise to 100 per cent.  It has reduced the sales by a half but good enough for you as a tax man, you are realising even the same or slightly higher.  You will say okay, we have achieved because we have a tax.  What does that mean in terms of sales?  It has reduced the sales by 50 per cent.  There is going to be almost redundancy, declaration and the industry will not perform.  There must be a systematic and very educated way of arriving at these taxes.  The last one is on Makerere.  I do not know -(Interruption)

ADJOURNMENT


THE CHAIRMAN:  It is time, please. With that we have come to the end of today’s Session. We adjourn until Thursday 29th July 1993 at 2.30 p.m.


(The Council rose at 5.30 p.m. and adjourned until tomorrow Thursday 29th July 1993 at 2.30 p.m.) 

