Tuesday, 20th July, 1993

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament Buildings in Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Chairman, Moses Kigongo, in the Chair).

The Council was called to order.

MOTION

“That the National Resistance Council do resolve itself into a Committee of Supply for the consideration and approval of:

 (i) The Revised Revenue and Expenditure Estimate for the Fiscal Year 1992/93.

(ii) The Budgetary Proposals for the Fiscal Year 1993/94 Estimates of Revenue and 
      Expenditure.”

THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Mr. J. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Chairman and hon. Members, I would like to pray your indulgence to make a clarification -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please. Is it a point of information?

MR. KATO WAMBI: Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, is it in order for the Minister for Finance and Economic Planning to stand up and talk when we have no quorum here?

THE CHAIRMAN: He is not in order and therefore, we adjourn for 15 minutes.

(Adjournment for 15 minutes).

(Quorum formed).

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Mr. J. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Chairman and hon. Members, I pray your indulgence to make a clarification of a statement or statements I made in the Budget Speech before hon. Ssendaula rises to second the Motion.

Hon. Members may see at pages 33 and 34. In the paragraph 104 I made the following statement and I shall read it.  It is under the head “Corporation Tax - the Investment Code” -Paragraph 104, page 33. It reads as follows:

“2nd - the current design of the incentive system makes it very expensive relative to the benefits that can be expected from it.  The main reasons why the system is so expensive is that it currently stands as it currently stands, the tax holidays are extended not just free investment but also to additional investments made by the existing enterprises.  The principal the incentives are only meant to apply to the additional profits generated by the additional investment.  In practice, of course, it is administratively impossible to distinguish between normal profits and additional profits.  As a result of this loophole;, not only form wrong potential revenue from new investments, there is a risk that it will also corporate tax from on-going and profitable enterprises.”

So, in 106 (a) - we say, accordingly it is proposed that - the tax holiday provided under Investment Code - this is on page 34, paragraph 106.  “Accordingly it is proposed that the tax holiday provided under the Investment Code will be limited to new investment.  Henceforth, applications for incentives for additional investments will no longer be there.”

This is really a technical problem of the identification of the taxes that are liable to corporation tax for the purposes of assessment.  The problem we had in the statement I made is - how do we identify those profits, net profits which are corporation; which have an effected expansion, the additional expansion of investment? How do we identify the taxes that are subject to tax and those which are not subject to tax?

This is why I said, since we have a problem there, we do not want these taxes at all.  We are going to take away the tax holidays.   Now, I have since found a solution to this problem.  For that reason, I am going to tell the hon. Members what the solution is and I hope that is going to leave the situation as it was before the Budget Speech was read in this particular aspect.

The solution is as follows: Now under the Investment Code -investment is defined as creation of new assets; creation whether by the existing company concerned or by a new company.  Investment on the Code is defined as creation of new assets and this includes new assets by expansion, new assets by restructuring.

So, if you want to get taxes to tax, two solutions have been proposed. First, separate accounts for the additional investment in cases of the existing concerned.  They should give for tax purposes, accounts for the existing assets or old investment separate from the accounts for the additional investments; so that accounts, any profit for the Bill due to the new assets, new w investment, will not be taxed.  You see, as long as the tax holidays under the Investment Code lasts.

The only tax is going to be profit to be thus in respect of the on-going existing assets.  Separate accounts will have to be given for purposes of corporate tax assessment by the company just chosen to expand, is going to expand.  Apart from that, there may be cases where it is not possible for such separate accounts in respect of tax assessment for purposes of corporation tax to be made.  I give an example. You take, say; Nytil - Nyanza Textiles - assume that it is going to sell 7 or 8 machines for making clothes or clothing material.  Then they decide to expand by introducing one new machine.  They have got about seven plus one (7+1) It is going to be very difficult, I think for the company to save the profits which are received by the company during this operation year, one eighth (1/8) of what goes to this particular machine.  It may be difficult.  

So, in those cases we are saying, we shall apply protata system.  That is to say, supposing the existing assets are shs.100 million; then the company expands by separating for a new plant of shs.500 million.  The total assets come to shs.1,500 million. Then put the case that the company now makes a total of shs. 800 million profits.  What are you going to tax? A prorata, a portion of it.  So, for purposes of taxation, the shs.800 million profits will be divided as to the ration held million; and then the one will be apportioned to the old investment.  The new one is going to be taxed.  That is what I mean by my prorata investment.  This then restores the situation as it was in respect to additional investments as they are under the Investment Code provided that two things are done by the company and provided of course, the size of the investment in terms of how much answers the specifications made under the Investment Code. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.  Now, I think I give hon. Ssendaula for seconding the Motion.  (Interjection)- I thought the Motion was moved last time.  I just read it last time.

Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the Budgetary Proposals for the Fiscal Year 1993/94 Estimates for Revenue and Expenditure be discussed.

THE DEPUTY MINISTER OF INDUSTRY, COOPERATIVES AND MARKETING (Mr. G. Ssendaula): Seconded.

Mr. Chairman, hon. Members, as you may recall on Friday, 25th June, 1993 the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Planning moved a Motion seeking for this House to resolve itself into a Committee of Supply for the consideration and approval of:

(i) The Revised Revenue and expenditure Estimates for the Fiscal Year 1992/93.

 (ii) The Budgetary Proposals for the Fiscal Year 1993/94 Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure.

I rise, therefore, to second and support that Motion.  While seconding this Motion, I would like to draw the attention of the hon. Members to the fact that since the NRM assumed state power in 1986, and the budgets have been mainly, on rehabilitation.  They have all been geared and tailored to rehabilitation.  I feel like many of you and hope that you will support me so that we have more or less complete rehabilitation phase. (Laughter) 

When I say that have nearly - that gives room and allowance for other areas where rehabilitation may have not been completed and of course in Masaka, we have parts that are also not completed.

The 1993/94 Budgetary Proposals are now addressing the issue of development.  The whole drawing up of the budget is geared and looking forward to development.  The fact that it has taken us nearly eight years to at least work on reconstruction (and of course even leave the dissatisfaction within the House as a reaction that I was getting when I mentioned that we have nearly completed rehabilitation,) it is a testimony or proof of the measure of the destruction to which our economy was subjected by the past regimes.  Therefore, the 1993/94 budget in a sense represents our first step to the long match to development after an interruption of nearly three decades.  The government has already put in place the necessary macro-economic measures for supporting the development process.  

Of course, we have been assisted by a number of organisations to put the Macro-economic policies and measures in place.  As you have been hearing and getting reports, reading about reports, most organisations that have supported us in that measure or in that move are very satisfied that we are moving forward effectively.  I support the overall objective of the budget to sustain the real Growth Domestic Product, growth rate of five per cent per annum and it will reduce the rate of inflation to below eight per cent and consolidate official foreign exchange reserves by increasing the Central Bank Foreign Exchange Currency Holding to four months of imports from the current level of three months imports.

As far as inflation is concerned, I think we have gone a long way and this is clearly demonstrated in the Background to the Budget.  Turn to the Background to the Budget, page 1, Article 4.  You will see, over view of the 1992/93.  One of the major achievements in 1992/93 Fiscal Year has been the significant reduction on the level of inflation from 65.1 per cent per annum in May 1992 to 1.3 per cent in 12 months of May 1993, minus.

Thirdly, I support the emphasis based on the well being of the masses through increased expenditure on the social service sector.  This is clearly demonstrated in the emphasis that has been put on the areas of education.  We start with primary education - only yesterday I heard on the radio that the salaries of the teachers of primary schools have been increased to 35,000/=.  This by no means - automatically, that will go a long way in assisting the parents towards the Parents Teachers Association contribution.  (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Proceed, please.

MR. SSENDAULA: Before I was interrupted, I said that I feel that the increase of salary to that level will certainly assist on the colossal sum of money parents have been paying or contributing to Parent Teachers Association so as to supplement the salaries of teachers.  Then the support to the Primary Health Care, Feeder Roads -(Interruption)

MR. WANENDEYA (Budadiri, Mbale): Point of order. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Is it in order, Mr. Chairman, for the hon. Deputy Minister to give us statistics which are in that Background to the whereas Mr. Peter Hognison who is a Consultant for the World Bank on Rehabilitation on Statistics Department does not go right to the villages in Uganda so as to get the correct statistics.  Is it, therefore, in order, Mr. Chairman?

THE CHAIRMAN:  He is quite in order.  Proceed, please. (Laughter)

MR. SSENDAULA: Hon. Members, I think it is not very appropriate for me in my capacity as Minister to know much about the gentleman has is talking about as far as these statistics are concerned.  These are properly vetted statistics and we submit them to all the organisations that have given us support and nobody has come out to dispute them.  I hope we should refrain from promotion views that are outside the normal source of information.

Once again before I was interrupted, I was looking at the support given by this budget to the social service sector.  I was looking at the areas like the Extension to the Agricultural Research through the support of NARO, an organisation that is bound to help us in researching into our local seeds and improve on the skills for the farmer.  The organisation also supports water supply in the rural areas by - of course this is being done through this budget as well as support from other good Samaritans who have come to our assistance.  You have programmes all over the place to promote the digging of boreholes or protection of springs.  In my opinion, the development of the vital human resource is a pre-requisite for the overall development of the economy.

Fourthly, I am particularly pleased to note that the offices of the Attorney General and Inspector General of Government as well as Judiciary and Police will be facilitated to a greater extent than in the past.  That is in carrying out their responsibility especially with regards to fighting corruption and embezzlement of public funds. (Applause) These two concerns - in our society have to be fought very seriously and uprooted.  Otherwise, we would have no moral grounds for demanding more sacrifices from our people through increased taxes.  I am convinced that Ugandans will be happy to pay higher taxes provided that they would be assured that the money so collected will be utilised fully for the common good and not for the personal benefit of a few unscrupulous embezzlers.  

The decision to base expenditure decisions on realistic projection of prospective Budget resources covers or moves us from the previous budgets which made it almost impossible for ministries to plan with any certainty.  The unplanned and unpredictable variations in allocation to ministries as a result of cashflow consequent has brought my Ministry to virtual standstill as we find it extremely difficult to enter into contractual obligation which we might be able to meet through no thought of our own.  We find a problem that unless we know how much money is available, running a Ministry becomes a problem but with this Budget, we are sure that we only move in and enter an obligation when we know that there is a Budgetary provision for that particular obligation.  My Ministry welcomes the Institutional reforms that are being undertaken to strengthen Financial Institutions in the country through the Financial Sector Adjustment Credit.  

One of the major consequences faced by our manufacturers, businessmen and businesswomen is lack of adequate credit facilities for their operations.  It is my sincere hope that a revitalized financial sector will be in position to effectively mobilise resources to support increased economic activities, especially, now that government has brought down inflation drastically.  In this connection, I am pleased to note that the Cooperative Bank will not only benefit from the restructuring programme but will also be substantially capitalised.  A revitalised Cooperative Bank has an important role to play in the economy through its financial support of the Cooperative movement; a movement that is playing a crucial role in liberalisation of marketing of our traditional cash crops.  The cooperative movement with its nationwide network of primary societies, store, ginning and processing facilities, as well as an extensive services sector providing for the procurement and distribution of spares, agricultural inputs, transport through the Transport Union, clearing agent through the Transport Union and forwarding Insurance, Computer Service is an idle development partner for government and needs to be supported.  

Therefore, the Cooperative Bank benefits from the proposed restructuring and provision of capital will benefit the people at grassroots.  My Ministry is working hand in hand with Uganda Cooperative Alliance, the APEX Movement to strengthen the managerial capacity within them movement so as to improve on our own performance.  High on our Agenda is insuring that the management of Unions in the societies is fully accountable to the Members through the holding of Annual General Meetings promptly and at this juncture, I wish to appeal to the hon. Members that you are entitled and we consider you to be ex-officio members to meetings of Unions that operate within your areas.  If you are going to check on accountability to the general membership at grassroots level, then it is your duty as members to usually find time to participate; to find time and attend General Meetings at which the Cooperative Unions provide accountability to their Membership at grassroots.   

I have already made reference to the macro-economic measures taken by government in order to create an environment conducive for investments and the development of our economy.  One of these measures which is closely associated with my ministry is the liberalisation of trade and marketing.  Export and Import certifications have already been streamlined and simplified and will be abolished as soon as Uganda Revenue Authority acquires the capacity of providing my Ministry with all the data we require for the monitoring of trade so that trade can be very free for people who want to import and export.

With regards to agricultural produce, the marketing of both coffee and cereals has been freely liberalised and the farmers are reaping the accruing benefits through prompt payments of their crops.  I am particularly referring, if the hon. Members could bear with me, I was in this respect only referring to coffee and cereals.  I have not moved to other crops where possibly we may be having a problem.  What I am stating clearly here is that the competition in the coffee sub-sector is so acute that coffee processors and exporters are buying coffee while it is still on the coffee trees.  It is the same with beans or maize. The produce dealers, some of whom are hon. Members of this House can testify on this matter. Anything they are looking for, they are looking for beans, they are looking for maize because we freely liberalised the cereals - they are buying and exporting.  Recently, the marketing of simsim ran into some difficulties when a neighbouring country that produces simsim dumped a lot of simsim on the international market.  However, we consider this to be a temporary setback.

The Cotton Development Organisation Bill will soon be tabled before this august House.  As you may recall, in the last session I tabled for Reading for the First Time; The Cotton Development Organisation Bill. But as you are aware of the procedures that govern this House, if a Bill is not Read for a Second Time and the Session expires, then it expires with that Session.  

So, I will be coming in the very near future to read for the first time the Cotton Development Organisation Bill. The Bill seeks to freely liberalise the cotton sub-sector so the problems currently faced by farmers due to lack of adequate crop finance can be solved once and for all.  I know and I sincerely apologise that we have not been very, very effective on cotton because this is a sub-sector that was dominated and monopolised by the Cooperative Movement.  The Cooperative Movement owns the ginneries in the rural areas and it is the Cooperative Movement to solicit for crop finance for cotton.  But there have been problems in securing crop finance for cotton and for that, we are extremely sorry.  However, we consider that when we bring the Bill here to liberalise the cotton sub-sector and we get your support which I am sure you will all give me particularly the hon. Members who represent areas that produce cotton, I am sure we shall have solved the problems on cotton and we will be at par on all the produce that we are expected to be handling.

As I mentioned earlier, to secure adequate crop finance for this year’s cotton crop has been a source of disappointment for my Ministry.  The answer lies in the fully liberalised industry so that those who have the money can invest in the production, ginning, marketing of lint with minimum delay in paying farmers for their cotton.

As stated by the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Planning in his Budget Speech and this I quote, page 37, Article 114,  “The major obstacle encountered by manufacturers trying to establish competitive enterprises are:  
    1. Inadequate infrastructure and basic utilities. 
    2. Inadequate investment involvement of Uganda’s human resources through poor 
           education and health facilities and; 
     3. The cost of working capital.”  End of quote.

To the extent that the 1993/94 Budget attempts to address these issues, it deserves our full support.  Because as you read further when you have time, you will see that stage line by line the Minister in his Budget address addresses himself to all these problems.  Naturally, I think that will be an issue of the past if as and when we effectively follow the budget as presented by the Minister of Finance and Economic Planning.

In conclusion, therefore, I support and second the Motion proposed by the hon. Minister of Finance and Economic Planning.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  The Debate is now open. 

MR. OBWANGOR (Soroti): Mr. Chairman, thank you so much.  The last hon. speaker, the Deputy Minister of Industry, Commerce and Cooperatives and Marketing gave us what he thinks in his Ministry about cotton, cooperatives and coffee and what not.  The House we are talking of the national budget not in isolation.  What is it in a national budget? We have been told in this book, page 5 - to the effect that the growth of economy, the average growth is 7.0 per cent.  Now what does that mean? The rule, 8 years or whatever it maybe, we have been in power and for those of us who have been 7 years in this House; and he has told us that; on a note, now winding up, the programme of Recovery; so the economy will be on take off.  But,  I think it is a cheating of the collective wisdom of the House.  Why? Because our agriculture; if you read page 5 of this book, Background here; anybody with a mechanism of economics and accountancy will see to it that there is now just under review 1992/93, we increase our agricultural production which is the basis, the main backbone of our economy.  We produce, I do not know, maybe, Shs.165 million. Very little, about shs.165 million of last year.  We are not going at all, we are not moving.  Alright, what did you do?  What did agriculture produce? 9.2, that means that we have been idle.  Why? Because Ministers do not go out to say their policies, except for the hon. Prime Minister who goes to Apac, Lira and Gulu. (Laughter) 

You will recollect particularly, those of us who are lawyers, you will realise in September, 1989 -(Interjection)- Yes, you can be a lawyer; anybody can be a lawyer.  You are a lawyer. (Laughter) You see, we gave ourselves that is this august House which is the watchdog of the economy, we gave ourselves under Statute 9 of 1989, an Interim period to give the NRM a longer life and also ourselves in the NRC a longer life.  Now, we gave this programme to ourselves in all honesty that is to say, the making of a Draft Constitution. If I may inform the House that education of the Constitution, implementation, policy development, and prisons service development, are all enforcements of the Judiciary of which my hon. Colleague and gallant friend, the hon. Attorney General and I am glad that he is here, the Minister of Justice, that he should hear that we want justice to be dispensed at all times in all courts.  At least 650 courts should be visited throughout the land of Uganda; not just to sit idle in Kampala.  Please go to my gombolola, to my place and see whether the cases had been carried.  You must ensure that those litigants who are grief must receive justice and courts must be working throughout the country on working days and not to just idle here in Kampala.  These people have no papers even I always prepare these courts when I go there. (Interruption)

MR. AKURE (Jie, Kotido): Point of information. Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that even in some districts we do not have magistrates.  There are only magistrates within Kampala.

MR. OBWANGOR: Mr. Chairman, I thank him for his inform because, why I refer to as no courts - because the deprivation of justice is deprivation of government.  If the law courts are not working, we are just increasing - and talking freely now - this is through experience - Uganda is likely to have two gentlemen, Minister of Justice and Attorney General and Minister of -(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Abu Mayanja): I am grateful to the hon. Member that he has not paid me due for task but he has given ways and enabled me to give him this information.  I am not aware of any place in Uganda where there are no courts.  There are courts and there are the personnel.  The personnel is being increased.  When I became the Attorney General, the first Motion I moved in this House was to increase the number of High Court Judges - was to request the House to increase the number of High court Judges from about 10 to 25.  That was done.  Of course, we have now got about 22 and the people are difficult to find but even if it is difficult, it is a struggle.  It is, therefore, not fair to come and inform the House and the country that there is no justice, there is no administration of justice. There is administration of justice subject to the constraints, the financial and other constraints that are all branches of government experience, Mr. Chairman.

MR. OBWANGOR: Mr. Chairman, I do not accept that explanation because I thoroughly know this.  I am not a young boy of yesterday.  I am acquainted to what is happening in law courts, particularly, in my area in Soroti.  And I would like to inform the hon. Minister of Justice who is now walking out to the effect that, it is very, very important.  We may laugh but in all seriousness, happiness, the peace we talk about the peace we talk about here and you demand that you want your allowances, coming here honourably when where is peace and peace is brought about through the operation of the law courts, the Army, the Police.  Therefore, Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)

MR. ORYANG:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to give the hon. Member a piece of information that I found in Gulu over the last weeks.  I met the Regional Police Commander complaining because the High Court was blaming the Police for not bringing witnesses to the High Court.  This was over the issue of fuel.  We do not know who is supposed to supply fuel for collecting witnesses.  Is it the High Court or is it the Police, or is it the complaints?  Because during that week, out of 32 cases lying before the High Court, only five had been attended to due to the difficulty of collecting witnesses.  So, I think there is something here.  Whether there is not enough allocation for the Judiciary to transport witnesses and if it is the Police to do it, there would not have been that complaint from the Regional police Commander to the effect that they were not given an allocation to transport witnesses.  They have their own allocation for the regional use and not for the High Court.  We want to know who is responsible.

MR. OBWANGOR:  Mr. Chairman, that is eloquent support for me.  Now, I would like also to tell the hon. Minister of Justice and Attorney General, though he is not there, that we need good conditions in the Judiciary, particularly among the Judiciary offices called the Magistrates.  Recently, you read in the newspapers over, common paper The New Vision, when Magistrates were complaining.  So it cannot be for those people who are adults to complain without a cause.  Therefore, it is important that we must use all the necessary available resources to improve Judiciary like other Ministries.  

When I stated that Statute 9 of 1989, we gave ourselves, we decreed ourselves for continuation of the NRM and NRC here, we gave the last item that I was mentioning, the question of road rehabilitation which the hon. Seconder of the Motion mentioned.  But, which roads they do not - this Government particularly the Ministry of Local Government through which money should go to the region.  He does not make an annual report.  How do we judge that rehabilitation has taken place? Subject to correction, I wish to challenge the Minister of Local Government through whom I believe money from overseas has got and supposed to be injected or pumped in the rural areas.  I do not think - how much was given to Soroti so that I can follow it up; how much? To Soroti District, how much? The roads are poor, Soroti itself, you must have gone there when the Pope was there, for some of those who went there. 

Only when the Pope came, that a sprinkling of this murram was done.  Is that development? Are those the roads?  What are the engineers doing?  A direct labour through our engineers, what are they doing?  We are waiting for foreigners to come from Europe to come and do this job for us, the same with High Courts, now that the Minister of Justice and the Attorney General has come  -(Laughter)- why? 

You see we import these lawyers from overseas, it is excellent in principle but it cheats us; we stop our own son and daughters from discharging the honourable duty of dispensing justice in this country.  Those lawyers there, they must have learnt the Indian laws and British laws, but they have no feeling, innermost feeling about the Uganda type of what we call justice.  They have got to learn the law.  It takes them six months and they are human beings.  So, the Attorney General cannot tell us that he knows all about this and that we do not know.  We know, in our collective wisdom here  -(Interruption)

MR. A.K. MAYANJA: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I also thank hon. Obwangor of this opportunity.  Let me inform the House that we employ expatriate charges not as a matter of preference.  We do so because we are not able get suitably qualified Ugandans to undertake these tasks.  We have approached - maybe, we shall advertise, although it is not within the tradition to advertise for the bench but maybe, we shall even break that tradition but I have approached personally, through the Law society in any way, people, other members of Judicial Service Commission, people whom we think - they are here, they are here Ugandans who are qualified to be members of the bench I would like to appeal to other spirit patriots to come forward and serve the country for a limited length of time as I informed the House last time  that instead of coming to be appointed until they are 65, we should consider a scheme whereby they can serve for 3 years as a national service.  But until Ugandans are prepared to leave their lucrative private practices and come to the bench and serve on the terms which are available and which we are improving, we shall have no option but to rely on expatriate support.

MR. OBWANGOR: Mr. Chairman, to answer that -(Interjection.) Let me finish, so that I can go on properly into the Budget.  It is like this:  We in Kampala, when I say; we, including hon. Member of this House, there is always quarrelling in Mengo Court and a Magistrate being suspended and what not.  They should be consistency and constancy of having, the Magistrates who are there, who will understand the work - what is the solution?  The solution is this, equal work for equal pay no segregation, not discrimination.  That is the only thing, nothing else.  We have the money except that - is not even allocated.  Of course, we are here.  Politics is creative.  We can create money by thinking mazima genyini. (Laughter)  

Therefore, another item that we have ourselves was rehabilitation of basic infrastructure in the schools, health centres, etc.  In the North and North East, I was just in Soroti recently, and it has not taken off.  There is somebody appointed there, but he is doing nothing, Northern rehabilitation has not taken off whether they have no money or manpower resources; I do not know.  Now, time is running, next year it is elections.  When will you do it - and it is the first programme - when will you do it?  The hon. Mover, when will you do it? You are the man who is both the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Economic Development.  You are wearing two hats.  But in my view, if I were the President allocating portfolio, I would not put the Ministry of Economical Development into the Ministry of Finance.  Why? Because a Ministry of Finance is often conservative.  It does not want or like to spend. (Laughter)  

For example now, here the Minister is starving some of us, Members of Parliament - it becomes silly when you go around the pubs here, you will meet your people from your Constituency, for those of us who were elected or for those nominated, or for those Historical Members, whom people say that we are badoddo. (Laughter) That is possible I am starting also from our own House here.  Let us put ourselves right and also going into our toilets here.  I do not know what for the ladies over there, you get drums there will papers thrown about.  Foreigners come here and this is a House of the first - the heart of the nation where every visitor would visit.  What is Leader of Government Business doing?  When I was a Leader of Government Business, the hon. Minister of Justice and Attorney General knows, here was posh and clean.  Everyone. (Laughter)

Let me go to Government Finances and Economic Stability. Economic Stability and Government Finances, we can get them plentifully, I submit, it we have peace.  Secondly, if we were hard workers and work efficiently and we go to the office at right time, 8.00 O’clock not 10.00 O’clock as we observe those of you in Government or even Minister.  We must go - if we have decreed that official hours must be 8.00 o’clock, it is 8.00 o’clock.  I experienced in the Uganda Constitution Commission as an old man.  I could be there by the half past eight and the young blood ‘baana bbana’Makerere, namaliriza Makerere,’ they do come. You see, this is not good. Therefore, money is there but it depends on how we work.  For example, over 183 counties in Uganda put 173 Agricultural Officers, Veterinary Officers, put one also in Usuk, Kapelebyong, Amuria that are granaries of production.  Go to Kasese, with plentiful of these passion fruits to pick out - nothing.  Then we say here is no money.  Money can only come when we work efficiently and on time.  

Government spending; the Government of today is not controlled.  Why? Because first of all, fundamental this House is weak because it is not the right watchdog.  How many Motions, myself inclusive, how many Motions have we moved?  If we find the Ministries, for example, over and above spending more money through an indirect way of giving the Supplementary Estimates, where estimates was 2 billion it becomes 8 billion, is that not a shame?  We only put the money to a few people there or to people in the Government not pumping money into the rural areas to develop our agriculture, to develop the economy so that people can reproduce to say overseas.  Do not spend money idly here just running discos around Kampala here. (Laughter) 

Now, spending, please.  The hon. Minister, the Mover, you are an economist and a lawyer; eliminate corruption and embezzlement.  Why?  Section 78 of the Code 106, has the authority to stop corruption. The law known as 1970 provides on Act 8 of Corruption.  It is there idle in a Statute Book untouched by the Minister of Internal Affairs who wants Lake Katwe. (Laughter) 
 
Finally but not least, in this House, we passed the Leadership Code, Statute of Conduct.  We have shelved it and I am told, subject to correction.  That the Minister of Justice and the Attorney General said that there is no money.  How on earth do we have to sit here and spend money to make a law - say Shs. 5 million a day and you make that law rubbish by just helping one Ministry to keep the law as. Is this not a shame?  This House, the august House, the sole in the nation to make the law and Government and yet these are the learned hon. Attorney General.  He does this and he shelves.  He said that it is alright, you want this administration committee.  I told you I was here and I think I was a prophet when I said do not choose a committee to administer the Leadership Code of Conduct.  Give it to the existing machinery; e.g. IGG, Inspector General of Government or Police.  It must be the police who are effective enough through the CID work and what not, who should be in a position to administer that law and not just the law made by Parliament and put on a shelf.  

Why I have government spending because here in this House, there are two schools. There is that school which wants and only those people, for example, the Army. The Army must get a big chunk.  Secondly, the NRM Secretariat must get a chunk for propaganda and not for production.  This is a challenge to this House.  We involve large sums to the mobilization vote for the NRM Secretariat, producing nothing, not even books to give to the people.  I have been there.  When I was an RC III, I used - I said, get me books.  They told me to buy a book namely Statute 9 of 1987 as amended and I had to buy it with my own money.  That type of Government is this?  Your own offices, you do not have books, legal books that have policy, what type of Government is this?  Your own offices, you do not have books, legal books that have policy, what type of Government is this? (Laughter)  Therefore, we spend in order to have peace and that security -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Mr. Obwangor, please wind up, wind up.

MR. OBWANGOR:  Now, importance of taxation in the national economy.  You see, we all need to be taxed but man always likes the fruit or the resources of work. We can have taxation provided we get services to the people, people will be willing.  None of us will go to Soroti to talk to the people there that, oh, the Minister of Finance, hon. Nkangi has increased the graduated tax from whatever it maybe, to 100.  In fact, Mr. Nkangi doe not go to Soroti or even to Kisoro or even outside Nkonkonjeru. (Laughter)

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Point of information. Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member that I have been as far as Arua and recently, I was in Soroti and about a month ago, I was in Bundibugyo.

MR. OBWANGOR:  Mr. Chairman, that was not under his initiative only when His Excellency the President happens to be there and travels with. (Laughter) Therefore, the importance of taxation, we all accept as reasonable men and women but do people get the services?  For example, Makerere here just under one office, people are fighting there for just ball-pens and stationary.  Go to various schools, go to hospitals, there are no drugs are we not to blame?  Why have we no sense of shame.  If we tax people without services? Moreover, it is a famous saying that no taxation without representation.  Equally, we are representing those people there.  Let us do our level best to see that the current Government under the broad-based Government makes a real good effort in our corporation and coordination to pump services, medicine and to schools, the money.  Now the 50 per cent should be curbed.  Why? 

You see, why 50 per cent should be curbed is this. Our Minister of Finance and Economic Development, the Minister of Local Government, the Minister of Commerce and Trade, the Minister of Education, the Minister of Labour, and Social Affairs, the Minister of Health, the Minister of Works, Transport and Communication, the Ministers of Agriculture who hardly is not here, who should be with us because we are the people who can sell this policy. So, therefore, agriculture’s inefficiency - these are the people who would talk about the costing because our costing system is faulty.  How can a commodity landing C.I.S. price in Kampala here, it is increasing by 400 per cent on C.I.S. price and these Ministers are sitting there. 

These are the Ministers who would control to advise the Minister of Finance and Economic Development the steps of costing the education why because school fees, the Minister of Labour because of Social services, the Minister of Agriculture because of commodity prices, the Minister of Health because prices in drugs, a Minister of Fisheries because of a price of an animal.  They cannot come and talk my animal say talk about Shs.100, 000.  How? Not of us the Bahima, the Bateso, the Karimojong; that is not the right price we want. You people, you want when we come to Kampala here. How many Shs.400, 000 and you want the cow, my cow?  And you want my cow just a quarter price of that, oh no.  So these are the Ministers who should speak together among themselves because they know the economy - the areas, then design the best card for the commodity and take them to the Cabinet, and the Cabinet.... this House elected, appointed the provision economy.  I have not seen the impact.  I am not an economist but have studied economics.  I have not seen the impact. What are they doing all the Members on the Board? What really have they given to the Government?         

MR. WANENDEYA: Point of information.  May I inform the hon. Member holding the floor, that the committee on Economy for which I am a member, has produced reports but invaluably, the government does not take in the recommendations we put forward.  Secondly, you will find that we wanted the performance of the Budget to be put forward prior to debating the Budgeted proposals but in some ministries; this has not been coming including one from the Ministry of Finance in particular.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. OBWANGOR: Mr. Chairman, I know that you could talk for long on this matter but I think I have given my point of urgency, honesty, and production so that we need - and pumps development in these rural areas for the economy arrive.  When I mentioned 173 counties in Uganda, whereas these are agricultural reliers, so the Ministry of Agriculture who should go there and with us, our system we can increase more production.  

Then finally, the Minister for Finance always begs us that they cannot buy cotton, they cannot buy coffee because there is no money.  Now, they have not allocated it, government selling occurs when there is - pressurise by the politicians, and that is what I am telling my Colleagues, if we do not pressurise the Minister for Finance, who tends to be conservative, he will get no where.  (Laughter) Therefore, what I would like to seek, the Minister to assist cotton producers, to assist coffee producers, go back to our 60s, we had 69 items by which cotton warrant producers - were producing this so that, these -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: It is time, please.

MR. RUTAROH (Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I rise to support the Motion.  I wish to thank the Minister for the Budget proposals that he has put forward.  I would like also to express the fear that these proposals may never be realised because of several things that are not in place.  While everybody does accept taxation because they expect the taxation to be as high as is indicated in the Budget proposals.  The first one is what concerns the majority of Ugandans.  Those are the people who pay graduated tax where the increase in the graduated tax was 100 per cent, and I am willing to beat that the vast majority cannot afford the present minimum as suggested by the Minister of 13,000/- mainly in the rural areas.  If it is to do with the upper most brackets where the seal is put at 80,000, I am willing to support because it was very, very unfair for a man who owns 40 heads of cattle to pay Shs.40, 000 and a man of 200 or 300 cattle pay Shs.40, 000 as well.  

So, I am willing to accept that the range be increased from what it was as a minimum of Shs.6, 000, 500 to Shs. 80, 000 but not the minimum to remain at Shs.13, 000.  At that rate, I would like to advise at least for the area where I come from, you would need to on the expansion of prisons, the increase on the number of policemen.  And, of course, the prisons service men because many people will not be able to afford that tax.  My appeal to the Minister right away is to revise the minimum tax payable; that is graduated tax. 

DR. KARUHANGA: Point of information.  That you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank hon. Rutaroh for giving way. When people are talking about this maximum, they always refer to cattle keeping people being able to pay the maximum, one and then when it is not about cattle keeping people also have a lot of problems.  When you just hear the numbers of people having 40 cows, or a hundred cows, you think these are rich people.  These are really labourers who are working day and night to provide meat to you big men and women and milk but in fact, what they are getting out is very, very little. So, I think that hon. Rutaroh should also sympathise with us thank you. 

MR. RUTAROH:  I wish to thank the hon. Member who represents the biggest number of cattle keepers in the country, for the information. But he forgot that dairy corporation today  -(Interruption) 

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order, please.

MR. RUTAROH:  Dairy Corporation today is about the best payer.  If you give the milk, they will pay you promptly.  If you bring your cows, they will be bought promptly, while those who have crops probably will have no markets.  I have heard cries from cotton growing areas.  I have heard cries from the hon. Member from Maruzi talking about groundnuts that are rotting in their granaries.  So, I am aware that the cattle keepers are very, very advantaged as of today.  

The second point, is to do with income tax, taxing all allowances.  This one I welcome very, very much except that when you tax all allowances, it is only the top most brackets of any organisation that will benefit most.  It is as though we are revisiting the Bible that him who has more shall be given.  The common man, the common worker who earns the minimum wage has no allowances or if he has, he has some transport allowance that is paid in cash.  If he has, he has a lunch allowance that will be paid in cash and what happens to the top executive? He has a house servants, he has transport all give in real terms. Unless the Minister is prepared to monetise everything monetise everything in Government, in the private sector, then the taxation, or no allowances will make sense.  If allowances are going to be given in kind, which according to what I know today is normally to the top executives, then the lowest paid worker is going to suffer most. 

The third point I would like to touch is to do with what the Minister of Finance and Economic Planning said was a bigger achievement on lowering inflation.  I do not know why we should have law inflation when relatively fewer children go to school, when relatively fewer people can afford a jacket of Shs.4, 000 that hon. Obwangor was talking about; when many more roads - this is not because I am grateful or anything.  Government has made several attempts and good strives in the right direction to open most roads but as of now, there seems to have been a kind of stop. Those that have been made are in a relatively good condition but in most areas, those that have not been re-opened are in a worse state than what they have been.  To me inflation, therefore, does not make a lot of sense.  I have made this point with regard to economic growth that does not reflect in the better lives of people who are supposed to benefit from that economic growth.   So, lowering inflation and attainment of economic growth when many more people are poorer than they were yesterday, when many more people cannot afford a kilo of meant, when they have to depend on ‘Muvumba’ means, the second hand clothes; to me, it does not make a lot of sense.  I am yet to be educated, Mr. Chairman, about this growth and lowering of inflation.  Section 30, okay -(Interruption)

MR. BABU: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that even the Muvumba he is talking about, that is second hand clothes, the taxes are so high that some people can no longer afford them.

MR. RUTAROH:  Mr. Chairman, I wish to thank hon. Babu for that information and I wish to congratulate the Minister for levying a very, very high tax on muvumba because muvumba has been discouraging the production in various centres where we gather tax Nytil and various other places.  As far as I am concerned, although Nytil may have a product that is costed high, we get employment for our own people.  So, to mere just air lift second clothes from whichever capital, to bring here to sell to our people, and they can never know -(Interruption)

MR. BUTAGIRA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Regarding these taxes on second hand clothing, I would like to inform the hon. Member and perhaps, the Minister for Finance, that as of now, most people cannot afford the new clothes and if you now tax the old ones, it means that they will go naked.  (Laughter)

MR. RUTAROH:  Mr. Chairman, before hon. Butagira gave his point of information, I was going to tell him -(Interruption)

MR. RWAKAKOOKO:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to give information technical information to hon. Francis Butagira about the cost and make reference to what he said.  I think it is a true fact, that if the tax, higher taxes are imposed on second hand clothing and people resort to new clothing, the demand for higher production will naturally put the price very low, much lower than the second hand clothing.  

MR. RUTAROH:  Thank you very much hon. Rwakakooko, I do not think I need to add to that information.  Definitely, I would like to discourage second hand clothes in preference to stimulating our industries, to give employment right in industry and at the farmer’s level.  The transporter will also be employed but air lifting will not help us at all. 

CAPT. BABU:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank you very much.  First, I would like to inform the hon. member on the Floor that whilst these theoretical theories have been going on for seven years, we were being told that by increasing taxes on second hand clothes, we will be able to sell the clothes that we make in this country.  I want to say one or two things. First, Nytil does not produce all the products of the clothing that we put on.  

Secondly, they only produce cotton and we have been using these things, especially, for our schools.  Our people do not have the money and the capacity even if you use the economy of scales that you are describing.  They will not be able to afford Nytil. So, the second hand clothes at the moment have been taking our people forward and they have been depending on these second clothes.  Even a lot of us, hon. Members here, are putting on second hand clothes.  (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.

MR. SENDAULA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform hon. Francis Babu, the NRC member for this area that, we do appreciate the fact that people have got used to second hand clothes.  The truth of the matter, however, is that we did not have the second hand clothes.  The textile that is produced currently by Nytil would be sufficient and will increase sufficiently to meet the demand.  

As we stand today, production is at normal level and there is no problem as far as those pieces of clothes that they produce are available.  Anybody should go and buy those but we must not play on the sentiments of the people because what it amounts to in this debate right now is that someone is trying to say look here, we are extremely poor without testing the price of a new against the old.

MR. RUTAROH: I wish to thank the hon. Deputy Minister of Industry and Trade for that information because it appears that hon. Babu has forgotten. He has forgotten that industries suffered like many other sectors and now at the time of rehabilitation and direction to development a step has to be taken by discouraging these second hand clothes.  The industries will never grow while we bring these second hand clothes. Capt Babu is not talking about importation of new clothes.  I was talking about high taxes, okay, but these industries until they grow; they cannot make all the types of clothes that the Ugandan people want to wear.  They must grow first and in phases.  

I was referring to section 30 on Page 11, of the Minister’s Budget in the second line for the second sentence reads that this includes Shs.89 billion for wages.  The question is that I want to pause to the Minister is whether this is a total sum of the wages derived from the present minimum of 6,000 or from the announced minimum wage for teachers of 35,000/-.  Suppose the minimum was 35, would it be enough to account for what goes on today?  Will it account for what was promised as a living wage when the then Civil Service Review and Re-organisation  Commission started its work, government started to promise that it was streamlining the Civil Service, reducing the numbers merely because we want to pay a living wage?  If the minimum is 35, is this a living wage?  Is it a coincidence, for example, today that you get too many armed robberies?  Is it a coincidence that there is an outcry about prices everywhere?  I do think part of our problem is to do with the economic measures that are put in place.  They are not only economic.  

Also, political measures I think, of recent we have taken a little more than we should be biting as far as I am concerned.  You are re-organizing the Civil Service and at the same time you re-organise the Army.  You are returning ebyaffe - doing literally everything at the same time with a contracted economy and unavailability of money to service all these activities. I think all the promises that were given in monetary terms by Government - surely the Minister has a responsibility to tell the people why after retrenching 14,000 Civil Servants, 23,000 army personnel we are still paying less than what we promised.  I do believe that if we continue we may not achieve, as I stated at the beginning, the goal that we set out to do.  Mr. Minister, a living wage is now due.  We cannot wait until tomorrow.  The school fees at Kisubi are Shs.140,000/- per term; Budo is about the same, Mwiri is about the same and that means that only the sons of the rich of Parliamentarians and the rich few -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.

MR. RUTAROH:  Mr. Chairman, the majority of the children who go to these schools are the sons of the rich.  The common man’s son cannot afford to go to Buddo today.  The common man’s child cannot go to Namagunga.  The common man’s son cannot go to any of these schools as of today.  I am -(Interjection)- yes, I will take the information, Mr. Chairman.

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA:  Point of information. Mr. Chairman, while expressing concern, the hon. Member holding the Floor, it will be more useful to raise the level of debate if people contributing did a bit or more research, so that we stop expressing sentiments and discuss facts.  For example, when one person says that few people are going to school, what figures is he referring to?  He would be able to give us a figure of 1970, of 1990, of 1993 then say 1992 was higher than 1993 but we are talking in general terms appealing to sentiments and causing confusion.  Soon, I will be coming out with a statement on the problem of school fees in schools but I would like to inform him that at Butobere, the school fees are Shs.30, 000 while at Buddo, it is Shs.130, 000/-.  Definitely not every peasant can go and even not all rich men can go to Buddo or Namagunga.  

There are other schools in the country and three years ago, when I debated on the Floor of this House that we should put more emphasis on day schools, for the simple fact that eating in a hotel is always more expensive than eating at home.  Members this august House violently attacked my policy that they wanted to go to boarding schools. If you choose to go to the Sheraton you must pay a higher free.  If you eat at Nalongo’s in Katwe for the same food for the same quality you pay much less.  But I would like to inform this House that soon I will be coming out with a factual statement on the status of education in Uganda, the level of school fees and now that we are tackling salaries, what we intend to do to the question of higher costs of education, some of which are self inflicted.

MR. RUTAROH:  I wish to thank the hon. Minister for Education for that information.  First and foremost, when he talked about emphasis on day schools it is on record that I did support him.  Two, it may be that the cost will be - people will inflict the costs on themselves when they want big schools. The unfortunate thing is that, those schools where the biggest amount of money is paid are the ones that get results and at the end, they are the ones that send students to Makerere.  This means that those who do not go to those big schools and not paying that amount of money have a lower chance of going to Makerere and therefore, condemned to suffer the problems of this world.  So, I am not opposing the Minister.  His moves I have appreciated  -(Interjection)- yes, I will take it.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I want to thank hon. Rutaroh for giving way for me to inform him.  The situation in the country is not stationary, and if we really want to debate meaningfully we must be comparative.  We must compare the economic and social situation in one year with the following year and not in absolute terms.  For example, people who have noted, in the last four years they were prominently about four schools that were doing exceedingly very well.  Those who have seen reports about last year’s educational standards, the number of schools jumped to twenty including up-country schools which did exceedingly well, better than the previous years.  But absolutely, we are not yet satisfied.  Government has not claimed that we have arrived but we are saying that Government each year is investing more money in education and each year results are getting better.  They may not be satisfactory yet, but the way we debate here we discourage everybody as if doom is just around here, as if nothing has been done.  

So, I beg Members and I beg hon. Rutaroh who is always very analytical to analytically compare - we are not doing well but we are doing better than before.  There is the ideal and therefore, there is also doing better than you have been doing about a bad situation.  It will help if this approach is adopted.  I thank, Mr. Chairman.

MR. RUTAROH: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I wish in turn to inform the hon. Deputy Minister of Finance and Economic Planning that one of the schools which performed very well from up-country is form my place, Immaculate Heart Secondary School.  I also wish to inform him further that initially, the school fees I aggregate everything school fees, PTA and everything.  I hope it is understood in the light, jumped from 60,000 to 105,000 and a number of children could not continue going to that school.  This is about the beginning of last year and I am not surprised that this seems to fit in that pattern.  

So, what I am talking about is not to discourage anybody but this is an observation that I have made.  I have people that I represent.  Very few go to these good schools and I do not think there are miracles in many other areas.  So, it is not only the school that we were talking about but also about taxation, increase in school fees, and increase in various levies which militate against production in certain areas.  It was not emphasis on school fees alone, but I was giving several examples.

I had talked about retrenchment.  Retrenchment is something that is very, very worrying to me because of the speed at which it is being done.  Every morning, every time almost you have somebody coming to you looking for employment whether it is back in the districts or here in Kampala; either it is somebody who has left school or who has been retrenched which is unfortunate. My proposal to Government is that, the retrenchment should take a slow pace because we are exciting the community.  A person who sent his children to school unfortunately, with a hope of being employed gets two of his children or three back home because of retrenchment.  The attitude that he develops or she develops towards Government becomes extremely negative. I wish to advise that retrenchment should be a little slower at a pace that we can match with the rate of growth of the economy.  I see retrenchment  -(Interruption)

REV. ANGORA ATWAI:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, the hon. Member is making a very important point.  Other than appealing that it should be taken very slowly, may I also inform him that even those who have been retrenched and are supposed to have their packages from the Ministry of Local Government, in my district, they received their retrenchment letters in April and up to now, they have not yet received whatever should take them back home.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member that I accept the statement that we have got to have the growth of the GDP - the growth of the economy going up but I say that it cannot grow if people are being inefficiently employed whether in ministries or elsewhere. So, you have to retrench to improve on the efficiency of production of those who are being employed. So, you will never get your GDP going up until you have all people employed wherever they are.  

MR. KANYOMOZI: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I find the logical a bite very difficult.  In the Minister’s speech he stated that the economy is growing at a rate between 5 and 6 per cent, the annual population growth is 2.5 per cent.  Surely, if the economy is growing at a rate 6 per cent, the population growth is 2.5 per cent and even the inflation is going down at the rate that he mentioned in his speech, surely there should be more jobs and more facilities for the population than what we are getting instead of getting extensive retrenchment.

MR. RUTAROH:  I wish to thank both Members for the pieces of information.  The hon. Minister is of course, talking about which came first, the egg or the chicken.  The hon. Minister is talking about the proverbial saying of which came first the egg or the chicken, whether we shall have this growth when we have retrenched people or whether the retrenchment will not affect the growth because retrenchment is changing people’s minds and their attitudes.  Those who are doing the retrenchment, if these attitudes become negative, the production will inevitably be affected negatively.  I would like to submit and emphasise that the speed - I am not saying that there should be no retrenchment, I have said the rate at which workers are being retrenched is alarming and that there should be a corresponding reduction in the retrenchment exercise.  

In conclusion, I would like to emphasise that the graduated tax minimum should be left at the 6,500/- and I have no objection to even the hon. Minister increasing the maximum to even Shs.100, 000/-.  Thank you very much.

ASIKU (Terogo County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  It is a tradition in this House to welcome the Budget statement because Budget statements are welcomed on traditional basis as they make the Government go.  It is so unfortunate that when I look at the Budget proposals of this year, they are more irritating and sometimes they appear like sabotage to Government activities. One, I challenge the planning unit.  It is definitely true that the planning unit has gone out to establish more universities at the NRM time; more universities are being created without providing more avenues for employment.  They have widened the scope of adopting more students in the university in Makerere every time every year, are thousand Ugandans graduate and the Government moves negatively retrenching even the old ones who had a room and can still produce in employment.  In this particular Budget, there has got to be more retrenchment by parastatal bodies and it is already taking place in BAT, in Industries.  Why?  If you look at the figures on Government ambitious to collect more money but not taking into account the theory of supply and demand; that is, for example, in 1991/92 Budget Uganda Treasury wanted Shs.16.6 billion from tobacco activities.  1992/93 they moved from Shs.16.6 billion to Shs.24.5 billion in 12 months, that was the commitment.  But the BAT was unable to realise that money and managed to raise Shs.22.5 billion into the Treasury.  Now, in 1993/94, the Government wants more expenditure therefore, more taxes on the BAT activities.  The Treasury is now requesting BAT to pay Shs.32 billion an increase of 45 per cent.  What has happened is that BAT knows that they will not sell the cigarettes and of course BAT went out and put cigarettes e.g. Sportsman from Shs.600/- to Shs.1, 000.  The consumer says that it is a luxury. Therefore, I will not smoke at all.  It has gone to beer, some of us when we get exhausted, we relax over one been or two if we can afford it.  It was about Shs.700/= sometimes Shs.800/=.  The Minister says no, I must have a larger expenditure therefore, I must double my charges.  Now, the beer cost has moved from Shs.700/= to shs.1, 500/= or some of it to Shs.2,000/=. The question is -(Interruption)

MR. BUTAGIRA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to give information on a serious note to the hon. Member speaking on the effect of the increase of beer prices.  Something terrible has happened in Mbarara.  There is someone who was working in the Ministry of Lands and it is widely believed that this gentleman because he was used to having a beer of a certain amount that he cannot afford, has resorted to waragi.  He drank so much of it that he ended in comma and has died.  So there are two effects, one effect is on the health of the people. Those who have been used to drink may be beer which is decent they will go to these crude waragi, in the end even the taxes, we are excepting there is nobody to produce them.  Now, the other effect is that instead of having tax collection improved through widespread consumption, now it is concentrated and the broad base is gone and you will end up, Mr. Chairman, without achieving anything.

MR. ASIKU: Mr. Chairman, I am still continuing.  I had said the increase, and in order to get Shs. 32 billion, the increase was 45 percent on bills of tobacco.  Now, I want to involve the Minister to revisit his assessment because right now, at the present time, BAT is able to make Ug. Shs.61.6 million per day.  This one, these other charges which are collected to make the billion, this means that by the present tax of 45 the collection has reduced.  They have gone down to 46 million per day.  Now, if you multiply 46 by 365 it will give you 16.7 billion shillings per annum which is a much reduced amount rather than the 22.5 which was collected last year. (Interruption) 

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I want to make just two points.  First, we listen carefully and we want to get all this information from hon. Members and also their recommendations on what is to be done.  This is very important. Point two, before we advocate and encourage companies to give them protection taxes, we should bear in mind the following.  The people of Uganda have made sacrifices as far as their economy is concerned.  As a result of these sacrifices, this economy is being stabilised.  

For example, any company that went to the Bank and borrowed to run its activities hitherto was paying 48 per cent for its interest.  Today, it pays 24 or 23 for the cost of that capital. Before the same company whose inputs are from outside was paying for raw materials in an unstable currency, scarce currency and today it pays less for a stably available currency.  The same company before was operating in an economy where inflation was 65 per cent. Now the inflation is around 3 or 4 percent. 

Therefore, this company has gained in the performance of this economy and therefore, its costs must come down.  Now, how do the people of Uganda also benefit from this achievement?  They must raise more revenue to meet their services like education, like health for which you are complaining.  Why should only the government sacrifice by foregoing revenue and the companies are not willing to reduce their costs in this environment and to bring down their profit? So, I urge you, do not argue by encouraging companies to grip all the benefits and the common man does not get any benefit in form of education, in form of feeder roads, in form of primary health.  I want to warn you about this.

MR. ASIKU: Thank you very much, Mr. Minister.  (Interruption)

MR. KANYOMOZI: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to give information to the hon. Deputy Minister of Finance and the House that the Deputy Minister of Finance is not telling us the causes of all those ills that he is now correcting.  One reason why we had excessive inflation was excessive printing of money.  

The second one was excessive deficit financing on Recurrent Expenditure.  The third one was ability of mismanagement on running the affairs in a way that enabled the people to take resources from production to consumption.  These are the areas that caused us the problem.  Now that he is correcting the problem, you cannot say that we should even sacrifice more by killing the very industries he is trying to build up.  (Interjection) That is the point I am answering.  The hon. Minister should realise that the problems were caused by him and he is not putting them right himself. (Interruption)

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA: Point of order. Mr. Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Kanyomozi, the former Minister of Co-operatives and Marketing from 1979 to 1985 when Lutwa disrupted his programme, who was a Minister on this Bench when all these ills were going on that the hon. Minister of Finance is now trying to correct, to pose as if he played no role?  (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: He is quite in order.  Proceed Mr. Asiku.

MR. ASIKU: Mr. Chairman, I am calling upon the Minister of Finance to revisit his calculations.   That is what I said.  It is as if he is behaving like a man with one cow whose capacity is two litres a day and he wants to milk this cow in the evening to produce four litres.  In the end he will milk blood not the milk itself.  What is happening now?  While I agree that the industries benefited, may be they are benefiting now  -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Proceed hon. Member.

MR. ASIKU:  Thank you very much. While I agree that the industries are benefiting because of stable currency.  I also want to inform the Minister concerned that he has withdrawn the money from circulation completely a hundred per cent.  Since there is no money in rural areas, people cannot go to produce unless they know that their properties will also be purchased. At this particular time, I am now informing the Minister of Agriculture and Co-operatives, it is the Government with its unshaky plans that has killed the industry of cotton.  In my area, I want you note and the House in general that in 1992, I was number five among the honourables in cotton competition.  (Interjection) Yes, I was number five in the nation.  I know the Minister of Finance was number one.  To be honest I want you to try a research whether hon. Members like that honourable there who is also a farmer -(Interjection)- if today they have no produced cotton this season, it means the leaders themselves are discouraged by government policy.  In my own area  -(Interruption) 

MR. ELLYAU: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  May I inform the hon. Member on the Floor that up to now in Teso, nobody is planting cotton because cottonseeds are not there.  First of all, in Serere where they always dress cottonseeds, chemicals are even missing and I am telling you as I talk now, I have cotton and nobody is willing to buy it because there is no good buyer coming to buy.  The price disappoints everybody.  So, I think cotton is one of the performances that farmers could participate in the economy.  If we chase the farmers then we are also retrenched from the cotton growing.  Definitely, this is a very serious matter, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you.

MR. SSENDAWULA:  Point of information.  Chairman, I did mention when I was seconding the Motion that this year we have had problems when identifying crop finance.  This is not news at all.  He is not bringing any new information because we are certainly aware of what is going on in the entire country but as far as Teso area is concerned, Lint Marketing Board has already put Shs.150 million to purchase cotton in that particular area. At the same time at Serere where he is talking of treating of seeds, the seeds are being treated and distributed.  I think we must be very accurate because some of these things, we may call upon the people at a later stage to come here and substantiate them. 

MR. ASIKU:  Sir, it is very unfortunate for an hon. Minister to stand here and tell us that they are treating seeds for cotton planting. I wish there are people here who are properly qualified.  The Minister of Agriculture should be here.  We have a deadline when economically you can plant cotton and not any season of the year is a cotton planting period.  This is exactly the inefficiency in planning.

I had gone down, this is the easier question.  The Minister of Education wants to be educated, and he wants to know when cotton is planted.  The seasons are two for north; the last planting date is - actually July to be economical - the last planting date is the 15th of July for the north and apparently for the east.  For Buganda, it would be much earlier because you are supposed to plant heavier cotton.

My second comment is on micro-planning.  Micro-planning would be for the rural area.  That means directly for the farmer who is the producer of Uganda’s economy.  In all our budgets for the last five years I have not seen a specific planning for the rural areas.  All the planning is concentrated either for towns or for industries in the city without the supporting materials for the rural areas.  Why I say this year’s budget is here sabotage our economy is because right now, Ugandan beer price that has moved to Shs.1, 500/- minimal, has induced smuggling from Kenya because Kenya beer is worth Ug.Shs.700 -(Interjection.) Okay, they say U.Shs.500 but let me say the maximum is Ug.Shs.700/=.  If you compare Ug.Shs.700 with Shs.1, 700/= even if you are very patriotic, I would easily grab two beers rather than one to satisfy my needs.  So, the same applies to cigarettes.  If we do not have the demand for our goods because they are very expensive, it simply means that we are going to reduce our labour because they will be producing goods that cannot be marketed.  This means again retrenching more workers from tobacco and equally from beverages factories.

I would like to end my remarks by thanking the Uganda Government and in particular the Minister of Education for giving something to the most hard working people of this country, the teachers. (Applause) I say this because there has been nothing for primary teachers to steal.  They could not steal anything and sell it.  What they were left with is chalk but unfortunately, many Ugandans do not now use white goods so the chalk had no market. These are the people who actually labour and produce all the various intellectuals of this country and what is worth noting is the mere fact that around them are young children.  If any teacher misses the children complain and the parents come around complaining.  Because of that pressure, the teachers actually sacrifice too much.  While I do agree that Shs. 35, 000 may not be a living wage, I appreciate it because it is a change from Shs.6, 500/=. Shs.35, 000/= is a very good beginning and we should appreciate it.  As we know, we are already complaining of higher taxes and we cannot expect miracles to work for paying people higher when we are also complaining that we are unable to raise all the money that we want.

My last complaint -(Laughter)- goes to the Minister of Finance.  I do not know whether he has an Audit Department. I would like his Audit Department also to audit periodically expenditures because the budget we have been given here, no Ministry abides by it. We look like, I mean, the Ministry is making a mockery out of us.  A few days ago, they asked for approval of money almost doubling the amount we had previously approved.  I am now wondering whether we shall live within our budget during this particular time.  If we are not to do so, we all put ourselves in a tight corner and I think with those few remarks, I support.

ADJOURNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN:  With that we have come to the end of today’s Sitting.  We adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.

(The Council rose at 5.00 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 21st July, 1993 at 2.30 p.m.)

