Wednesday, 20 July 1994

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS 

(The Deputy Vice-Chairman, Mr Ekemu, in the Chair.)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF LABOUR AND SOCIAL AFFAIRS (Mr Ateker Ejalu): Mr Chairman, allow me first of all, to congratulate you on your alleviation to the Chair, since this is the first time I am substantively in this House.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister raise your voice please, on the microphone.

MR ATEKER EJALU:  Mr Chairman, hon. Members, I wish to make a statement to the hon. House on the famine situation on the country.  You are aware that, there has been a general outcry about the famine situation in the local press and amongst the leaders at various levels.  Sections of public opinion have indeed accused the NRM Government of not being sufficient necessity and responsive to the problems of famine in the country.  While I share the legitimate concern for the welfare of the citizens, it is unfair for any responsible person, to suggest that government has been insensitive or indifferent to the faint of our people, who have been victims of drought and famine.  It is even more inexcusable, that one or two colleagues in this House, in blunt and breach of the principles of collective responsibility, have had the audacity to attach me personally for the complicated famine situation in the country.

On the contrary, I wish to categorically state that, government has done everything possible to mitigate the effects of famine in the 16 districts, and has to - a large extent, managed to contain the situation.  Before anyone engages in apportioning blame for the recurrent famine, and pondering in a holier than thou attitude, it is important to recognise that there is almost an unbridgeable gap between public needs and the government capacity to satisfy those needs.  I am sure the Deputy Minister for Finance will confirm that.  In developing countries, it is very uncanny to ignore the social sector, than human resources in our economic planning and management.  

In the case of my Ministry, there is a yearning gap between the budget and relief requirements.  Let me illustrate this point.  Over the last three years, our relief budget has fallen from 65 million shillings per month, to about shillings 30 million; this financial year. Last financial year, the monthly release budget was approximately 38 million shillings per month. However, at no stage did the treasury release all the above amount, in July and December 1993; and June this year, no funds were released at all.  

In August and September last year, the treasury released approximately shillings 13 million per month.  For the rest of the year, the monthly releases were about 25 million shillings per month. And the current CTV approved prices of shillings 500 per kilo of grade two posho; my Ministry could buy 625 bags enough to feed 4,167 persons per month; at daily ration of 400 gms per persons.

I, therefore, say in a famine situation like the one we have just experienced, it would require miraculous powers to feed all the famine-affected people in the country estimated to be 1.8 million people.  I have repeatedly pointed out in different fora, in a point of monotony; that the annual relief budget is too inadequate to meet the country’s wide demanding for relief.  My Ministry has been point the problem of under budgeting in the preparation of budget estimates.  For example, we have hammered on this point, before the Sectoral Committee on the social affairs of this House, in my Ministerial Statement, and before our presentation to the Agricultural Sectoral Committee of this House. 

Just to give you one example. In the budget estimates of this financial year, my officials and those of the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning agreed that the annual relief budget should be at least 1.3 billion shillings, and before you in this House today, there is only provision, for 380 million shillings, which we also learnt on the Floor of this House.  I am sure the Treasury tried, they tried to provide, but could not find enough funds. With shillings 300 million per month, which is provided in this budget, my ministry will be able to buy 730 bags of posho for distribution in the entire country, if and when that money is released.  

Notwithstanding all the above budgetary consequent, I am pleased to say that, the government handling of the recent famine has been commendable.  The recent famine in the 16 districts, was detected as earlier as November last year; as a result, my ministry in conjunction with the Ministry of Agriculture Animal Industry and Fisheries, and FAO, carried out a food survey, which identified that 1.8 million people needed food assistance. The ministry of Labour and Social Affairs worked out the food requirements for these famine-affected people whose estimated cost was about 65 billion shillings; that is 10 per cent of the total national budget.  Give the response for all concerned government departments, were prompt, concerted, and coordinated.  The gravity and spread of famine situation would have been better contained.  

In response to the threat of famine, government took certain actions, among which are the following: government in March, this year, released special funds to my ministry to enable us buy food for the victims of famine.  Since then, government has released shillings 2.3 billion to buy food for the famine affected people.  Than the famine-affected people now, include Mukono District.  This is much more than the annual budget of an average ministry.  

As of today, government has bought and distributed 4,600 bags of posho and 3,386 bags of beans to the victims of famine.  I am confident that, this relief assistance as formed a useful lifeline for thousands of our people to the current harvest.  Apart from famine, the government provided 500 million shillings to assist the victims of earthquake in Kabarole, Kasese, then Bundibugyo.  I will be making a comprehensive statement on this House, on my Ministry’s work in earthquake areas in due course.  Furthermore, going to the magnitude of the problem, government appealed to the traditional donors notably WFP for relief assistance.  

Unfortunately, this assistance has not been forthcoming for the number of reasons.  First of all, the resources of our donors have been over stretched by the demand for assistance in Africa and elsewhere in the world.  WFP for example, has been paying more attention to Rwanda, Sudan, Kenya, Somalia, and Angola, where the food situation is far worse than here.  

Secondly, our friends have not been able to grasp nature and the pattern of the food crisis in this country.  They say that, since Uganda is a food surplus country exporting food to our neighbours, we should be able to cope with the problem of famine here.  What they do not appreciate is that in this country, the problem is not so much deficits, but rather mass, rural poverty, and the consequent lack of purchasing power in the famine-affected areas.  Therefore, there may be surplus for in say Kasese, but people in Karamoja may continue to suffer from hanger, because they have no money to buy that food.

Money is required to bridge the gap between the availability of food in the country and those who need it.  This is the paradox of the food situation in our country.  The understanding of food situation is more even confused, when some Ugandan leaders demonstrate colour’s luck of sensitivity, sympathy with and sense of duty towards the plight of the family victims.  I am aware that despite massive efforts on the part of government, to mitigate the effects of famine, our food assistance to the famine-affected people is like a drop to the ocean.  In order to feed all the people, as I have told you, we need 100,000 tons, at the cost of 65 billion shillings.  But we have been able to afford and deliver 4,000 tons.  Unfortunately therefore, the victims of famine have not had enough to eat, and regrettably, some lives may have been lost, in some areas.  In the famine-affected areas, the suffering has been dare and real.

However, hon. Members, we should realise that, the problem of food inadequacy does not mean that government is not committed to assisting our famine affected people, the problem of famine should be seen in a wider national context.  There are many things in this country that government would like to do; but there are unfortunate consequences caused by scarcity of resources.  Government would like for example to provide free and compulsory education, to offer medical care to all, to provide full and freely chosen employment, and to eradicate poverty.  If these social goals have not yet been scored, it is not because government is insensitive to the welfare of our people, it is simply because we as a country do not hear to have the capacity to deliver all the things we need to have.  

From this wider perspective, and in view of our meagre and over-stretched government resources, I am proud to say that government has been able to mobilise substantial funds to put out some of the fires of famine. Indeed, this is the first time, that the country has coped with the problem of famine, almost single-handed.  I say almost single handed, because some friendly governments and NGOs indeed have provided some supplementary assistance. For example, the British Government donated over 500,000 pound sterling.  The Lions Club of Norway donated US dollars 15, 000.  Also, commendably, some Members of this House notably hon. Gabriel Lukwago, has donated 5 trailer loads of cassava cuttings for Teso; assistance has also been received from Coffee Marketing Board which donated a half a million shillings.  Among other parastatals and civic authorities. 

I also wish to point out that, even the increasing challenges of disaster management and mitigation. Government is working out a strategy that will fast develop a realistic, manageable and affordable national relief policy.  Secondly, enhance the state of emergency preparedness, by building food reserves at national and household level.  Thirdly, develop a concurrent national food security system. And fourthly, reduce our dependence on relief food assistance.  To achieve these objectives, government has already established a national disaster monitoring and preparedness committee under my chairmanship, to perform the above functions. 

Let me conclude my remarks, ladies and gentlemen, hon. Members, by pointing out that the provision of relief is an enormous and expensive task, which government cannot should alone. I, therefore, wish to challenge national and local leaders to become more responsible, imaginative and innovative in handling problems such as famine. Leaders should not simply report problems, they too, should think of ways of means of solving these problems, and should initiate remedial actions at any level.  For example, they should work out strategies to improve food security at local or house all levels.  They should make specific proposals to government, aimed at eradicating the causes of famine in minimum and long term.  We are all talking about decentralisation.  But decentralization also means shared responsibilities and costs.  Government will certainly continue to cater for the welfare of our people.  But all leaders must also play their part.  

The struggle to achieve food self-sufficiency and security is bound to be a protractive one.  We shall not win the war by blaming this or bad ministry or individuals by all means, let us criticize but let us also pay credit where it is due.  We should handle national problems such as those in production, distribution, marketing, food security and famine, or any other problem for that matter, as a united force.  I am confident that, with national determination, of the government and this House, we shall win.  Thank you very much.

DR TIBERONDWA (Igara County, Bushenyi):  Thank you Mr Chairman.  under rule No.24 of our Rules of Procedure, I would like to ask the Minister to answer these questions. One; recently, the President stated that he was intending to appoint the commission of inquiry to find out whether people have died of famine or not in the 16 districts.  Now, that the Minister has publicly accepted that some people have died of famine  -(Interruption) he is not even sure. Can I know from the Minister whether the President is going ahead to appoint this commission?

Question number two, we have been having drought and all these other problems in this country, since we got independence, but we have not had a situation in which so many people are reported to have died of famine.  Can the Minister tell us what has gone wrong particularly during this financial year that people have died when it has not happened in the past?

MR ATEKER EJALU:  Mr Chairman, hon. Tiberondwa, I think got me wrong.  I did not say definitely that people died out of famine.  I said some lives might have been lost.  In fact -(Interjection)- yes, I am giving room for the investigation, which has been ordered by his Excellency the President to take place. I cannot prejudge investigation.  Then as for the appointment of the Commission, I am not really the competent minister to say so; it is being handled by the Minister for Presidential Affairs.  

Now, my statement clearly chaps out the problems my Ministry has experienced this year.  In other words, we have no resources to respond in time.  You see, it is not in the question of saying, blaming the treasury; the treasury can only be sure of what they have, they cannot create it. So, it took time; even after discovery of the fact that the famine was there; it took from November to March for the first amount of money to be released to us.  So, really the problem is off, except for lack of resources at government level, and also the world situation which has taken away some of the relief we have been getting from our traditional donors.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members you can only ask one or two question to investigate as hon. Tiberondwa asked.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Since this Ministry seems to be a Ministry affected by crisis, and the hon. Ministry is saying, that since famine started the situation has improved.  Has this situation improved because the Ministry has better funding or because rain has come?

MR ATEKER EJALU: Thank you, hon. Atwai.  Suddenly, in my statement, I made it very clear that resources started coming in March, so we started alleviating the situation in March.  Rains are just coming now or harvesting is beginning now.  So, certainly the situation was improved by the intervention of the government by injecting funds.

MRS OKER:  Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I just want to seek clarification about the establishment of commission.  I found it very absurd that, commissions has to be established, and consume a lot of money, and this is possible.  Things have really run bad instead of saving this money to establish something, which will remain firm in the ground, say buying food or something and storing. I think that it is really absurd that we have to keep on establishing - putting in place a commission, which actually consumes a lot of government funds, Mr Chairman.

MR ATEKER EJALU:  Mr Chairman, I would not really go along with that reasoning.  For one thing, serious allegations of being that, so many people have died, other colleagues, other leaders in the country were saying, some people may have died.  Others were saying nobody has died of famine and I think in a situation like that, His Excellency the President is right for the good governance of the country to set up a body, which can come and say this is what happened.  I think that is correct.

(General Debate continued.)

MR BAKABULINDI (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  By the time you adjourned the sitting yesterday, I was reacting on the statement which was made on 16 June, by saying that we are getting richer and not poor and so many Members gave points of information in support of my argument. 

Unfortunately, the hon. Minister is not around; the Minister for Education and Sports.  He came with an opposition by saying that what we were saying are just mere allegations about teachers going without salary.  I wish the Minister were around.  I wanted to challenge him today by quoting what is in today’s New Vision on page five and see what the serving teachers of Kyazanga have stated to the extent that the whole Prime Minister had to come to their rescue and save the situation whereby teachers were complaining that they had taken about four months without being paid.  

I want hon. Members and other ministers around to know that when we debate or contribute on something, I think it is for the advantage of the whole government that if somebody finds that whatever they have told his is beneficial, he uses that information to clean his House rather than coming here to argue for the sake of arguing.  I would like to talk about investors.  We, workers have no grudge with investors.  We do very much appreciate and commend the government efforts to attract more private investors. 

We also do accept and appreciate the positive aspects of the structural adjustment programme.  But, we are not very much happy at all with the negative attitudes of these SAPS. They have created a lot of poverty and created a lot of no job security and we have ended up getting a lot of retrenchees because of the poor method that is being applied.  I wish to request whoever is concerned that the way the retrenchment exercise is being carried out is making the Ugandans look and feel as if they are not part of this country.  Something must be done so that the exercise is done in a proper way and a very humane way. (Interruption)

CAPT. BABU: Point of information. Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that the information I have for him is, whilst a lot of these companies are being sold and are being bought by some members who come even from different parts of the world, we are now having a new phenomenon because of the weakness of our immigration system.  They lay off the local people, the indigenous and they bring third class rate people from other countries.  And not only that, they pay them in dollars.  Now, after sometime, within a year or so, these people who have been from other countries become dukawallas and a dukawalla is somebody who sells in a shop.  

Now, whilst the Ugandan labour force is being laid off on the pretext that they are not trustworthy, that they do not work, that they are lazy, they are bringing people from other countries to get jobs here.  I think the immigration board should now look into these workers who come from different parts of the world. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR J. BAMBALIRA: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. A lot has been said about the immigration board.  I would like to clarify the position.  In fact, the board has tried to perform very well.  I have reasons to say this.  At the time the board was appointed, the whole department was in confusion.  There were no proper guidelines. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, can you declare your interest?  Are you the chairman of the board?

MR BAMBALIRA: I am a director.  So, in fact when we get applications from aliens, non-citizens, there are different classes of persons who apply.  There is Class A that is for expatriates, who come under bilateral arrangements between the Uganda government and other countries.  There are also other classes like classes B, C up to class F.  There are cases of Asians whose applications we get.  There are Asians whom we allow to repossess their properties here.  So, when they repossess, they have got to have an immigration status to stay in the country.  So, we follow that.  And there are cases of Asians who - not even Asians alone - whom the Investment Authority recommends.  So, sometimes there is a problem from the Investment Authority.  They have sometimes recommended persons as investors who are actually merchants.  Yes, this we have found out.  So, we have asked the Investment Authority to make a follow up because the department does not have facilities; the board does not have facilities to move and check.  

Last Financial Year, the board was given three million shillings.  We could not make any movement to check on these people.  So the Investment Authority is in a better position. So, the Immigration Board has actually done very much to safeguard this country but we have got bottlenecks within the system. So, I think when I get time to contribute, I will clarify more on this board.

DR MAGEZI: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, the Member holding the Floor raised a very, very important matter and the response that we are receiving with regard to the way the Immigration Board controls the people that come here, is questionable, because as you know, Sietco which took over the contract to expand the Dam, brought into this country brick-layers as if Uganda cannot produce brick-layers and we hear these poor brick-layers, the Chinese were actually prisoners in their own country and shifted to this country to work for Sietco for manual jobs like brick-laying and such things.  So, Mr Chairman, I wonder whether the Immigration Board really checks on people of this kind!

MR BAKABULINDI: I would like to thank hon. Members for your good information is support of my argument.  I wish to state something from the Budget Speech. In the Budget Speech, they say so far Uganda Investment Authority has monitored 268 projects on the ground with investment todate totaling US$ 208.5 million and the employment creation capacity of up to 23673 jobs for Ugandans.  What it does not say is that how many jobs are lost in the process and how suitable these planned jobs are for these Ugandans.  

Mr Chairman, you very much know that even among the retrenchees they have got professional people. We have got skilled people.  Why can such a statement not tell us how these people can be catered for? 

I would like to request the Deputy Minister for Finance since he is presenting the Budget Speech, to clarify on this statement of how they are going to utilise these 268 projects on the ground and the jobs available so that we can see how the Ugandans are going to benefit in this programme.  

Sometime back, hon. Members here contributed very much about drought and famine in the east and I would like to appreciate what steps the hon. Members took to alleviate the situation and save our sisters and brothers in Teso and neighbouring places.  

There is one vital thing I want to be noted and also Members to contribute as they did on the famine situation. The reason why we contributed much on that was simply because we were looking at the lives of the Ugandans.  We have got the issue of accidents. Accidents are finishing a lot of Ugandans and if we are concerned about the lives in that east because of famine, we should also be concerned about these people who are dying day and night.  I have taken my trouble - I have bothered to make my little research on accidents.  

If I may quote, one single route; that is Jinja Road, from Kireka up to Kampala. In the month of April alone, there were 30 accidents; that is almost an average of one accident per day. There were three fatal accidents and three people died on the spot.  Those who have died in the hospitals, you cannot count.  Whoever is concerned this is a very serious issue.  We must take some provision to avoid further accidents of that nature.  RCs neighbouring those areas have bothered to approach City Council and the people concerned.  From my research, the causes of accidents mostly are two.  One, as I gave an example of that road from Kireka up to Kampala, we are lacking humps -(Interjection)- and most of the people who have died are pedestrians.  Yes, this is important.  People are dying.  (Interjections) Yes.  

Another point I noted, apart from humps of which Members have not taken to be a serious issue but while other people are dying, is poor driving.  Most of the taxi operators - I do not know how they get their driving permits but you may find the way they are driving also deserves that something must be done about the way they are issuing these driving permits.  Mr Chairman, I want to talk -(Interruption)

MRS SSEKITOLEKO:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the information I want to bring is actually very - said because he was talking about one person dying everyday in a car accident.  It is with a heavy heart that I remind this Parliament that everyday including today, in Uganda we bury 400 children. 400 children die in Uganda before they attain the age of five.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

MR BAKABULINDI:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like also to note the information that I have got though it was not relevant to my topic. I would like to talk about the labour market.  Also, quoting from the budget speech, the budget provides for a 40 per cent increase in wages and salaries.  It also hopes to achieve payment of the full minimum living wage by 1996/97 for the Civil Service.  This is to be attained through a reduction in manpower from 320,000 that is from July 1990 to an expected level of 145,000 by July 1994. It is already achieved. This is a bad theory if a better life means few employed.  More and more people are entering the job market each year. Universities and other tertiary institutions of higher learning are increasing in number and the population growth is about 2.8 per cent. You know very much that right at the moment, we are even seeking for more universities.  Tertiary institutions are increasing.  Those students are going to leave and enter the job market and at the same time, the formula, which is being applied now is to retrench more so that you remain with few. I am wondering what the government is planning for the students who are going to complete their studies! And I am saying if that is the formula which is being used at the moment,  -(Interruption)

AN. HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  I would like to inform the Member who is holding the Floor and my fellow workers Representative that the issue he is tackling is a bit difficult in a sense that today in Uganda, it seems there is no any rule to protect you if you go to join even the private sectors they are talking of; because there is no minimum wage.  Currently, our minimum wage is 60/= and there is none to protect anybody that the employers who are coming should pay so much.  This is very serious.  

Another issue is that we are getting worried.  I do not know whether begging institutions in Uganda have been established also! We are even getting expatriates as beggars in the streets of Kampala.  You can go around there because -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: That is enough hon. Member, please.

MR ATEKER EJALU: Point of information. Mr Chairman, I did not like to interrupt the contribution of my social background but I would like to clarify that as of now, there is no minimum wage in Uganda.  We have been waiting for the economy to stabilise so that the minimum wages board can be appointed to determine it.  In a situation that was fluctuating by the day, by the night, it was very unwelcome to appoint the minimum wage board.  But, however, the unions have been through their collective agreements agreeing with employers with our collaboration for the wages and salaries.

MR MUKASA:  Point of information.  I do appreciate the information given to the Member holding the Floor by the hon. Minister for Labour but I would like to inform the speaker and indeed the whole House that the minimum wage setting is not intended to protect the already protected people, but it is intended to protect those who are not covered by collective agreements and they are many.  According to the Employment Survey, people employed in private sector, the informal sector are over 900,000; and those who are employed in a formal sector are just 300,000 and something; now those people are not protected.  

Secondly, the last minimum wage set in Uganda was that of 1984, when it was set to Shs 6,000, that is the minimum below which an employer in Uganda cannot pay.  If they afford paying anything above that, they are not breaking any law.  But that was also interrupted by the Currency Convention – Shs 6,000 became Shs 60. Now today if an employer is found paying informal sector, somebody below - above Shs 60 is not breaking any law.  But if he is paying below - above Shs 60 is not breaking any law.  But if he were paying below that, then he would be prosecuted.

MR BAKABULINDI:  Mr Chairman, I thank very much hon. Members for the information they have given us.  In fact, it has been very good information and, I am also wondering how the Ministry of Finance could say that they are going to give civil servants the minimum living wage.  It is very shameful.

I would like to talk about monitorisation. In the Budget Speech, it is clearly stated that benefits of the kind like transport, lunch, they should be monitorised in such a way that it can be exposed to taxation.  I have no quarrel with that, but the only problem is, right at the moment even the money we get for housing is not enough and I should I think request the Minister of Finance concerned that he should wave off the taxation on such benefits like housing, a lunch and transport, because surely these are the things we get to assist us in our daily life; and even what we are getting at the moment is not enough, then why should it be subject to taxation? I am looking at that point and it is a serious issue for us workers, we are being squeezed so much, somebody you have given something but it is not even enough and yet you say at the end of the day that I want to tax it.

Of recent there is also a system of consolidating all allowances.  This has also created another problem to the workers. At the moment the lowest worker is paying graduated tax equivalent to that one of a Minister. It is very interesting because the formula is that once they consolidate whatever you have got, that is lunch, transport, housing and salary and you reach 68 - that means you are subject to graduated tax of Shs 80,000. And there is no formula that is saying that a Minister, who is getting about a million, should also pay certain amount of graduated tax.  (Interjection) Yes, this is very unfair; I call it unfairness in the government.  (Interjection) No, no, the figure should be increased from 68 at least to 300 and it should be charged in such level that the Minister should be in position to pay something above 80,000/=. I can see that this is also another way the government can earn more revenue by taxing these people accordingly. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Please, end your speech, hon. Member. 

MR BUTIME: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Member to give information to this House misleading it, saying that Ministers get one million shillings per month whereas, me as Minister of State for Internal Affairs, I do not get more than Shs 95,000 per month.  Is it in order, as my salary?

THE CHAIRMAN: Order please. The hon. Member was not emphatic. Please go ahead and wind up your speech.

MR BAKABULINDI: Thank you, Mr Chairman, maybe the hon. Minister would like some clarification on the million I was referring to. I gave an example that with the worker, they consolidate housing, they consolidate lunch, and they consolidate the little transport he gets.  If I come to the Minister, some of them are CADS, CMs, ministers, and directors of different things.  I mean, yet get more than one million.  And when I say, also whatever you are getting should be consolidated and you pay graduated tax accordingly.  I think, Mr Chairman, I am very fair.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member your time is up.  Your time is up, please. 

MR BAKABULINDI: Thank very much, Mr Chairman.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you Mr Chairman.  I want to start my observations with some positive remarks.  We note, through the Background to the Economy, that the 1993/1994 Financial Year, there was 130 per cent draw in credit to government.  This is very well welcome.   

We also note that instead of government borrowing, actually, there was a net deposit of 12 billion shillings.  The only question I would like to raise as far as this was concerned is at what expense to the economy this was done? We know very well as it has been said here that quite often government become very stringent with expenditure at the expense of not paying, meeting its obligations to people or organisations who make or supply services or even goods with the government.

I do not know what is the state of affairs with the National Housing and Construction Corporation is, but at one time, debts owed by government were literarily crippling that organisation, and I think they had to get rid of their estates in order to survive. So, much as we would welcome government not going beyond its means, I think it is not correct that government does not meet its obligations.

Also we note with gratitude that there was growth in the exports fractions as well as an increase in the currency inflow from private transfers.  This is a welcome because it is an indicator of the confidence that the people outside the country have in this country and, therefore, are more willing to bring their money into this country.  But I think there is every need to do much more about pushing exports up. And that is why I think that, as I have said here before, we must focus on areas where there is the maximum benefit regarding exports, and we invest a lot of money therein.  

Those are the positive remarks I wanted to make. Therefore, I would like to turn to something that is a little bit unfortunate, and the first one I would like to mention is the 1.7 per cent growth in agriculture.  This was attributable to the vagaries of drought. This, however, is regrettable.  We have said time and again that must be a position to control nature.  And unless we are able to do this, we will always have probleMs Much as we have what you call, I think this organisation that tells us about the future regarding the drought - I forget its name.  I think early warning  -(Interjection)- yes, system.  

I think it is not enough that we should be warned that we are going to get hunger.  What we ought to do is to make sure that we do not allow that hunger to take place.  And how do we do it? We must intervene. I have said before, there is no way we can go on praying to God that it rains, because it does rain. For example, Gulu has the same annual rainfall as Kampala. Or Entebbe; whichever, you like. I studied geography more than 25 years ago.  But we know that the basic difference is that the rain in Gulu only comes at a point in time; much of the year the whole place is dry.  But if we controlled the water that comes down in that period, then throughout the year we ought to be able to grow whatever we need.  And it is important that quite often when we have drought in the region that is when food prices are very good; and this is the thing that this country should take maximum advantage of.  It is a welcome idea that the prices of coffee have gone up; and I would like to know from the Minister concerned what implication is this has on the immediate economy of this country but also the long term effects on the coffee industry and are we doing anything about it? 

In this connection, I would rather on the Minister talks about taxing coffee when the prices go beyond certain price that this money we make sure goes to the people who have always been the losers and that is the farmer.  But I do not know how the Minister is going do it. What I think, even if he taxes, he should make sure that this money goes to the farmer so that for once our farmers can benefit from a good price of coffee. I want to talk also on the cost of utilities. We have an aggressive campaign for industrialisation or production industries is energy, 30 per cent and above. 

Unless we are competitive in the prices at which we sell energy in this country, we are wasting our time in expecting the people in industries to compete with industries in countries where energy costs only a fraction of what our industrialists spend here. Now we are told that we have to raise the money or rehabilitation and even new development, but I think it is unfair to kill the goose that lays the golden egg.  Unless the industries survive, maybe, we would be happy only to sell the power to the neighbouring countries that are perpetually short of energy anyway.  But I think something ought to be done about the cost of energy there is no question in my mind.  I do not know how we shall do it.  But industry can only survive if they can afford energy, including by the way water; the cost of water is going through the roof.  

So, what do we do?  Can we compete? I am told telephones - it is prohibitive to make the telephone to a correspondent in London you fear doing it and in the process the economy suffers.  So, unless the utilities are manageable, they are affordable, there is no way the economy can flourish.

I would like also to make some observation about moneys that we get either as grants or as loans.  I think while we are restructuring the economy we should also look at how these moneys are used.  Yesterday, it was a little bit interesting on the hon. Minister of agriculture was informing Members of the House about funds available.  And a lot of the Members were probably ignorant of these funds.  Now, I think, one of the reasons is probably the method by which these funds are dispersed and utilised.  I would like to see rationalisation.  I think, it would be good that people themselves get involved, democratise this system also.  (Interjection) I take the information. (Interruption) 

THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL AND FISHERIES INDUSTRY (Mrs Ssekitoleko); Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the speaker on the Floor that I do not know how more democratic we can be.  Why?  When the money for SWARAPOSE beginning, I remember we organised a workshop for every body including NRC Members.  I remember this workshop was in Mbarara and I remember - this is for SWARAPOSE - for South West - this workshop was in Mbarara and I remember hon. Nasasira was there together with the First Deputy Prime Minister, the others did not turn up. You are hon. Members, if I invite you and you do not turn up, what do I do? That is one.  For the money in Hoima -(Interjection)- protect me, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order please. Order please, hon. Members.

MRS SSEKITOLEKO: For the money in Hoima, this money is not even controlled in Kampala; it is under the RCV leadership of Hoima and Kibale.  It is decided upon by the NRC Members from Hoima; they invite you and you do not go there, you are hon. Members - what can I do? Thank you, Mr Chairman.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr Chairman, I beg your indulgence, if I can be allowed to make my contribution and Members can also have chance to make their contribution.

I was not in any way focusing my observations at the Ministry of Agriculture.  I am focusing at the whole method of inflows and how the money is used in this country.  I would like to see that when this money comes into this country, it is apportioned. (Interjection) Yes, it is apportioned.  Let the money go in the districts completely not just by calling us to seminars and what have you.  Let the money come there; let the districts decide given the priorities of how that money must be spent.  

The reason why I am saying this is that those projects I have seen which we have originated ourselves and the people have participated, we have seen maximum utilizations of funds and we have seen results.  I will give an example, In one subcounty, we have moved water 8 kms.  Why? Because we got the money ourselves and we made sure it was spent on pipes, digging up and so forth. We have put up community treatment centres; we have build schools, a 100 per cent of the money goes on the buildings. But the trouble is, when we have money, so many hands are involved, you have to go to Mbarara for SWARAPO, like the hon. Esther was talking about and then the officer is not there he is in Kampala, really there are a lot of problems involved.  We would like radical rethinking by the government on how you utilise the funds inflows into this country. (Interjection) I will accept the information. (Interruption)

CAPT. BABU (Kampala Central): Mr Chairman, thank you very much for allowing this information. I would like to go a little bit further.  That in the RDP and in the government, Ministry of Planning, there are a lot of projects that are being sat on.  And I will give you an example.  There are some of these projects were used for campaign purposes.  There is a project right now from IDB which is being promised the citizens of my constituency and they are being told that your NRC Member refused to come and see us in the office.  We want this to be brought to our RCV, and we want it to be brought at the District Council, we want the RC III of our area to implement these projects as projects of the district, not as projects certain Minister in this government.  We have proof and if you want it I can produce it, even PAPSCA was pulled form one area to another during this campaign.  And, therefore, you right.  I think these projects should be told to us, we are the legitimate NRC Members of these areas, Mr Chairman. (Hear, hear!) 

MR RUKIKAIRE: Point of information. Mr Chairman, while I appreciate the point being raised by my hon. Friend, hon. Babu, I would like to point out that I happen to be the Minister in the Ministry of Finance responsible for PAPSCA Project and I am not aware of projects which, with my support have been moved from one area to another and I will be delighted and of much assistance to him, particularly if I assure you that neither the Minister nor is the Deputy Minister is responsible for PAPSCA Project.  It is me and, therefore, if there has been any diversion of a PAPSCA project, I am prepared to reinstate it myself; if you can tell me what it is.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Mr Chairman, what the hon. Minister of State has just said, goes a long way to emphasize what I have been saying?  Fortunately, or unfortunately, I was once a Minister and you cannot believe how much goes on in your ministry without your knowledge.  That is why we are saying - precisely distribute - hon. Nekyon once said; what did he say?  Even corruption I am told they say we should distribute corruption - decentralise corruption. 

Seriously, mine is not a criticism of the government or any individual minister. I am saying - much as Uganda is being praised for being progressive in its approach, in what we are doing, we have even go further and make sure that the systems we use are efficient. It is not a Vote of No Confidence in anybody, and it is just because that sometimes the Ministers are overwhelmed by the size of what they are handling. I want to make some observations on tax collection.  Of course, it was necessary that we had to move very hard on tax collection because the rates of tax collected where really low but I think there has been a danger of over enthusiasm in tax collection; maybe sometimes at the expense of focusing on production.  

While we are busy raising the percentage of tax collected of the GDP, we should also make sure that there is a concomitant rise in the GDP.  We must increase production and that is why some Members are talking about poverty in the countryside.  It is possible that actually we can improve on the well-being of the people.  

For example, in those areas where people are luckily enough to be able to keep dairy cattle.  I think, there has been a material difference between what was obtained about four or five years and to what is obtaining today.  Four, five years ago nearly everybody in Kampala drank reconstituted milk.  Today, everybody in Kampala will, if they wish, drink fresh milk and what is the net result of this?  It means, the milk producers are daily getting some money into their pockets even as far away as hon. Mbabazi’s place in Kabuga there.  People are getting some money into their pockets from milk.  So, if we focus on those areas, which can bring money, it is possible for people -(Interruption)

MRS MASABA:  Point of information. Thank you very much Mr Chairman. I wish to inform the hon. speaker on the Floor and the whole House and the nation that we are capable of producing at least 160, 000 litres per day at the dairy plant. That is the surplus milk - there is a lot of milk within Mbarara region and we are trying to tap all the milk, and to set up a milk powder plant: also a UHT - funds permitting.  (Interjection) Well, you will know later.  

But the point I want to make, is that - many people here, do not want our milk because they do not think it tastes the same way as the fresh one: but we are in the process of having a law set up so that we can sell you good milk - it is treated milk; and it is available. We have butter, we have cheese we have yogurt.  So, we have everything.  I wish to emphasise on the point that actually the agriculturally sector of the Dairy Industry has improved.  We are trying to market it all over Uganda.  Thank you.

MISS KABASHARIRA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. The hon. Member holding the Floor is raising a very good point on the cattle keeping products.  People produce a lot of milk.  The government laboured much to put some plants - the Dairy Corporation plants to collect that milk but surprisingly or unfortunately, people collect the milk, put it in that plant but the Dairy Corporation failed to collect it.  We would all be taking milk, which is fresh - but we are taking milk, which is made up of flour because it is not collected from those areas which produce a lot of milk.  Thank you.

PROF KAGONYERA:  Mr Chairman, I thank all the Members for the information they have given. I only want to add also that really Ugandans must get rid of this -(Interruption)- syndrome of foreign things are better. You will find a lot of people in this country drinking milk like UHT and what have you.  Little do they realise that this is reconstituted milk and they do not drink Ugandan fresh milk.  Whether it is packed by Dairy Corporation or sold by milk vendors, it is still fresh milk.  I was talking about taxation and I wanted to say that tax collection must be as comfortable as is possible and I am glad to say that really the Revenue Authority have improved tremendously on their public relations. You are received and treated quite politely. So, I thank them for that.  

However, I want to make some observations about road licences.  Road licences, it is so difficult  -(Interruption)- an hon. Member was talking about accidents in this country.  Now, we get problems whenever people want to get a road licence.  Your vehicle is DMC - you are what? I would have like him to tell this House, how many of these accidents that are causing death on our roads are due to DMC vehicles or to very careless driving of very good vehicles? (Interjection) Hon. Karuhanga is talking about tyres.  

I am aware that Eureka sells tyres, so everybody is encouraged to go to Eureka and buy new tyres.  But what I am saying, I would like the Ministry of Internal Affairs to look to where we are coming from.  Until recently, every vehicle on Ugandan roads was ramshackle and had we abided by their regulations, there would be no vehicles on the roads in Uganda.  Just like the buildings in Kampala - with trees growing on them.  They are DMCs but can you tell people to pull them down when they have nothing else to do.  I was wondering - okay, DMCs are dangerous on the roads because they cause accidents and death.  Is it not the presumption?  When I was in America, I drove a DMC and always bought my licence but I made sure that the breaks work.  (Laughter) What I am saying is really - there should be minimal harassment of people who are struggling to survive. (Applause) You see someone driving an old vehicle, he is carrying cassava, he is carrying tomatoes to the market to try and survive and send his children to school in a very honourable manner, he is stopped and the thing sis taken to Naguru and what happens after that - it is anybody’s gift.  Therefore, I was saying that as much as we should keep our vehicles in reasonable conditions, I think government must understand where this country is coming from.  We must not be oblivious of the poverty in the country.  Nobody chooses to drive a terribly old vehicle. It is circumstances; it is conditions that force them to do so.  I thank you Mr Chairman.

MISS KADAGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman, for allowing me to contribute to this Motion.  I wish to draw the attention of the House to paragraph 28 of the Budget Speech, page 12.  We are to spend 329 billion shillings, which will be externally funded.  So, in mind this means that all of us Ugandans are going to have to pay this money.  So, I am calling the Ministry of Planning to improve on its planning system and redistribute development more equitably in this country. (Applause) 

In the Background to the Budget of 1990; on the Transport Sector, we were informed that in the pipeline, were a number of projects. One of them was the introduction cargo and passenger barges on Lake Kyoga and Lake Albert; at a cost of 83,000 dollars. This is just elementary Economics.  If government were to improve on the infrastructure in the Lake Kyoga area, I believe that it would go a long way to improve income, standards of living of the people in those areas. (Applause) But when you look at the Background to the Budget of 1991/92 - they say they resume ferry services in Kumi and Soroti - just that.  Nothing about the other side of Lake Kyoga. 

In 1992/1993 - they are talking about 73 locomotives, nothing about the barges.  The matter of barges is dying out as you can see.  The same pattern is followed, up to now nothing is said about them.  That was only 83,000 dollars.  Is it possible that government was not able to secure US$ 83,000 to improve the lives of the people of Busoga living along Lake Kyoga? Not only those living there, but I mean the whole interland?  We have talked and talked in this House about the lack of economic viability in our area because of our geographical location: but apparently nobody really takes an interest.  

What is worse, I have here the rehabilitation and development plan, 1991/1992 up to 1994/1995 - what they call priority projects.  I will confine myself again to transport.  If you think about development sector - you see Mpigi, Mubende, Kabarole, Kasese, Nalukolongo, Kampala.  From there you continue Kampala-Kasese line - still railway, a little on Kampala Jinja Tororo.  You will leave that one - you proceed to road infrastructure.  Kampala to Mpigi District. Jinja through Iganga to Tororo Districts.  Nothing about Kamuli.  From there - roads again Bushenyi to Kasese districts, that is Ishaka Katungulu Road completed.  Masaka/ Lyantonde /Mbarara Road. I am sure you can see the directions. Then Mbarara/ Ntungamo /Kabale Road.  

Then we go to communication.  Communication on Masaka/Bukoba microwave, Masaka/Rakai/Mbarara and Kabale districts; that is communication.  Then, there is what they call a countrywide programme to last 24 months. That one started in 1991/1992; 24 months they were completed.  So, while the other side is on microwaves, Kamuli is on the Stone Age.  So, what kind of development is this?  So, I am calling upon government in the next rehabilitation and development plan - I would like to see -(Interruption)

MR NASASIRA:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, if hon. Kadaga had read the information in the Budgets of 1988/89, she would have found there – Jinja / Kamuli Road because that is when it was rehabilitated and resurfaced.  Then, as far as communication is concerned, she would notice that the microwave system she is talking about is actually going international.  Now, if we head to Kamuli, we shall still be in the interland.  The two microwave projects she has talked about is going across our borders.

MISS KADAGA:  Mr Chairman, I travel on the Jinja-Kamuli Road. What I am talking about is that while some people get wholesale, others get crumbs.  So, the Jinja-Kamuli Road is a crumb.  I hope the Minister understands, that.  So, what I am saying while we have those 50 miles of tarmac road, we are asking for other services.  We are asking for opening of the marine services.  I would like to see something on inland waterways here.  In fact, despite the government saying that they are going to concentrate on marine improvement, everything is done in Lake Victoria here.  Maybe it will benefit my Friend in Kalangala, but Lake Victoria is not Take Kyoga.  

Then, the question of Corporate Tax.  The Minister proposes to give some incentives. On page 36 paragraph 92, the Minister  proposes that he will give 100 per cent accelerated depreciation if you invest outside Kampala, Entebbe, Jinja  and Njeru. But, who is going to go to Kidera when there is no road? Or when there is just a murram road.  Who will go to Kidera when there is no electricity?  This is just going to remain on paper.  I think that it is time the government woke up.  The Ministry of planning must wake up and design a special programme for backward areas. (Applause and Interruption)

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, first agreeing with the sentiments of the hon. Member and precious Lady, I can only pray through her to give the House and the country get across the government - until and unless Chapter 320 of the Uganda Constitutional Commission is revised, which is an objective law in our Statute Book so as to create the Ministry of Economic Development on a national basis rather than on a basis of giving only the political spoilt system of thanking Nkangi to run that Ministry: in order to woo him to go to NRM. (Laughter) Uganda wants and is crying for rapid economic development and it can only be done objectively through that law I have mentioned - Chapter 320, Uganda Constitutional Commission, which will enable everybody to go to the Government and even the so-called - we call ourselves RCs but very important.  In fact, you write to these people in the Secretariat, they never answer you and can only be done objectively through that law I have mentioned, chapter 320 Uganda Constitution Commission which will enable everybody to go to the Government and even the so called - we call ourselves RCs, but very impotent, in that you write to these people in the Secretariat they will never answer you; so, we shall never develop.  In particular I have written eight memorandums ever since I joined this NRC business, and nothing has been done.  I have built schools in my area; so I am not talking as a small boy, no. (Interruption)

CAPT. GASATURA: Point of information. Mr Chairman, just supplementary information on hon. Kadaga’s call for equitable development in Background to the Budget page 23, the Function Classification of Development Expenditure, while 79.3 per cent is spent on administration and social services the rural areas gets 5.4 per cent; and when you come to Recurrent Expenditure they work harder at it.   Rural areas get 1.7 per cent, even against their claimed priority areas of health and education development health gets 7 per cent and in recurrent health gets 4 per cent.  This is upside down development. We are pushing for that may not auger well with our well-known No. 10 on the 10 point programme of a mixed economy; we may end up having it mixed up.

MISS KADAGA:  Mr Chairman, I would like to thank both Members for that information.  So, really, I think you will agree with me that the need is real and these things must be done now. Because if all of us are left to play in the market, we have no chance like I said nobody is going to go to our areas where we do not have services.  They will come here to Kampala, and they will forego the incentive and stay in Kampala, in Jinja and Njeru.  So, it is high time that we develop the plan for special areas specifically. I would like to see that in the next Budget, and also, when the President goes on his investment wooing trips, I think that he should go with a design to who specific investors for different areas.  But if he just says come to Uganda, come to Uganda they will stop here.  I would like to see a situation where the President and whoever accompanies him can we specifically invest for a particular project in a particular district.  I think in that we shall be able to benefit from these things to which we all contribute as taxpayers. Thank you very much.

MRS K. KIRYAPAWO (Women Representative, Tororo): Thank you very much, for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this Motion.  Many people have talked about the famine in the East and North; and I am sure some people are almost getting tied, but we are doing so because of the importance of the people who were affected, and in my observation I have observed that some people tend to think that, maybe, those people in those areas were lazy but I want to assure everybody here that it was not due - but it is due to the charges of the weather, where you find that there was prolonged draught in that area; and people would do nothing to control it, and at the same time I also observe that there is over liberalization of our products.  Right now as I am speaking there is harvest, harvest has started in those areas, but you can imagine at what price these foodstuffs are being sold.  You find that a bag of maize now, dried maize, it is between Shs 5, 000 and Shs 7,000 a bag of 100 kgs.  You cannot believe it but it is because of this unfair distribution of wealth that these people have nothing right now they have to take back their children to school. 

Now, what does a man or woman do?  Definitely he has to sell this food, it is the only item he has in order to earn a living; and you will find that when we are liberalizing it is a policy; it is a Government Policy and very good.  But at the same time Government is doing nothing to compete, now here is where we are finding that our Colleagues in the Cabinet, everybody is trying, you know, to shade off to another one, saying that my duty is to do this but not the other.  

Then I note, lack of co-operation.  I am sure when I produce children I must see that my children survive.  So, if you mobilise people, the farmers to produce you must be aware that when they produce, where is my responsibility is to be taken into account. So, you cannot leave it just entirely to somebody who did not participate together with you to produce.  Because if you participate you know the hardships you have gone through; so, I am sure there must be good co-operation between the ministries, instead of one after doing this one you say that is now my responsibility was to do this not the other. We talk to the silos but why do we not fill these silos?  Why is Government failing to fill these silos, after all why are they there, why were they built? Now we come to the Ministry of Labour who has to distribute what is in the government pockets.  (Interruption)

MR KAIJA:  Point of information. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The hon. Member has talked on silos, this one, as you know it was designed by government where notable prices, where produce is largely abundant were earmarked for such silos. Masindi was to benefit out of this, and you know very well Masindi being the granary of Uganda it missed it.  Therefore, our people in North would not have suffered this much, and currently the farmer in Masindi is just earning Shs 10, 000/= out of his produce of one bag.  Simply because his maize cannot be dried so it has got some high moisture content, with the silo that would not have been the case.  Thank you.

MR KAJUBI:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, commercial farmers wish to buy these silos so that they can fill them because the Minsitry of Marketing, Co-operatives and Industry has failed.  Mrs Kapampara who is the Director of the Produce Marketing Board is almost doing nothing.  So, we urge the Ministry of Co-operatives and so on to sell this to the farmers, we must buy them so that we can fill them.

MR KANYOMOZI: Point of information. Mr Chairman, the farmers, the progressive farmers should not wait for the sell, if they are dynamic enough they can put up their own, that is point one.  Point number two, some of these silos where put in such places to be used as strategic reserve for food, for remedy.  Three, we have already passed the PERD Bill, and in it part of the PMB is going to be privatized.  So, if the gentleman can be patient besides building up his own, he will be in time to have the PMB on his best.  

MR MWANDHA:  Point of information. On the question of silos I had a discussion with the Deputy Minister of Trade and Industry.  My concern was why the Government was not using these silos to keep food for occasions when we would have no food to feed the people like he is saying, they would be used for strategic food reserves. He told me that these silos are for marketing purposes, for storing grain food, which would be exported or sold, but not for storage of food for internal consumption. 

I raised a question yesterday, it appears to me from the explanation we got from the Minister of Trade and Industry, and the Minister of Agriculture; and now the Minister of Labour and Social Affairs. The Government has no policy on food security, surely it is exposing our people to the indignity of famine and suffering and so on.  Why can the Government not have a policy on food security? Rather than simply saying my job sis to produce food and then one Minister says my job is to sell whatever is available, then somebody says local leaders should be able to mobilise the people so that they keep food.  Honestly can this be taken as a policy on food security?

MISS KIRYAPAWO: I thank all those who have given me that information. Mr Chairman, the issue of by laws which we are -(Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that the information which was given by hon. Kanyomozi, my Friend is not quite fully what it should be in the sense it is that most Ugandans’ do not have the money and, therefore, unless the Government advices a system whereby savings could be mobilized there are not many Ugandans who can afford even those silos, and we discuss matter in detail not only the silos, but also some of our industries which are being sold to foreigners.  The Government must have in place a policy of mobilizing resources, and without that there is no single person in Uganda who has got resources in order to buy those silos.  

So, I am appealing through the good Lady on the Floor and to the Minister of Agriculture who is here, even the one of Finance to make sure that really we mobilize saving as the only alternative of developing countries like United States developed the whole of Europe, through mobilizing resources. Thank you, Chairman.

MISS. KIRYAPAWO:  Mr Chairman as you see, it is all this that has come because of lack of food policy which is not in place; and we have - we Members on the Sectoral Committee on the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, ever since these Sectoral Committees started, every year we have recommended Government to have food policy, but up today there is no food policy in Uganda. When we are talking about by laws yes, we can revive these by laws but there are some laws, which have by passed the time.  Right now in these areas we talk of these granaries it is of a high risk for one to put your head and, maybe, the chest inside and leave your stomach outside.  These granaries are outside, and most of the people live in these small houses - our normal huts. Then you find that somebody cannot put all the food he has produce in that small house.  What does he do to leave it outside and he cannot risk that.  So, what do I do? I sell. (Interruption)

MR EKWARU:  Point of information. The point which the Member is bringing up is very important, because at local level if we have a bye-law, it might be put in place that circumstances surrounding that area, especially, the areas that you know very well, I know most of you know where we come from, you will find that you may encourage people to grow cassava, you may encourage people to grow potatoes, you may encourage them ever to store them in granaries but when our brothers come from across, everything is theirs.  (Laughter)  So, there are, actually, some two things that I suggest the Government should do.  One; to have a nationally policy for food security; and then two to control those people so that ever we mobilize at, at a local level should be preserved.

MISS KIRYAPAWO:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  s the previous informer has said, in fact, when these people come if they do not take they set everything on fire. (Interjection) The cattle rustlers! All these are insecurity on food.  That is why I stand to urge Government to also provide funds to the Ministry of Labour and Social Welfare to buy food during harvesting time so that this food is put in the silos -(Applause)- If these silos are not feet they must make them feet.  They must recorrect the mistakes so that they can be used for our food.  I mean if they cannot store they can store many there is maize, beans soya beans, and millet.  But if they say, as one Member was informing the House, that there are not suitable for certain foods, then it is very sad. Now, that one takes me the rural development.  I do not know how we can be proud of development, when the rural side is not developed; and still that one emphasizes to say that everybody in the rural and even the whole country must get food.  I do not know what development you can talk about when people do not have enough food. But you will find that now in the rural side the infrastructure - the roads - feeder roads, I understand that one time we were told that every district is going to get a road equipment unit, but up to now, I do not know whether it has started because even if you give 50 per cent when the road equipment unit is not there that money will be embezzled; and the people will not benefit. 

So, I am requesting the Ministry concerned to see that each district gets this road equipment unit.  So that our feeder roads can be put in a proper manner; and now investors who are coming in they cannot even go to the rural areas because there are so many things lacking especially the roads, not talking about the others like telephones, electricity all these discouraging investors and you will find that most of these investors will remain here in Kampala.

THE CHAIRMAN: please, wind up.

MISS KIRYAPAWO: Mr Chairman, there were some people who were informing me.  So, please, an additional few minutes.

THE CHAIRMAN: One minute, please, wind up your speech.

MISS KIRYAPAWO:  Now, you take me to - when I refer to Tororo District, you can find that all the industries, the factories, which were in Tororo District, and there are no more. TIKAF went long ago and, now UCI stands there as ghost. Now there is only one thing which is remaining in Tororo; that is education, and it is very sad when I talk about Tororo Girls School; it is in a pathetic and a very dangerous situation. I want to inform the whole House that the lives of the people of Tororo Girls are in great danger. I know people will say that there was a fund-raising. Yes, there was a fundraising, but that was nothing.  The money which we got from the American Government was to demolish those dangerous structures which were most dangerous, but all the structures were condemned in 1992 by the  -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Mr Chairman, I share very much the concern being expressed by the hon. Member holding the Floor about rural development.  With regard to the point on Tororo Girls, my information is that the demolishing of the dangerous structure is now being completed by the money offered by the Ministry of Education.  The Americans offered Shs126 million tied to the reconstruction; they refused to finance the demolition.  Thank you.

MRS KIRYAPAWO:  Mr Chairman, I would like to put my NEC Member in the current - because this money, when the American donated Shs126 million, in fact, their donating that money, it was to House to save themselves, Tororo Girls was donated by the American Government, and once they realised that the school was in such a grave situation, they wanted to save their government by pulling down the school, because if it collapses, it should be in my lay way, it should be the American Government to be sued which constructed the school! Because the material I stand to be corrected.  Now you told that time is going, can I finish. (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is it in order for the Members to mislead this House, that the American Government really financed the demolition of the construction when I have just given the correct information, that they refused to financed the demolition, but that they were prepared to finance reconstructions.  To the best of my knowledge, the money that was given for the demolition work was given by the Ministry and the Americans up to day have not realised Shs126 million, which they offered for reconstruction.

MRS KIRYAPAWO: Mr Chairman, I wish the hon. Minister has waited for me to finish, because what I was saying in the first place, they had wanted the school to be demolished. Now, when they donated this money, they had to agree, whether the money is to go far demolition or for construction; and right now, they are saying, if demolition can be taken over by Government, then they will be constructing one building at time, and they promised to construct eight buildings, but right now, the most dangerous buildings were demolished but at the same time all the buildings are dangerous, and now, I have even a letter from the Ministry of Lands Housing and Urban Development, a Permanent Secretary writing to the Secretary of the Ministry of Education urging him to solicit funds during this year, the amount is Shs308 million. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member do not labour that point too much, please you wind up your speech.

MRS KIRYAPAWO: Now, my request is to the Ministry of Finance to avail funds to the Ministry of Education so that work can start of constructing; right now the short socketing every week, because the wires are necked and then the pipes are leaking, so there is always that contact, it is important that people know the situation at the school, because that is why you see me -(interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please, hon. Member resume your Seat.

MR KASAIJA (Bujenje Country, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I wish to thank the Minister of Finance and Economic Planning for the good Budget Statement he made during this Financial Year.  I would like to state, right from the out set, that this Budget has been a balanced Budget totality, balanced in the sense that at least it has addressed some of the issues that used to pain the public, and not balanced in the sense that it did not address the issue of deficit management properly.  But, if you compare this Budget with the previous Budgets, at least, you will find that the Minister endeavoured actually to do the needful.  If you read this Budget together with the Budgets say from 1991, up to day, and within a short time, I will be giving you this comparative figures, you will find that, at least the Government is trying to address the issue of revenue mobilization, and there we should give them credit.  I am also going to be upraising the Members about so far the impacts, that this revenue, collections have had on our economy since 1991. I am inviting some appraisals and I will be giving out the Members but what I am presenting here are some of the views that so far I have come out -(Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like the hon. Member on the Floor to tell this House, as to whether it is a good Budget when the Finance Bill itself just does not state exactly what these rates are - he just says - his code that for existing rate of sales tax substitute this -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, hon. Member, we have not yet come to the Finance Bill.

MR KASAIJA:  Mr Chairman, I think I was trying to make a point and when we are discussing the Finance Bill, I will also be saying something about the rates, but generally, I think this Budget has been characterised by reductions, which used not to be the case in the previous Budgets.  This has been one way of broadening the tax base, you know most of us when we talk about broadening the tax base, some people think maybe, exploring new areas, where you can tax the public, but you can broader the tax base by reducing the rates, so that you induce the compliance level of the tax payers, because you are bringing actually, a big number of them in the net of paying tax, and surely, I think this one is a very good policy on the side of the Ministry of Finance to allow.  

Now, I would like to give the Members, so far some of the comparative figures and I would like to start with the allocations, since 1991/92 Budget up to this kind Budget, I find the total Budget in totality has been increasing, right from say a Budget of about Shs 588 billion in 1991/92, then Shs700 billion in 1992/1993, 1993/1994, Shs 803 billion and this year, Shs 857 billion, the figure has actually been going up.  So, if it is a curve, the curve has been going up.  But now, what we need to do, we as representative of the people, is to see that in spite of these figures going up, what has been the accompanying effect on the lives of the people, maybe what I need to do, is to inform the Members that in terms of their allocations, when you look at these figures, the development proportion has also been increasing, for example from 1991 to 1992, the ratio was 40 to 60, that is 40 per cent of the total Budget went to the development Budget, then in 1992/1993, the ratio went up to about 55, 45, this was a very good thing, because at least, we need a big proportion of the total Budget to go to development, but I will be telling you in short time to come, has this increase been also - has it been transformed into the improvement of the lives, because actually my analysis that I want to give to the Member is that the Government has been doing a good job, but where has the problem been? 

That is the actually, this is the fifth that I am trying to defend here.  For example in 1993/1994, the allocation has been 49 development and then 51 Recurrent then 1994/1995, the proportion is 46 to 54, and I think this is a good thing the increase is good, but what I have so far noted, is that despite, these increasing levels of development allocation, the money has not been transformed to the improvement of the rural poor in the rural areas, what the problem so far that I note has been noted that the allocation has been bad, not that the planners have been bad, but I think the people who have been entrusted to utilise this money in the rural areas have not done a good job, and this where I want to inform you of one prominent economist who has said that, it is good to give aid to the poor countries, and they give aid of course, in the form of assisting us mostly in development allocation, because recurrent, normally the Government has to try as much as possible to meet it, but, some of the developed countries like America, they say, they are tired of giving assistance, okay, they are tired to taxing, there are poor population to come and benefit the rich population in the developing countries, and actually, this is happening, because they go and tax those people we get this money and the money is misallocated.  

So, unless we the legislature here come up with a policy that when this money comes up, we as the legislature should have a committee to look at how this money going to be allocated in such way that it penetrates eight from the centre up to the rural area, this is where we have been failing Members; and at an appropriate time, I will bring - most like if it is accepted to the Members and we are entitled - I will be convincing my colleagues, because this is my areas of specialization that unless we scrutinise this amount that we normally get from outside in the form of development assistance, in the form having a committee to look at what is the proportion that is going to transform the lives of the rural population, then we shall not be able, really to do justice to our nation, which we are going to approve the Budget in the way we have been doing so.  Because in the way I have been noticing.  

When we come here, to debate, of course, we have never changed the Budget right from 1986 to now, we have never changed even a shilling from the total amount that we are given here, but we come up, we talk and we come up with good ideas, but maybe, if we can come up with something which can really lead our nation that we are tied of seeing budgets, the total increasing but the lives of the people in the rural areas are not being actually improved, that we shall not be doing justice - there I can  now maybe, get the clarification before I proceed. (Interruption)

MR KANYOMOZI: Point of information.  The thing I would like to say is this, the committees of this House, sectoral committees have, actually done a thorough analysis of what should be done, and they have made recommendations to Government as what should be done, the only problem is that Government does not take these things very seriously.  You need only to read this report and see the various recommendations put forward by the sectoral committees at different level.  If this has been followed, the issues that my colleague is talking about would have been reduced; but some how we make the recommendations and they only become a white paper.

MR WANENDEYA: Point of order.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order, please, hon. Wanendeya, your point of order is an abuse to the rules of the House.

MR KASAIJA:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I wish to thank hon. Kanyomozi for the -(Interjection)- I was saying that hon. Kanyomozi is right, but maybe, why do not ask ourselves that despite those recommendations we have been making and which we have always been passing here in the House, what has gone wrong, because the power has not been taken away from us, we are still the highest body here in this country which definitely makes laws.  Now, if we come up with resolution and we say unless the Government implement a, b, c, d, we are not going to do c, d, e I think this is what we are lacking, for us we look at things, and we live them to go, the way they have come.  

So, maybe, what I need to caution the Members is that, let us impose on us by the World Bank and the IMF.  One thing, which I note also, is that we have been too much too open, and this has been actually, too much to the detriment of our people in the rural areas. Mr Chairman -(interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of order.  Thank you, Mr Chairman, I would like to ask the hon. Member, whether I would request him whether it is in order for him to mislead this House by saying that these structural adjustment programmes or the liberalization policy which this Government is following that has been imposed on us.  It is actually ourselves who are kneeling for this money not imposing this structure adjustment.  Therefore, is it in order for the hon. Member to mislead this august House.

 THE CHAIRMAN:  The Member is in order.  Go ahead.

MR KASAIJA: What I was saying is that structured adjustment programme may not necessarily have been bad for us.  But I think we have been too much open.  Because in an economy like ours, it is I think not good or something visible for us to accept the theory that you lead everything to the free market economy.  Because even the developed countries have not actually gone as far as liberalised as they are telling us to go.  

For example, I have been giving here information that if you look at Agriculture - people wanted to go and riot.  But for us here we accept to go fully and yet you know when you want to liberalise and you want a free market mechanism, there have to be some structures, which could be put in place. So, when you add up, that is how we come up with this figure the 1.9 per cent, and that is on page 19 of the background of the Budget.  

So, I wanted to give this information - to inform the Members that so far so good the Uganda Revenue Authority is performing but I would not like the Members to ask me the question they have been asking that if you are performing where is this money.  It is not being transformed in our pockets.  I think hon. Members you know very well the Statute we passed.  The Uganda Revenue Authority is an agent.  We collect, and when we collect we sent the consolidated fund. We have no power to determine where this money goes unless we change the Statute. But you are the one who passed this law that URA only performs and sends to the Minister.  And we have done the good job.  Mr Chairman, I would like to thank you very much for giving this time to clarify.

MR MUKASA MURULI (Nakasongola):  Mr Chairman, hon. Members, I wish to thank to the Minister of Finance for what I think is a good Budget this year.  The Budget is good because of the number of things.  One; this season the pre-budget and the post-budget season has not been characterised by some of the evils, which used to characterise these seasons in the past.  The evil let us say, of hoarding the evil of hiking prices and so on. What we have seen is really the contrary in the prices have more or less remained stable and in some cases, prices let say, of soap have gone down.  So, that is one aspect of goodness about this Budget. The other is that the Budget this time is going to allocate a lot of funds, towards the development.  So, that is another good aspect really and we are told that the shilling has been appreciating as against the dollar and it is likely to become fully comfortable in international money market.  So, another good aspect of the Budget.  

Now, I would like to say something about Agriculture as mentioned in the Budget. We know that Agriculture is the cornerstone of our economy and, therefore, a lot of care and interest must be put into this aspect.  However, what do we see or what does the Budget say about Agriculture?  You see, the attention given to Agriculture has not gone as far as it should have been.  Of course there are not several improvements in the field of Agriculture but I think there is a lot to be desired, there is room for improvement.  Because we have been told that one slight thing like the drought has actually not only brought disaster in this country.  A number of people may have died in various districts and even the performance of the economy has been affected because of the drought.  

So, this means therefore, that there is a lot that has to be done in respect to Agriculture such that one natural disaster like that or prolonged drought should not cause this adverse effect on our economy.  Okay we have been told that actually, there is food here and there, the only problem why some areas have suffered from hunger is that they have not been able to transfer food from one area to another. This is okay, it is possible but I think know it should not be the case.  I think every effort should be put in place to make sure that every area in this country is self-sufficient in food so that there should be no need whatsoever to move food from one rural area to another.  I think with the little bit of effort and planning, this is possible in all parts of this country, Mr Chairman. (Interruption)

MR MAYENGO: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member that as a good example of what he is saying, while people in so many other parts of Uganda are starving because of lack of rain, in my area people are starving because there is too much rain. It is necessary as he is suggesting that the Ministry of Agriculture does research to find out what kind of crops both food and cash that can grow in so much rain.  Thank you, Sir.

MR MUKASA MURULI: That is very useful information thank you very much, hon. Mayengo. I would like to say that in famine – stricken areas, these usually happen to be the semi arid or arid areas of this country - a lot of areas, which include of course Nakasongola County, Karamoja, and I am told Bulisa.  And such areas even Teso.  This should be given special attention so that really these areas should not suffer from famine from time to time.  There are very many causes of famine, and drought has been mentioned, there is also the cassava mosaic in the case particularly of Nakasangola County and surrounding areas of Kibanda, Nakaseke and so on. 

There is also the problem of poor attraction.  We cannot plough our areas in time and in sufficient acreage.  There is a problem of poor enforcement of the agriculture bye-laws.  These are already in place but they are poorly enforced by the chiefs. There is a problem of poverty really.  Peasants are poor they cannot afford some of these inputs which are necessary for proper agriculture and production of enough food to ensure proper food security.  Then the extension staff.  A lot has been done really to facilitate the extension staff have been given for instance, motorcycles.  But then no money is provided for maintaining these motorcycles even to buy fuel.  

So, somebody the gentleman will have his motorcycle it will be there, when it gets spoilt then he cannot move. Or if it is not spoilt at all he cannot get fuel to run that motorcycle.  You find these miserable workers trying on their own to put in fuel to do work of the Government if all these problems are looked into I think something then can be done.  The agricultural performance can be improved and we shall have the food security that we need and then we might not have famine that is troubling us from time to time and again.

The Budget Speech talks of an effort by Government to look into the possibility of having irrigation. In fact, the exact words are these: ‘they will investigate the possibility of having irrigation.’ Actually this is very good.  At least it is a step forward in the right direct.  But I am a little bit apprehensive. We in the agricultural sectoral committee have talked of irrigation time and again.  But unfortunately, Government has not moved very fast.  And when we hear of investigation or possibilities, then I have a feeling that if it is an investigation is not a hurried thing.  It can be today or tomorrow or ten years’ time. So, I would really feel that a sense of urgency must be put in to this aspect so that we already know that there is need really for irrigation.  Then there is no reason to look into investigation. The best thing that can be done now with resources available, is to establish a pilot team.  (Interruption)

MRS MUGARURA: Point of information. Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to inform the hon. Member that irrigation is not possible in peasantry agriculture, it only works well for mechanized farming, commercial farming but when you bring to peasantry, it is not feasible the farmers cannot maintain this.  Thank you.

MRMARWAS:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the former Informer that irrigation is possible in peasantry agriculture as evidenced by the example of Dokora Scheme it is a peasantry scheme.

MRS BWAMBALE: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman, for the additional information. I would like to inform hon. Mugarura who was informing hon. Mururi that actually it is irrigation that is needed in this country.  And it has worked in Kasese District under Mubuku irrigation scheme, where we can have tomatoes, onions, full-time and throughout the year.  The only problem and it is peasants doing it, the only problem is that the Scheme was introduced in 1962 and since then, it has never been expanded.  It is my prayer that the Ministry of Agriculture does expand this scheme and also put all the mountain areas under irrigation so that we can have farming.  So, that we can do farming throughout the year.  Because if Masaba which is having rivers flowing 24 hours, Rwenzori mountains and perhaps Kabale, the plain lands were under irrigation then we would be in a position to have food throughout the year.  Thank you.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Thank you very much for those pieces of information.  I think they go to prove that agriculture or irrigation is possible even in peasant agriculture.  After all, we know that the Egyptians 5,000 years ago, used to carry out agriculture by irrigation, and I think they were at time peasants.  Even now a good number of them are till peasants.

Turning to the problem of the cassava mosaic.  I am aware the efforts which the ministry of agriculture has taken to avert this problem of cassava mosaic.  However, these efforts are still very slow, and unless something is done to put in some speed then the problem of hunger especially, in these dry areas, will continue. 

I would like to suggest that - okay the Minister of Agriculture has a number of multiplication centres in various sports; they may be of two hectares, three hectares.  It is hoped that when the stems are mature they are cut and distributed to the farmers, and then they keep distributing like that until finally we have a number of stems throughout the area. For instance, in Nakasongola they are 33,000 homes, and an average homestead has let us two hectares of cassava.  Under this arrangement, it might take us about ten years or 15 for each homestead to have enough stems to plant two hectares of cassava.  I do not know what will happen between now and that time.  

I would like to suggest that there could be a method of multiplying these stems very rapidly.  If the multiplication centres were for instance, put near a permanent swamp or near lake Kyoga, and then these stems are permanently irrigated because water is nearby, these stems could grow very fact and we could harvest three times a year, and surplus give them to the farmers.  Yes it is possible, and if they are planted not in the normal way of actually producing tubers, you just put them there  -(Interruption)

MR KIRYA GOLE: Point of information. I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that the growth of various cassava varieties have to follow a certain natural timetable, we cannot just hatch.

MR MURULI MUKASA:  I am still convinced that with enough gingery, and in good sense, I think the speed of growth rate is good sunshine, the rate of growth could be speeded up. Instead of letting everything leaving everything to nature, when drought comes in there is a reduced growth, when there is plenty of rain then growth hurries up, we leave everything to haphazard method, this will not assist us any way.

We are a cotton producing area, unfortunately cotton production in our areas has collapsed because the very well know - tow well known reasons. But one of the reasons that I would like to dwell on here is the collapse of the ginning capacity, and this ginning capacity in case of Nakasongola, or Bururi County, is because we do not have power to run the machines, to run the ginnery in our ginnery.  Yet power just runs ahead - overhead a ginnery, all along it has been running overhead there for the last 10 years.  What is required is just a step down transformer. (Interruption)

MR ELYAU:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the hon. Member holding the Floor is holding very important information for us.  In our area, I think you are aware there is a line, which stretches from Mbale straight up to Lira spinning Mill, overtaking Kalaki and so you can imagine the electricity is brought down so that we share it.

MR MURURI MUKASA:  The power I am talking about goes just straight to Luwero industries passing ahead of the cotton gingery at Nakasongola.  Since 1972 the people of Nakasongola have made every effort possible to them to make sure that this power is tapped and goes to the factory it goes to the gingery, it goes to the rest of the town.  We have financed feasibility studies, we have gone to UEB, we have gone to the whole generation of ministers of power they promise this and that, nothing materialized.  We even took our appeal to the highest authorities to His Excellency the President, nothing has materialized.  Yet we are told we must grow cotton, we must do everything possible to have something income generating so that we run out of poverty.  

Now, I do not know how we can do this if we are not facilitated in this very, very important aspect.  I would like to propose on this, that to the UEB to the Minister that government of - Minister of Natural Resources that we are ready to grow cotton in thousands and thousands of bells if gives a transformer, on credit facilities we can pay after we have grown our cotton we pay maybe, for 20 years, w are paying for the transformer. (Interruption)

MR MULONDO:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that Nakasongola gingery and the area around there is one of our priority areas for the supply of power. What I would like to encourage the hon. Member is to persuade the people in Bururi and Nakasongola area, to continue growing cotton. All that is possible is being done to make sure that the gingery at Nakasongola is provided with power.  We also feel that many other people around there should come in and apply for the use of electricity.  Because it must be economical; it must be economical for UEB to maintain electricity in the area, and that can only be if all the people at least many people around the area are prepared to consume the electricity.  Thank you.

MR EKWARU: Further information.  Apart form electricity, the farmers also have been very much frustrated because in our own areas you find that one once farmers have bought cotton either the price is low, and they are not paid on time.  In that, people have now lost hope in growing cotton especially in Teso.

MR MUKASA MURURI:  I am very grateful for the pieces of information I have received. I am particularly happy to learn from the Deputy Minister of Natural Resources that Nakasongola is high priority.  But I have received that kind of information since 1972 and I think this time - I hope this time it will really be a priority.  If we are going to have food security then we must then we must seriously consider the question of ox-plough traction; that one is a very important issue we must - whenever we talk of traction and so on, people normally run towards tractors; and so on.  In a good number of areas like Bururi, like Teso, like Karamoja and so on, ox-plough traction is really ideal.  There are many various advantages, of ox-plough traction, one; is that you have your technology which you understand very well, under your control, you can use it any time you want it whenever it rains you pull it out and use it. 

You do not rely on technology which far too ahead of you and is under the control of somebody and requires too much money to use. Two; ox-plough traction will at least encourage farmers to move from one stage of agriculture to another from just simple crop production to some kind of mixed farmer. Thereby improving even the nutritional standard of the areas concerned.  I sometimes knew and I ask why the Itesots very tall and healthy and so on. One of the reasons is that their nutritional standard is really very high because they all these things.  So, we, people if we move down to ox-plough cultivation, we could also improve in this respect. Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Can you wind up, hon. Member?

MR MURULI MUKASA:  I am trying to wind up, Mr Chairman.  Before, I wind up, let me talk about roads.  His Excellency said in his speech here that he sighted some of  - a number of roads that were not being utilised to their maximum, he sighted the Kampala - Kako Road as one of them. It is true it is not being used to maximum it has been repaired. But how can it be used to maximum when the roads move leading to that main road are impassable? They are just cattle trails not even cattle I do not have a word to describe them.  These roads have not been repaired since 1967, really these roads in Bururi, roads in Nakaseke, you cannot imagine.  

So, even if we produce or grow a lot of stuff we cannot transport these things to the main road.  We were given a road unit, but this road unit is there are certain vital components which are missing in that road unit.  We do not have bulldozer for instance, we do not have even compactor, we do not have very many things. All these even become a problem.  So, I am saying that if we are going to produce, if we are going to use these roads then certain things must be put in place, if we - a road unit then let us have it in its eternity.  And it must be in complete form, and its control must be in the hands of the district administration. (Interruption)

MR TIVU:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the point about road equipment the hon. Member is raising is very important, as much as these equipment are being tenderised, there is a place which says they are projects and under that project you find that half of the money for the project is meant for the salaries and allowances of the part working under that project.  So, you find that every year, for instance, every month in Arua, they give 7 million shillings for the project but 3.5 million shillings has to go for salaries and allowances of the workers.  You can see you find that for a bulldozer to run, at least two thousand litres of fuel is required.  Now, how viable is this project.  So, there is need to address how this project is supposed to be run.  Thank you.

MR MURURI MUKASA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, that course will force the point I am making and illustrates the agony we go through everyday in our places. Everywhere you go they tell you to make a road and there is unit and there is nothing going on.  So, what do we do?

Before I wind up there is one other point of concern.  It is a point on compensation; this point is really very serious.  In Nakasongola county 3,000 families were moved from a site called Kiburi at the lake shore, to make room for Luwero industries; their property was valued and they were promised compensation, they were also promised that government would make an access road from the point they had moved to connect them to the main road in Nakasongola. That was about three years ago, these people have not been compensated up to now.  The access road that was promised, I have no word in my English vocabulary to describe it.  It is not even a road I do not know what it is, it is not a path at least, and I do not know, but you could assist us.  It is not a road and it is not a trench, and it is not anything.  Now, when I was looking at items in the Ministry of Housing and Land on compensation, I saw a miserably 5 million shillings.  I think we should be serious -(Interruption)

MR BWANIKA BBAALE:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, in support of what hon. Muruli Mukasa is saying, the people in that area Kiburi are bitter about government because government asked for this portion of land and people were moved away. Up to now they have not been compensated. Now, we have another development which hon. Rwabita is aware of, the army again wants to take Nyimbwa and the people in Luwero are refusing because of that incident in Mugyera.  So, if a government can solve that problem there, the Nyimbwa issue will be easy to negotiate with the people of Luwero.  

So, I am appealing to government to solve that one first before they could really enter the Nyimbwa issue to displace other communities.  Thank you very much.

MR KERMU: Additional information.  I would like to inform the speaker on the Floor concerning compensation, there is a teacher training college started (ten) 10 years ago in a primary school and people decided to give land for it, and the compensation has been not felt amounting to about 53 million shillings they should be paid.  Up to now this money has not been paid and because the people are reluctant to pay. Thank you.

MR MURULI MUKASA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman. You can see the problem there is on compensation, and to make matters worse, when we talk to the minister concerned, and even kindly invite them to go and see the people to see their condition they turn down these invitations.  They should also assist us as local leaders there to say something not just to keep quiet but say something, even a statement can be made about clarifying the issue of compensation.  Our people are patient they can wait so long as they hear that there is something definitely that government is going to do about the welfare i that respect. One final point, that is to do with the UCB Branch closure. These branches have been closed, while others have been -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Please, do not repeat yourself too much on UCB.

MR MURULI MUKASA:  Okay, what I am saying, Mr Chairman, that some let should be allowed for areas where banking is still a new culture.  Where there is a lot of potential for banking activities.  The UCB - I am asking the UCB to sort relax a bit where these branches have been reduced to agencies, let them give at least five months or so, to allow people mobilise savings so that they can reach the break even point instead of being scrumping down so fast on the bank and even killing the banking institution.  

Something was talked about accident -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  That was your last point hon. Member.  Okay make your last point.

MR MURULI MUKASA:  Mr Chairman, honestly I would like to say something on accident.  I am the chairman of the National Road Safety Council and I thought I could use this opportunity to say something about accidents in this country.  I might not have a similar opportunity.

There are 52,400 motor vehicles running on our road today. (Interjection) Yes, that excludes bicycles, carts and so on and even cattle.  Most of our roads have been rehabilitated, and I think the major roads. This means that there is increased traffic on our roads, there is a lot of speeding and, therefore, accidents are more.  To-date, as I speak now, at least 400 fatal accidents have happened between January and now.  People have died 400.  So there is reason therefore to do everything possible to stop this kind of carnage on our roads.  National Road Safety Council is doing whatever is in its power to stop this kind of trend but the National Road Safety Council is handicapped.  We do not have enough resources, we do not have funds and a good number of resources we use we beg from well wishers.  People like Total have assisted us occasionally.  Then the grant or the vote allowed to the Ministry of Works, Transport and Communication for this Council is again very small.  We cannot really do very much.  Now, there are other people who contribute to this carnage.  For instance -(Interruption)

MR KALULE SENGO: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I want to inform the hon. speaker that the majority of these accidents are caused by the reckless taxi drivers and unless something very strong is done about the taxi drivers, these accidents will never stop on our roads because when you check most of these accidents you find that over 70 per cent of them involve a taxi driver.  So, I would request the hon. speaker to think along the lines of disciplining or retraining the taxi drivers if we are going to remove these accidents from our roads.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Another point of information.  I wish to inform and support the hon. speaker that unless something is done life continues to go on our roads.  In many civilised countries, even Uganda, all cars have got safety belt but many drivers ignore to use safety belt.  I had a chance to visit Britain and if you are seated -(Interjection) Protect me, Mr Chairman. 

Last week I had a chance to visit Britain, all the passengers in the front seat are required to use safety belt.  If they do not use safety belt they are fined fifty counts on the spot.  May be if our traffic act was amended and we have the regulation that every driver or every passenger in the front seat should use a safety belt some of these fatal accidents would be reduced.  Thank you.

MR BUTIME: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, as a point of information and to add on what the speaker who has just been giving a point of information, there is a lot lacking in the current Traffic and Road Safety Act.  We in the police and the Ministry of Internal Affairs have sat down and proposed and forwarded our proposals to the Ministry that is concerned about that particular law and it has so far taken us, this is the third year ever since we submitted our proposals to the Traffic and Road Safety Act and it has not been possible for the Ministry where the chairman of the Road Safety Council sit to come out here in the House and cause those amendments to be done.  Unless there is an amendment to that Act we are going to continue having this problem on our roads and whatever the police can do, I do not think they can succeed if they are not backed by the new law.

MR MAYENGO: Point of order.  Is it in order for the Minister to hide the identity of the Ministry he is talking about?

THE CHAIRMAN: The Minister is in order.

MR BAKABULINDI:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, the point the hon. Member is trying to bring to the Floor is a very important point. First, from my research I found that what is causing all those accidents are, we need certain humps in certain areas. That is one. 

We need to cross zebras in certain areas.  This is very important.  They have killed a lot of kids, and it looks to be a simple issue but it is a very important issue.  The third point, as one hon. Member was indicating is that we need some tough measures on these taxi drivers.  From my research, because the Ministry of Defence is applying some tough measures, from January up to June we have found that there are few accidents, which have been caused by the Army contrary to what used to be in the former years.  That indicates that discipline is needed. 

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Further information. Mr Chairman, I would like to add supplementary information to what the hon. Member is saying.  Recently, when the police, the Inspector General of Police was addressing his staff on the question of road safety, it was found that the army was the best in reducing road accidents. (Laughter) because in the whole year the army was only involved in six accidents as compared to the previous year when, I think, there were more than thirty something, as compared to foreign registered numbers which was involved in very many accidents, even the Prisons, even different ministries and the information I would like to give are the measures which we took concerning the vehicles of the army.  

A speed limit was given to all vehicles, they are not supposed to exceed limit was given to all vehicles, they are not supposed to exceed more than 80 km/hr and in some areas around towns they are not supposed to exceeding around 50 km/hr. So, I propose that similar measures are taken in other Ministries and other departments and also the police or the Ministry of Internal Affairs to take tougher measures on foreign registered numbers and the taxi drivers.

MR LUKUM:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. member holding the Floor that the case of accidents affects not only travelers on the road but also those who are traveling by inland waters.  You have heard cases on Lake Albert, Lake Victoria and also Lake Kyoga whereby lives have been lost because of irresponsible transporters who actually are not at all controlled by the police.  We have got traffic policemen only on the road, no effort to control travellers on the lakes.  

Therefore, I wish to appeal to the hon. Minister in charge of Internal Affairs that control of travellers should be extended to our waterways because I come from Bulisa along the shores of Lake Albert.  This year alone we have lost about 80 lives as a result of accidents on water and in many cases it is out of irresponsible transporters overloading these boats and it would appear it has never been the concern of the Minister of Internal Affairs.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Shall I inform the Minister of Internal Affairs that accidents will go on until the mini bus, these small mini bus is banned because most of the accidents are caused by the small mini-buses called kamunye and so on. Let us use these mini buses with four tyres behind but the mini buses are very fast, too fast and they are too fast to stop and these are the main causes.  So let something be done about those small mini buses.  They are the causers of accidents.

MR BUTIME:  Well, Mr Chairman, as far as the mini buses are concerned, it is not the Ministry of Internal Affairs, which is in charge of passenger vehicles and what type of vehicles to import and what type of vehicles to licence for carrying people.  That is the work of the Ministry of Transport.  As far as traffic on the lakes and on rivers is concerned you will see that in the budget of 1994/1995 we have some funds specifically for the purchase of patrol boats.  When this money is released I think we should be able to be in charge on the lakes and on the rivers. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Muruli Mukasa, please go ahead and wind up.

MR NASASIRA:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The supplementary information I wanted to give is on two issues.  One, a suggestion that on our international highways we should control speed by crating bumps is turning vehicle driving into horse racing or horse riding.  We will end up with bumps from here to Jinja just to control traffic.  That is a defeatist attitude and in fact bumps are called sleeping policemen in road terms. What we need is to have qualified and competent drivers. Now, that takes me to the next point I wanted to inform, the speaker, that is the amendment of the Traffic Act of 1970.  I understand as I came in that this Draft Bill was sent to our Ministry.  The truth of the matter is actually it was not sent to our Ministry. The truth of the matter is actually it was not sent to our Ministry alone, the Ministry of Internal Affairs did their part but there are other areas.  

In order to draft a Bill there are other departments where this Draft has got to go through before finally the Draft Bill is brought to this House and to make my point further today I was holding a meeting with the Road Safety Council members who have put in their in puts and their in puts was brought today and hon. Muruli Mukasa who is the chairman can bail me out here, we had a meeting this morning and that part of the process of bringing that Bill here, there were so many departments involved and one of the Chapters that will be in that Bill is how to handle driving schools.  That is the information that I thought the House should know.

MR MURULI MUKASA:  Mr Chairman, the deterrent law in indeed coming to be here. When it comes I am sure it will receive a lot of support from this House and it will go a long way in assisting the Ministry of Internal Affairs to make sure that traffic is controlled on our roads.  As I was saying on this point, that there are a number of interested groups in road safety and in this terrible scenario of accidents.  For instance, the oil companies, the department which licence motor vehicles, the breweries, those who deal in spare parts like UREKA and so on and the insurance companies, I have been in the budget these people are contributing a lot of money towards the budget.  I would like to say that some of this money should actually be put aside for road safety.  If they give us only one per cent of that and it went straight to the Road Safety Council then road safety would do its job and all these hue and cry of road accidents on our roads if only we could be facilitated in that line.  I think you could support this idea.  The Road Safety has some financial muscle and it carries out its work.

Finally, I would like to hail the democratisation of this country, We have had a very good democratic exercise recently.  I would also like to thank the decentralisation status that this country is enjoying.  Now, the people of Buruli say for them to enjoy this decentralisation status and to enjoy fully the democratic process that is taking place, let the NRM Government make them into a district status; then they will enjoy that. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman and hon. Members.

ADJOURNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now adjourn the House to tomorrow at 2.30 p.m. 

(The Assembly rose at 5.50 p.m. and adjourned till Thursday, 21 July 1994 at 2.30 p.m.)

