Tuesday, 23 July 2002

Parliament met at 2.15 P.M. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Today we will be holding a special session because, honourable Members, it is with a lot of sorrow that I have to officially announce to you that our former Deputy Speaker during the Sixth Parliament, hon. Betty Okwir suddenly died on Sunday. The news devastated most of us who knew the late Betty Okwir. 

This is a lady who was so kind and received most of us as a mother. She was a very effective mediator of people who had disputes and nobody would have a quarrel with that lady.  We greatly miss her and, therefore, it was thought proper to receive her here in the Chamber so that Members can pay tribute to her for the work she has done to this House and to the country. 

(Entrance of the late Mrs Betty Okwir as Police Band plays dirges.) 

National Anthem (One Verse)
Laying of Wreaths

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT SEEKING TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE MRS BETTY OKWIR, FORMER DEPUTY SPEAKER OF PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Eriya Kategaya): Mr Speaker and honourable Members, I would like to move a motion for a Resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Mrs Betty Okwir. 

Be it resolved by the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda duly convened, constituted and sitting in Kampala on this 23rd day of July in the year 2002.  

Whereas Parliament notes with deep sorrow the demise of Mrs Betty Okwir, former Deputy Speaker of Parliament, former Woman Member of Parliament for Lira District, former Deputy Minister, Ministry of Youth, Culture and Sports, former Minister of State for Labour and Social Affairs and former Minister, Office of the Vice President, which occurred on Sunday 21st July 2002;

Whereas the late Betty Okwir has had a distinguished career as an educationist and exemplary political leader who deserves national recognition;

Now therefore, the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda: 

(a) Do hereby convey its most sincere condolences to the bereaved family, relatives, friends, the people of Lira District and the entire nation upon the loss of a distinguished daughter of Uganda, Mrs Betty Okwir.  

(b) Do further register its unbounded admiration and gratitude for the services that she has, in the course of her life, rendered to the people of this Nation. 

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER:  Seconded?  Seconded.

MR KATEGAYA:  Mr Speaker, as you said, the death of Mrs Okwir was a surprise. I would like to talk about her as the cadre of the Movement. Mrs Okwir was definitely a humble cadre of the Movement, and as I narrate how she joined the Movement, you will see that.

In 1987, she was elected LC I chairperson of St. Catherine Secondary School, Boroboro. She was also elected secretary for women affairs at LC II Boroboro Ward. Then at the end of 1987 she went for the cadre course at Kyankwanzi. In 1988, she was appointed Deputy Minister for Youth, Culture and Sports. In 1989 she was elected unopposed as NRC Member from Lira. In 1990, she was then re-appointed Deputy Minister, Ministry of Labour and social Affairs. In 1994 she was promoted to Minister of State, Labour and Social Services. Mr Speaker, at that time we had Ministers of State and Deputy Ministers, unlike today when we have only Ministers of State. Lastly, in 1996 she was elected unopposed as Deputy Speaker of Parliament, and I think it is in that capacity that she is here with us. We have to pay our last respects to her.

In short, Mr Speaker and hon. Members, this is somebody who has served the Movement very faithfully and in a humble capacity, from LC I to Deputy Speaker of Parliament. I wish to pay my respect to her for her contribution to the service of this country, and the Movement. Thank you.

MRS MARGARET ZZIWA (Woman Representative, Kampala):  Thank you very much, hon. Speaker. My colleagues hon. Members of Parliament, I rise to second the motion of paying tribute to the fallen daughter of this land, Betty Okwir. She served this country very dedicatedly in very many capacities, but most of all, as a Deputy Speaker of this honourable House.

The person of hon. Betty Okwir lying here before us, was the first woman Deputy Speaker in the history of the Parliament of Uganda. In this office, she could be described as a keen listener, patient observer and responsive leader who would respond appropriately to the needs of hon. Members and the House, immediately as they arose. As a Deputy Speaker, hon. Okwir could be described as non- emotional, very authoritative and she could guide this House properly. 

Hon. Okwir acknowledged and made proud the constituency of women. She acknowledged that as women Members of Parliament we have a specific role and duty of ensuring gender perspectives in legislation. She always consulted with Uganda Women Parliamentary Association and gave continued advice and counsel on many gender issues.

Definitely, as a teacher, hon. Okwir gave non-lawyers, normally called assessors, more confidence that they could also be good speakers in this august House. She performed extremely well.  

As a Woman Member of Parliament representing the people of Lira District for two consecutive and effective terms, that is 1989 to 1996 in the NRC and in 1996 to 2001 in the 6th Parliament, hon. Okwir effectively represented her people. She preached the gospel of unity, love and reconciliation. She lived above sectarian tendencies and always gave wise counsel to all.  

Hon. Okwir was a Girl Guide. She served at the highest rank of Girl Guiding, as a Chief Commissioner. Hon. Okwir was very humble and she served Guiding with humility. She actually gave us a sense of common feeling, and we would refer to each other as girls. We felt proud and young calling each other girls. 

As a Girl Guide, she was a volunteer who, during her term as Chief Commissioner, promoted caring and advocacy programmes about the girl-child. She promoted good girl-child up-bringing, reducing teenage pregnancies, and helping the poor, among others.  

Hon. Okwir can be described as a true African woman who represented the dignity of an African woman in all aspects. She was very hard working, she was loving, she was kind and she was caring. She is an accomplished woman.  She is a mother, she has been a wife, and she has served this country in very many capacities. Definitely as a Deputy Speaker, she did us good.

The Parliamentary Commission honours her because her contribution to the Parliamentary Commission was immense. We salute her. Farewell Betty, for where you go, we shall be.

THE MINISTER OF GENERAL DUTIES IN THE PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members. I was upcountry over the weekend and reception of the radio transmissions was not very good. I however heard something about Betty Okwir over the radio but was not sure what. So I anxiously waited for the next day when reception would be a bit better. Then I learnt with horror and shock of the very untimely death of our friend and comrade, Betty.  

I refer to her by her first name because that is how Mrs Okwir excelled. As a person, she dealt with you as a human being and, therefore, it is appropriate to refer to her as Betty. It was unbelievable, but unfortunately true; and that is what life is about - full of contradictions, the undesirable happening and the desirable not happening.

Mr Speaker and honourable Members, I had the privilege to work with Betty when I was a Backbencher, but I also had the privilege to work with her when we were both ministers.  As a Backbencher, she was our Deputy Speaker, and we always had a wonderful time with Betty in the Chair.  

Betty has been described as a humble person, but you better believe that behind her humbleness stood a rock of a woman, who stood by what she believed in. And that partly explains her political character because one would expect that since Betty was from Lira district, she probably would have had to handle things the way they are conventionally handled in politics. But she knew what she believed in and she stood by her beliefs. That is why it is not surprising, as hon. Kategaya said, that because of the good of this country, Mrs Okwir decided deliberately to serve this country within the Movement Government. 

Mrs Okwir had human feelings like all of us. She belonged to her tribe in every respect, and she was a woman in every respect and, therefore, felt for women. I believe she had religious beliefs, which I never had the chance to find out, because sometimes these things do not really matter, they are personal to holder, but her public life transcended all of this. The most important thing she knew about was serving this country. 

In her long years of public service, I do not know her as a teacher, but I was talking to some people and I hope someone will have an opportunity to talk about how she excelled as an educationist. I cannot talk about that because I do not know much about it. But hon. Betty Okwir is one person we are very proud of as a leader. 

Leadership, Mr Speaker, is not an easy thing. Here and there, you will stumble and sometimes even fall. I cannot remember a single incident when Betty Okwir stumbled; forget about falling. Many political leaders have all sorts of allegations, true or false, levied against them. I cannot remember a moment when someone had something negative to say or even to whisper about Mrs Okwir. That is why it is in order, hon. Members, that you receive the remains of Betty in this House and pay appropriate respect.  

I think one of the greatest tributes you can pay to Betty, a woman who solidly believed in peace and did everything she could in her political life to nurture peace in our country, the greatest tribute we can pay to her that the Almighty God should be pleased with is for the political leadership of this country to transcend those items I have listed; tribal, religious, gender and other feelings and all of us strive together for peace in this country.  If we can achieve peace in our country with everybody’s participation, we shall have paid tribute to this lady.  But I do believe that no amount of rhetoric here can be worthwhile unless we practice what she stood for. May the Almighty God rest Betty Okwir in eternal peace! I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIMARY EDUCATION (Mrs Bitamazire Namirembe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Dear colleagues, I stand here to pay tribute to the late Betty Okwir as her former headmistress, former teacher and former colleague in the struggle for the liberation of women in this country -(Applause). Thank you. 

Hon. Betty Okwir, who is lying here still and dead, joined Tororo Girls School where I was a headmistress during her early age, having completed ‘O’ Level at Kings College Budo.  Tororo Girls at that time was a school for the rural girls mainly from the Eastern and Northern region, but, of course, many other girls from reputable schools like Namagunga and Gayaza joined the school.  

When Betty Okwir joined the school at about the age of 16 or 17 years, a very big staff of more than 30 teachers at that time appointed her as a school head girl, realising her potential, intelligence and capacity in leadership. At that time, colleagues you will remember, head prefects were not elected, and there was no campaign. But looking at Betty at that time, there was no other choice at the staff meeting but to appoint her a head girl, a job, which she did so well.  

In her quiet intelligence, she managed to convince the girls in the school, who were more than 600 at that time, to follow the regulations of the school. I want to assure you, any credit that was given to that school for its performance – academic and social – was all due to Betty Okwir. And I stand here as the proud head of school who at that time had very little to do where Betty Okwir stood. That is the type of girl she was - (Applause).

Academically, Betty was sharp and very innovative. She had a lot of ideas. After her A’ level at Tororo Girls, like many schools do, we followed Betty Okwir to the University. We came to learn that she was very intelligent at the University and completed her undergraduate work very well and successfully too.

Betty Okwir listened to career guidance very strictly, as she has lived thus. So she took up teaching as a career and I want to assure you, and as many previous speakers have said, she was an outstanding head of school.

As I also moved from Tororo Girls, I still had the opportunity to monitor Betty Okwir as a head of school. I visited St. Catherine Boroboro Secondary School, to see what my “daughter” was doing there. Although I was of course performing my public service duties, I found a quiet, well-organized school, under the leadership of Betty Okwir. Betty Okwir proved a mother to the students and was an outstanding personality in the school and in the community around the school.

Betty Okwir then moved, after the wonderful work done politically, to a higher post of a Deputy Minister. Still I had the opportunity to follow her up and indeed to work with her as a colleague, forgetting that she was at one time my student. We used to work together very well. Betty Okwir performed so well as a Deputy Minister, and at any other posts where she has been. 

What I admired about Betty Okwir, as a former head of school, is that every now and then she would say, “mummy, this is what you wanted us to be. I am a woman of substance.” Because that was my motto at that school, and indeed Betty, as you have heard, was a woman of substance - (Applause).

Many of us elite women may probably not be putting in our best to emancipate women, but Betty did. She was always invited to meetings of women gatherings, and in spite of her schedule, she would always turn up. She would indeed portray that calmness and superiority in leadership and social mobilization.

At the time of her death, she had been the Chairperson of the Uganda Girl Guides Association. I happened to be the previous Chairperson, working with her when she was holding the post of Chief Commissioner for the Uganda Girl Guides. Betty Okwir managed, despite her busy schedule, to organize the female youth under the Uganda Girl Guides Association.  

Betty Okwir was the diplomat whom we sent abroad to solicit for support, to solicit for funds and to link the Uganda Girl Guides to the outside world. And I want to assure you, she is lying dead now, but she has left a mark on the Uganda Chapter of the Girl Guides Association.

She took over the chair about five months ago, of the same association where she was the Chief Commissioner. I understand she had already started working hard to promote the girl-child, as it has been mentioned. Through that global association, the Ugandan girls would be linked with other girls of their age under an organized women’s movement “The Girl Guides of the World.”

You will forgive me, but I will mention this to show the warmth of Betty Okwir. Mr Speaker, I was amazed five years ago when I lost my mother. I went down into the rural bush of Mpigi to bury her. In the afternoon a Land Rover with some askaris accompanying a woman, turned up there in the middle of nowhere. And who was it but Betty Okwir! I said, “Betty, how did you find your way in the Mpigi rural villages?” She said, “I had to come because I really feel for you.”

And now at home, back in my village they call her the “Lango Woman” because of her coming then. The whole village collected to see the “Lango Woman” who could dare go deep into the Buganda rural village to sympathize with the mourners.

I am sure that when they heard of her death, many of them sympathized. It is because of that courage, that warmth, that touch for the feelings of others, Mr Speaker, that we are here to mourn and pay tribute to a woman of talent, a woman of substance, a woman who has nurtured herself to the fame that she attained.  

What do we learn from Betty Okwir? I think from her we are here to learn that we should organize our lives the way she did. Betty Okwir is a woman we should all put in our role book and look at her as a model. Let the soul and body of Betty Okwir rest in eternal peace - (Applause). Thank you.

MR OMODI OKOT (Kole County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to pay tribute to Betty Okwir, who is my sister in as far as the relationship between her and I is concerned.  

Betty Okwir was not only a good lady but also a mother of high standing. She was a mother who did not make a difference between the clan from which her husband originated and her own.

When she got married to Okwir, he was not academically equal to her. She was at a slightly higher level than Mr Okwir, but here is a lady who respected her husband in spite of the academic status of the husband being a little lower than hers - (Applause).  This is an illustrious point, which is very rare. In most families, when the lady has higher academic qualifications, it becomes a point of crisis in the family.

I was teaching in an institution next to Betty Okwir’s. She was staff at Boroboro, Dr Obote College, and I was in Col. Lawrence College, and we were close families. There was never a time when I was told that Betty was in dispute or crisis or misunderstanding with her family. Every time I would drop by, I would see her kneeling before her husband, treating him as husband. This is the lady we are missing, and this is the lady whose body is in that box.

Mr Speaker, Betty Okwir did not die suddenly, Betty died gradually, because moments came when Betty started to find herself extremely isolated and left alone.  There was a time when she contested the last election and lost. Instead of those who worked and trusted Betty Okwir trying to find a way of making her regain, a ministerial vehicle was taken away from this lady when it was being washed; somebody went and grabbed it back! That was the beginning of this sad thing we are seeing here.

I rise to suggest that the Government, especially the Movement Government, must have a clear way they treat and maintain their cadres. They should not only wait when somebody has died and then pay a lot of glory and glory and glory; that will not help.  What are these glories we are giving here, what are they going to do for the family of Betty Okwir?  What is it going to do? I think we have too many double standards; there is a need for us to know what we say and what we do in our society.  

It was difficult to take the Movement to Lango. People who dared to take the Movement to Lango did risk a lot, but Betty was one of them. She did not only take the Movement, she held a Movement office in the district. What has she gained from that now?  We must learn to stop having double standards; it will not help us. May her soul rest in eternal peace.

DR OKULO EPAK (Oyam South, Apac): I thank you, Mr Speaker. Betty Okwir is my niece. I am her uncle. I can very briefly define her personality as very humble, but at the same time very firm. She abhorred controversy. In fact, the moment anybody became controversial in a situation where Betty was involved, she became very restless.  

I want to say something, which maybe somebody may not say here, and which has rarely been said in public. Some time after the NRA Government took over, a rebellion started in Lango. Nevertheless, the Movement Government appointed Betty Okwir a minister. Betty Okwir’s grandfather was the head of the Inomo clan, Awitong.  He was a very strong UPC, by the way. Equally so, Betty Okwir was the UPC chairperson of the UPC women branch in the entire Lango sub-region.  

The entire family, including the grandfather, took the gesture by the Movement administration, or let me say President Museveni, as a very positive step towards harmonising relationships. She was given a very big party. I have rarely seen parties being given in honour of people who have been appointed ministers, but she was given one. I was not around, I was in Ghana, but from reports it was a big party.

Betty Okwir and her late grandfather, Erieza Alori, were instrumental in stopping rebellion in Lango – (Applause). The leader happened to be a son of the Inomo clan, and Alori said, “my son, come home.” He came home, and that was almost 90 per cent stoppage of rebellion in the Lango sub-region.  

At one time, when this young man gave up fighting, I think even until recently, he became a frequent visitor of military prisons. At one stage he was retained for a very long time.  I remember the late Erieza Alori telling the late Prime Minister, Adyebo, that “Mr Adyebo, if I knew I had to call my son back from the bush only for him to be a frequent resident of military cells, I would not have done it.” He said, “I gave my word that I would keep this child in peace, and I will discipline him, and there would be no question of him attempting to overthrow the Government by force of arms, so now my words have no respect.”  

We had another problem when this camp thing started or was supposed to be in Lango. Betty Okwir and hon. Jovino Akaki, some of the people who served in very high positions then, played a very important role in pacifying the Lango sub-region, and that problem was nipped in the bud. I presume up to today, or probably up to tomorrow, the Lango sub-region will continue to work with Government to develop the region through peaceful means.

Honourable members may be keen to know what befell Betty. I am not a medical doctor, but yesterday we had the privilege of hearing a post-mortem report from a medical doctor, and I am going to venture into some of the hardest words I have ever pronounced. 

I am told Betty returned from travel to Korea on Monday. She had complaints about ulcers. Everybody thought that was her problem, but what ended up in her death came completely from nowhere, and according to doctors, such cases, when they strike, end up tragically. 

We are told she died of what is called myocardial infarction. It is a state of affairs where the veins stop sending blood to the heart and the heart ceases to work. And the basic cause, according to the doctor, could be extreme stress, and when it hits, nothing can be done.  So, that is not the ulcer, but that is the cause of death as stated by the post-mortem results. She died at around 3.00 p.m. in the afternoon in her house.  I thank you.

MRS MIRIA MATEMBE (Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. First of all, I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity to say a few words about my late colleague and friend, Betty Okwir.  

I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker, for accepting to bring the body of the late Okwir to this House – (Applause) - so that we may pay tribute to her.  

Right now we are having the Women’s World Congress, and I wish to use this opportunity to apologise on behalf of the women Members of Parliament, including the chairperson of UWOPA, who are not here. This afternoon we were slated in the programme to address the congress on the contribution of women parliamentarians – women and politics in Uganda.  

When Betty died, it was a shock to us. I had just come in the evening with my husband, and I walked towards the bedroom and he walked towards the sitting room. I think he switched on the TV, and immediately there was Betty’s picture.  So, I heard him saying, “you Miria, when and what happened, how can this woman die?” So, I came running and asked who had died. He said, “Betty Okwir. Did you hear she was sick?”  I said “of course not!” 

The news was bad, but we were in this congress and some of us were going to address the congress. The whole of yesterday, the women were saying, “can you imagine these Ugandans, Betty Okwir is dead, she was a Deputy Speaker of the House, and they are not talking about her; they have just put her picture in the corner in the newspapers!” They were saying, “If it was a man –(Interjections)- I am telling you that is why I am thanking the Speaker.  They were saying, “Maybe if it was a man, we would now be hearing on the radio and knowing everything!”  

Today, I was giving a keynote address at the conference. When I walked out, some women followed me and said, “but where is the programme for Betty. You are not even talking about her.”  I said, let me go to Parliament and check, something could be happening. When I arrived here, I found this red thing there.  I said, this is good; they are bringing Betty to us so that we can pay tribute. So, I thank you, Mr Speaker – (Applause)- for that good gesture.

The struggle for women empowerment needs women of all qualities, and it is important to harness them and to raise them for the struggle. I met the late Okwir at a political platform. Just like she started in LC I in Lira, I started in LC I here in Luzira, and eventually we found ourselves in this House in the NRC.  

Hon. Okwir and I were struggling for gender equality and empowerment, but employing different tactics and strategies. We were different in a number of ways, but we had common goals.  I was loud, she was quiet, but we would be saying the same thing in different ways and we would appreciate different things in different ways.  

I used to call her to participate in my programmes, and one time I called her as a minister - I was not a minister yet – to an ACFODE play. Of course, you know the way I fight, I do not mince my words; I do not even hide my energy in the battle.  So, I called her, and you know the attitude I have for people who batter women and the defilers. I called her to officiate at the play as guest of honour, and of course in the play there was fighting.  

When hon. Betty Okwir came to give her speech, she told people, “you people be kind to women. Do not torture women, do not beat them, but should you find it necessary to beat, beat a little” – (Laughter)- and I looked at her with my eye, and she laughed. But you can see the type of person she was, to conform to what the honourable member was saying here; that was Betty.  

When we walked out, I said, “but Betty, you are destroying my struggle”. She said, “but you Miria, you see these men have not yet learnt a lot, we have to move slowly.” So, from her, I would learn how to move slowly – (Laughter)- when moving slowly comes in, but I do not think I will tolerate the little beating.

Everybody knows that Betty was caring, kind, loving and she was motherly. It is on record that at one time in 1989, I went to Lira as a Constitutional Commissioner and I did mobilise for the Lira Maternity Ward. We equipped it with a lot of equipment that time, but who led me to this maternity ward?  That is why I am saying we had a common goal but struggling differently.  

When she met me in Lira, she said, “Miria come.” When I went to Lira Hospital and my attention was drawn to Lira Maternity Ward. I went into that ward, and luckily or unluckily, I do not know, I found a woman there in labour.  You should have been there to see the cold hard metal where the women in Lira were delivering their babies. There were no curtains at all in the hospital, and you know, boys and men were peeping, as this woman was agonizing to have her baby.  I looked there and my tears came down. She said, “you see, Miria, in our motherly way this is what is happening, what can we do?”  

I came back all determined to change the situation, and I went to ACFODE and I said, “You women, you need to go to Lira”. I think Mbarara Maternity Ward was also the same and other wards, but you see who drew me to the ward. I went there, we mobilized - I think hon. Omara Atubo is here and the colleagues in NRC - we got money, beds, and uniforms, whatever! We even gave pocket money. We took all these things and equipped Lira Maternity Ward but that was Betty Okwir –(Applause).  They could have seen me carrying the beds and so on, but they did not see that it is Betty who originated it, using different strategies and tactics. 

I had an opportunity to be treated personally by Betty Okwir. For you, you do not know the reason why I sit in that chair; it is because of my back.  When Betty Okwir saw me suffering with this back, she told me, “why don’t you come and I treat you.” I had about a whole week of treatment by Betty Okwir in her house there, near Fairway hotel.  She used to take me and massage my back and it made me feel a little bit better.  

Like honourable Bitamazire, one day hon. Betty Okwir surprised me when I lost my father-in-law. We were just there burying deep down there in Bushenyi and we saw somebody being dropped by a vehicle, and this was Betty Okwir, coming to give a send off to my father-in-law.  So, you can see what a women she was, and why we are happy that we are here to talk about her.  

Humility, simplicity and firmness were her qualities.  I have never seen Betty’s anger. You people - and I want to tell this honourable House that as women, you see us struggling but many of us are full of envy, full of jealous and evil at heart - (Laughter). I have seen women envy, being jealous, agonizing and that kind of thing, but not Betty –(Applause).  I have never heard Betty backbite a woman; I had never heard Betty talk ill of any woman; I have never heard Betty do this; she would even smile at problems 

I want to say that her life style was an embodiment of a good Christian. She had real Christian values and loved God. I had an opportunity to visit Betty and see her with her husband.  I want to say that they were living a good and fulfilling life. The hon. Member was thanking Betty for being humble enough to live with her husband, but I want to thank her husband, Mr Okwir, to accept to live happily with a woman of higher qualifications –(Applause). Some men have made us fail because we have high qualifications and we are better placed and earning more than them, and they have made life hell for us to manage. I want to thank Mr Okwir, when he is still alive, that he was able to do that. In fact, when I heard that Betty is dead, I said, “Oh, Poor Mr Okwir!” I really felt sorry for him.

I want to conclude by saying that the sudden death of the Late hon. Betty Okwir should teach us two lessons:  one, that life is meaningless here on this earth. If you have not known it, you better know it now.  If you hear of how she just collapsed, then you would know that life on earth is meaningless, and you can only live it with the love of God - (Applause). It should teach us to stop hating each other.  Why waste all the time quarrelling, envying, hating and amassing wealth and piling it there when any minute you will be dead?  For me, the lesson I learn is that I should get closer to my colleagues, love them and care for them so that when I die and they get opportunity to talk about me, they would have words without having to tell lies –(Applause and Laughter). 

The second lesson is that we should always be prepared to meet our maker. And I want to use this microphone to appeal to you, Mr Speaker, and hon. Members, that the sooner we give our lives to God and commit ourselves so that he can rule over us, the better for us; otherwise, this life is just meaningless. 

Finally, I am so happy that the late Betty Okwir has left her three daughters, they might be more but she has left daughters, and the appeal I want to make to them is that you have heard about your mother and she has had time to care and counsel you, please pick up her mentoring and move it forward.  She has lived a fulfilled meaningful life and you should not embarrass her. And for Mr Okwir, the Lord who gave you has taken away from you, and he will take care of you. Just get closer to him and he will guide you.  May Betty’s soul rest in eternal peace –(Applause).

MS MARGARET ATENG OTIM  (Woman Representative, Lira):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this chance. I have listened carefully and heard about Betty Okwir, but I would also like to give my moments that I shared with her, which have not been said by anyone here.  

When I was at the University in Makerere, which is from 1990 up to 1993, the late hon. Betty Okwir then used to invite ladies who come from Lira and Apac and hold constant talks with them.  So for me, she has been a very good role model –(Applause)- and her talks ranged from many topics, which I think has managed to make me what I am today.  So, I would like to thank her for the role she played in doing that.

I would also like to say something about the moment I shared with her during the last campaigns. She was the incumbent and people did not know much about me, but having been with Betty Okwir for a long time as she invited us to her house and she had moments with us, she knew me better than any other candidates.  So, whenever we would meet in the field, hon. Betty Okwir would say, “my daughter how is it going”?  On several rallies she even managed to tell the people that that is my daughter, I am preparing her for Parliament.  So, I think what she did was really going out of her way to make sure that if she does not go through, then I do.  So, I would like to thank Betty for seeing that quality in me, and for having prepared me to take over.

We have been told that she died due to extreme stress.  I did not have time to share a word with her but having known her, we have been told that she was a highly qualified person. And a person of that nature, I think she ought to have been given a job because she had the qualities, but the fact that she died a stressful person, that is yet another blow for the Movement in Lira.  And I tell you, it is not a good one because people are seeing what is going on.  

I wish not to take up most of the time because the brief moments I shared with her is what I have narrated just now. I would like also to urge that let there be a system where when people leave Parliament they can fall back to Parliament.  Here we have people with high qualifications but when you leave Parliament that is the end of you.  You are not remembered; you are not taken up for jobs; therefore, you end up very frustrated.  This is a lesson for us.

I therefore would like to thank God for giving us the person in the name of Betty Okwir Okullo, and may her soul rest in peace, Amen.

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I rise to pay my tribute to the late Betty Okwir.  One of the greatest prolific writers of literature on earth today, William Shakespeare, attempted at one time to define the conception of death and he said, “It is an occurrence which is beyond tragedy”.  So, this is a very tragic moment, Mr Speaker and hon. Members, and I rise to pay my sincere tributes to Betty Okwir.

Many people have defined her character sketch and I have admired the flow of those words of admiration for what she stood for but, if I were to summarise the content of those definitions, I knew Betty as a great nationalist and nobody has mentioned that.  She was a nationalist at heart -(Applause)- she was an accountable woman and had a natural phobia for corruption.  Whenever you talked about corruption, Betty would run away.  I praise her for that noble stand.  

As Deputy Speaker, I used to be a trouble causer for her on a number of occasions talking words that were seemingly sour in political jargon but she always tolerated me. She was a fair Speaker who never hated anybody, even if you are a Lukyamuzi talking - (Laughter).

My definition of Betty in regard to her good work as the Deputy Speaker should be noted very seriously because to be a great speaker you need to be fair; you need to act fairly; you need to be impartial.  She was an achiever of all those attributes and what should the new generation today learn from Betty, especially the women? 

I have had a lot being talked out, namely a speech by honourable Matembe.  Betty loved culture: whenever there was an occasion at Mengo, she would call me seeking a brief about what was going on in regard to our Kingdom.  I also bring tributes from the Kingdom of Buganda - (Laughter).  

What about Betty’s role in the field of gender?  I have not seen many people who are so useful as leaders in the gender sector.  Betty was committed to the gender sector; she was committed to the woman folk.  A woman who cannot live by excitement, that was Betty; a woman who respected her husband; a woman who never underrated anybody, a woman who lived to be challenged.   

It is good that the person who succeeded Betty has talked, and I liked her words of courage because in the circumstances she would not have introduced her as a possible prospective Member of Parliament if she was bad spirited.  So, it is not bad for people to begin introducing their successors -(Laughter)- because in so doing, you are also motivating others. 

I would like, before I end my speech, to praise the words of the successor of Betty.  A good number of Members of Parliament who fail to make it at a given election go back to the village and rot there.  We should adopt a scheme that can harness those potential resources within our system, not necessarily pension, but within our working force there are many gaps where we can recall experienced workers.  Why should we dump them away because they have not gone through?  This is a very important challenge for all of us.

Finally, if anybody were requesting me humbly to finalise the definition of Betty Okwir, what would I say?  I would say that in Betty Okwir was a woman of dignity, a woman of love and a woman of joy.  God bless her heart.

MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (Representative of PWD, Northern):  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  With deep sorrow and pain, I rise to pay my last tribute to Mrs Betty Okwir.  

Mr Speaker, the death of Mrs Betty Okwir has shocked and paralysed each one of us at this very moment.  We never expected her to die on Sunday. Last Thursday after Parliament, my guide was talking to me, she said, “Hon. Margaret, today I met the driver of Betty Okwir and I asked him where she is, and he told me that she is at her home and she seems to be lonely.”  Then I told my guide Theresa, maybe one of these days we should go and see Betty and talk to her. We have missed her for a very long time.  Now, on Sunday evening, I was listening to the news only to hear that Mrs Betty Okwir is dead.  I was confused.  After sometime, I recovered and got the phone and rang Theresa, I said, “Theresa have you heard?  I have heard from the television that Betty has died.”  That thing pained my heart. I said, “but God, when somebody says she is dead, she is dead and it is not a lie.  Surely, Betty has gone!”
  
I would like to describe Betty very simply; she was very loving, humble and caring.  When Betty was the Deputy Speaker, her office was open to every Member of Parliament, especially the Women Members of Parliament. She told her secretaries that please, do not let any Woman Member of Parliament stand there outside the office, let her come in. So, we were coming in and out of that office like our own house.  We would come for consultation and whenever she could get some information regarding donors, she would share with us. And whenever she had very good experiences for the constituency, she would share with us.  Betty, we have missed you in this House.
  
Mr Speaker, one time in 1998, women with disabilities from Lira had a study tour of Kampala, they asked me to arrange for them to come and see the Parliament of Uganda?  I quickly went to the hon. Deputy Speaker, by then Mrs Betty Okwir. I told her that I had my visitors who wanted to see the Parliament of Uganda.  She told me, “Please, Margaret, bring them”, and she went ahead to mobilise other Women Members of Parliament to join us. We had a very nice meeting in the Speaker’s Lounge outside there.  We shared information, we rejoiced, we took sodas and the women with disabilities were very happy with what she did for us, people with disabilities. That shows how she loved each and everybody, including persons with disabilities. 
 
Now, when the time came for the ladies to go out - some wanted to go out for a short-call, some were crawling on those steps because by then this Parliament was not accessible. Betty felt so bad, she said, “Margaret, I think we have to do something.  These ladies cannot crawl down to the toilets and down these steps.”  I think it was through that practical experience that today Parliament is accessible for persons with disabilities. 

Mr Speaker, we shall live to remember what Betty has done in this Parliament, and to each and everyone of us. There was no moment when she would pass me without touching me, and though I never saw her, but I knew how she looked liked and how warm she was, because she made herself very close to me.  

She introduced me to Girl Guides.  I said, “Deputy Speaker, how can a blind person be a Girl Guide?”  She encouraged me and I participated very well. When we went to Kaazi, I was there matching with her and I have the feeling I will still see her.  So, that is how Betty was.

Mr Speaker, I cannot continue to talk, otherwise there is a lot to talk about her, but allow me now to pay my sincere condolences to the bereaved family over there.  The loss is not for you alone, my dear members of the family, it is for all of us. May her soul rest in Eternal Peace! 

MRS CHRISTINE AMONGIN APORU (Woman Representative, Kumi): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I rise to join the colleagues to pay tribute to the late Mrs Betty Okwir. I want to thank Mr Johnson Okwir Okullo and his family, for having accepted to mourn with us. 

When Mrs Okwir died, Mr Okwir was in Lira. If he were a selfish man, he would not have allowed us to bring the body of his wife here. But I want to thank him for having accepted to bring her here.  

Mr Okwir was not as educated as the late Betty Okwir. He rose through the gates of Makerere through mature age entry. He was my OB and we graduated on the same day -(Applause).  

I got to know the late Mrs Betty Okwir in 1988, when she was appointed together with my late husband, Dr Aporu Okol, who was by then a Deputy Minister of Animal Industry and Fisheries. I associated with this family because we enjoyed ourselves together. By then deputy ministers were all staying at Silver Springs Hotel, until when the Movement Government thought it wise to come up with the Ministers’ Village, and eventually the ministers had to be moved there.

Mr Speaker, I want to commend the appointing authority, His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, for having kept on appointing Betty for 13 years in the Cabinet circles.  This is a very, very commendable thing that I cannot let go.  13 years you are on the Frontbench, it is an achievement that the people of Lango will live to remember, and the name of the late Mrs Betty Okwir will be remembered.

I miss Betty!  Why do I miss Betty?  Betty was a lady who groomed me to manage political visitors from the constituency.  I used to lead a humble life of having - because I am a teacher by profession - parents as my visitors. But she said: “No, you have to change approach, I will be giving you lessons on how to manage a home of a politician.” She groomed me and even when I lost my husband in 1992, she still came to me and encouraged me to take up a political career, which I am holding today.

Hon. Members, this big loss does not only affect the people of Lango, it affects the entire nation. And the people of Kumi join the rest of the country in mourning the deceased former Deputy Speaker of Parliament, who was elected unopposed.

On Sunday, I had agreed with the late Mrs Betty Okwir that the girl guides, who were supposed to travel to United Kingdom tomorrow, would converge at my place and meet for a rehearsal, including one of her daughters, Rebecca.  But I am telling you, Mr Speaker, as I was traveling back home from the opening of the congress of women, which His Excellency officiated at, my driver told me, “Have you heard?  Mrs Betty Okwir is no more.” I could not believe it; I only told him, “Take away your lugambo there.”  When I reached home, I found the girl guides, dead silent, waiting for me because the news of her death had been broken, and the daughter Rebecca never arrived for the rehearsal. Rebecca is seated right there.

Life is but a dream. Betty died working for the cause of this country. Betty was up and down, getting visas for these girl guides, and now she is no more!  

The Uganda Girl Guides Association that has been talked about is an association, which was nearest to Betty’s heart, and she lived by the fifth law of the girl guides law: “The guide sings and smiles under all difficulties!” That was the person Betty was. Mr Okwir and family, sing and smile though Betty is lying here, because you cannot breath in air back to her, but accept the big loss that we have had.

Mr Speaker, Betty played a significant role as a peace negotiator during the days of insurgency surrounding Lango and Teso. And I want to reflect it here.  During the Teso – Lango insurgency, Betty Okwir happened to be one of the female ministers with Mrs Betty Bigombe, and by then hon. Omara Atubo was a minister, the late Ekinu, the late Dr Aporu and Mzee Okurut. These were the people who negotiated for the peace that we are enjoying in Teso - (Applause). 

Betty, as a political cadre of the Movement, was a lady who was clearheaded; she was not rushy in approach, but she was a behind doors negotiator.  She was negotiating the mothers, the sons to abandon rebellion during that time. She was tactful in approach and she was gifted because she could speak three, four languages to convince, talk peace to the UPA rebels.

I want also to say that Betty Okwir did not only remain at that level of negotiating the peace, but she joined the Teso Peace Initiative, and has always been taking messages down to that association which is currently working.  

Finally, I want to say, Mr Speaker, when Mrs Betty Okwir was a Deputy Speaker here, we had the highest enrollment of Members of Parliament to the Uganda Girl Guides Association. 35 Ugandan Women Members of Parliament were enrolled.  We did a lot of work, mobilized for the Movement, and I think that was why she was even re-elected unopposed.

I want also to say that she was very good in fundraising.  Hon. Ruhakana Rugunda, Prof. Mondo Kagonyera are a few of the gender sensitive Members of Parliament who traveled with her, and some of us at the backbench, inside Europe, outside Europe to fundraise for the cause of the girl-child through the Uganda Girl Guides Association, which is being patronized by none other than the First Lady of this country.  

I mourn her as a teacher, I mourn her as a girl guide, I mourn her as a mother, and to you, Mr Okwir, we want the name of Betty to come out through these daughters of hers.  Though Betty is dead, her name will remain alive through those offspring of yours.  

I thank the Lango Parliamentary Group that kept vigil with us yesterday, and I urge you Members to come and give a word of comfort to the children, to the family, still today at Kitintale. May the Almighty God rest her soul in everlasting peace!

DR DAVID MATOVU BYATIKE (Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I stand here as one of the endangered species of the 1989 NRC Members. We are getting less and less in this House here!  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, that shows I have known Mrs Okwir since 1989.  She was humble, that is how I know her, but more than that, I think she was cultured.  I think that is the word I would like to use – she was cultured indeed!

In Entebbe, we know Mrs Okwir as Aunt Betty. And personally, she helped me out of several tricky situations in Entebbe as a Minister and as a girl guide. Whenever there were some doubts as to what was going to happen with the girl guides, I could only tell them, “If you do not believe, go and ask Aunt Betty.” That smoothed the whole situation and they would believe me, and it worked.

On behalf of the people of Entebbe in general and the girl guides in particular, I would like to say to Aunt Betty, thank you very much indeed for whatever you did for us in Entebbe. We will remember you and we will definitely cherish the time you gave us, and whatever you did for us!  May your soul rest in eternal peace!  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MRS LYDIA BALEMEZI (Woman Representative, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I would also like to stand like my colleagues to pay tribute to our colleague, the late Betty Okwir.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you very much and to thank the Commissioners of this Parliament, for having made it possible for the body of our friend, Betty Okwir, to be brought to Parliament for us to have something to say about the co-operation she had with us.

I came to know hon. Betty Okwir during the 6th Parliament when she was a Member of Parliament representing Lira District.  I felt so proud of her when we elected her as Deputy Speaker to this Parliament because of the way she had started interacting with us. Even we Members who had never been in Parliament before, she treated us like equal partners and she was trying to guide us on how to go about with parliamentary issues.

Hon. Betty Okwir is one member who really served the nation as a leader.  She was all embracing, she was very eager to see that even the young Members of Parliament were informed as to how Parliament run and would encourage us to interact with her and be at par with everybody else. I went ahead to know more about her when she was elected as the first Member of Parliament to be a Commissioner for the Girl Guides.  When she became a Girl Guide leader of Uganda, she tried very hard to mentor the Women Members of Parliament through leadership skills and to analyse and identify issues, which were paramount for the woman and the girl-child.

Betty Okwir started a number of activities and organisations among the Women Members of Parliament, among which girl guiding was a very big issue because this body helped all the women Members of the 6th Parliament to reach out to the women and the girl-child.  Hon. Betty Okwir went ahead and initiated the Girl Guides Co-operation in East Africa. It is the first of its kind because in girl guiding, each country holds its organisation by itself; but hon. Betty Okwir managed to convince the Kenyans and the Tanzanians. And as of now, we have one body, which unites all the members within the Girl Guides, and she has been our leader. So, much as Uganda mourns Betty Okwir, East Africa has also lost Betty Okwir because she has been our current Commissioner in the East African Girl Guides.

Betty Okwir has not only been an East African Girl Guides Commissioner, but she is a member of the international body of Girl Guides representing Uganda and East Africa, which in brief we refer to as WAGS.  Hon Betty Okwir has tried to mentor most of us within this association and she is a lady who has been so unselfish. Betty Okwir would be invited to very many conferences but because she would not be in every place, she would never hesitate to delegate. Betty Okwir would pick on any lady in Parliament here to represent the nation in her place.  She would go ahead even to prepare what you should present as if she would be the one in that forum. So, Betty Okwir is one of the very few ladies who could give up her position for somebody else without any envy.

Mr Speaker and Members of this House, Madam Betty Okwir, as you have been told, started this Member of Parliament Girl Guides Association and she set up committees, and through these committees Betty Okwir would handle all the small issues, which matter to women.  There are some issues, which cannot be discussed in Parliament here, but they are important issues to a woman.  This is how the 6th Parliament would always be seen with all women moving together, all women representing the nation as one body. This is a very big challenge which she has left to us because as we talk now, we have not yet managed to bring together all the women parliamentarians in this one body of girl guiding as she did.

Betty Okwir as she promoted the girl child issues, was one of the people who spearheaded the “Sarah” programme.  This is the programme where all girl issues - defilement, lack of education, early marriages  - would be handled. It is now a national issue being spearheaded by the whole nation. But Betty Okwir was one of the very few people who came up with the programme as to how the nation could address the girl-child issues.

As many Members have said, Betty Okwir was another person - being a Commissioner of the Girl Guides, we would just tell her of our programmes. And I would also wish to recall, like hon. Bitamazire and hon. Matembe.  I had a programme in Mukono, deep in the villages, where we had to have girls in a work camp to stay there over night.  I just told her that I was organising a camp, but I was surprised late in the night around 9.00p.m. Betty appeared and said she wanted to be with the girls. She slept there. I was really disturbed because she was a Deputy Speaker of Parliament, I had no security around and I insisted that she comes back, but she insisted that her place was with the women and the girls - (Applause). 

Betty was a very committed servant to this nation.  I recall one time when Betty went to Lira to organise and talk to the people there to stop the rebel activity, on her way back, she was ambushed and her driver was killed.  But Betty never stopped there, she found her way out, and came back to Kampala and continued with the de-campaigning or mobilising people against rebel activity.  

As Members of Parliament we are the policy makers; so much has been said, a lot of which I will not repeat, but we are challenged. In this Parliament we see so many dead being brought here, yet I am sure many of our friends were not informed of this function well in advance. We should have informed them because many want to know how Parliament handles this situation. 

It is automatic for serving Members to be brought here when they pass on, but there are many who have served this nation, like Betty, but are no longer in Parliament. When they die it is very difficult for these Members to be recognised nationally, much as some of them even give their lives to serve the nation. They are ready to die for the nation but once they leave Parliament or the national political leadership, we tend to forget them. 

I request that we as Members of Parliament, more so the front bench members, need to do something about it. I have seen many ministers, once they leave the post that is the end of it. When they die, it is only the relatives who come to know of their death. So, as Members of Parliament, what do we have to put in place to cater for that last minute of our lives? 

I wish to end here and wish my friend Betty Okwir a peaceful rest. I also pass on a word of condolence to our dear brother-in-law, Mr Okwir, and the children. We pray that the good Lord takes care of your lives and the future. I thank you.

MS TIPERU NUSURA (Woman Representative, Yumbe): I would like to join my colleagues in paying tribute to the late hon. Betty Okwir. A lot has already been said, but I want to make a small comment on the time she worked as a Minister in the Vice President’s Office. During that period, I do remember the interaction between the Vice President and Members of Parliament increased because there was nothing like protocol. 

When it came to making appointments with the Vice President, it was a smooth process. Hon. Okwir made sure that the secretaries always left any Member of Parliament who wanted to see the Vice President to enter her office freely. It reached an extent that at times, whenever the Vice President was not in her office, she would even make appointments at her residence.

Hon. Members, it is good for many words to be said about the dead, but I would like to make comments on a few women who, during the 6th Parliament, could be approached. These would advise you, and you would be sure that whatever you have discussed with them would remain in confidence. Maama Betty was one of them - (Applause). 

If you needed comfort, it was always Betty to give it, and I would describe her as somebody who was sympathetic. She would put herself in your situation. There were times when you explained to her your problems and she would start crying with you. And I would wonder what type of person she was! 

There are ladies, whom I want to mention now, as they are still alive, who have played a very big role in many people’s lives - particularly colleagues during the 6th Parliament. We had people like hon. Sarah Kiyingi. She would give you spiritual guidance whenever you had problems We have people like hon. Miria Matembe who would give you, you know -(Laughter)– when you had problems and you wanted action, I can assure you hon. Matembe would always be there for you. And results would come out. She is frank and where you are wrong, she would tell you, “My dear, you are wrong there.”

We had people like Abu Dominica, this one would give you guidance, and I am saying this as a former Youth Member of Parliament. You know, as a youth, you are so ambitious that you may have very high speed. So such women tried to control our speed.  

I remember Mama Betty told me, “my dear daughter, you can come to this House when none of the 300 Members of Parliament is your enemy. But if you are not careful, you may leave when half the population in this House are your enemies, and you may make those enemies unknowingly. So please control your speed, make as many friends as possible, consult where you do not know. Do not always assume to know much.” I will never forget those words that came from her heart. 

It is true that she would always try to attend any funeral that she knew of, and it is unfortunate to hear that she died of extreme stress, yet she pulled most of us out of stress. If wishes were horses, beggars would ride. Everybody would have loved to hear that, “Betty is sick in hospital, she has been visited, she has been counselled,” the way she always counselled others. I did not wish that extreme stress would be the cause of her death. 

So many women in this country are going to miss her. She has been a mother. The Members have talked about her daughters but I would like to thank God for the fact that she was not only a mother to the three. She was a mother whose love was shared by so many women in this country. 

I do not want to forget hon. Rebecca Kadaga; she has always given legal advice to particularly women in this country –(Laughter and Applause). I have a list of men who also fall in the category of hon. Betty Okwir, but I will not mention them now. They might be over-burdened because sometimes I would imagine, “does Betty have time for her family!” She would give all her time and listen to you narrate your own story to the extent that I would sympathise with the family members. I am however pleased to hear that she had time for her family and she also had time for us. 

I want to convey condolences from the people I represent, the people of Yumbe District. Indeed this country has lost a mother. I thank you.  

THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Eriya Kategaya): Thank you Mr Speaker and hon. Members. There are about three points I want to make before I thank everybody for their wonderful contribution.

First, the impression that this type of death is caused by stress alone is not medically correct. There are other causes of this type of death. I had a friend of mine who was an Ambassador in Brussels; some of you may remember him. Charles Katungi died of the same problem, yet I do not think he was under stress. I am told that medically there are other causes of this type of death.

High blood pressure can be one of them, diabetes can be one of them, and heavy weight like mine, puts us in danger. So, I suggest that Members think of having medical check-ups regularly. That will help. Mr Speaker, it is not correct to say that this death is primarily associated with stress. 

The second point; somebody mentioned double standards. It was suggested that Betty was used then dumped. I can assure you, Mr Speaker, this is not true. Betty was still on the list of useful cadres of the Movement. Deployment might not have come quickly, but she was not forgotten completely. As I said, when I saw it in the newspapers and on television, I did not believe it, because there was no inkling that she had been sick at all.  

The third point, which I think is true, is that the House should consider the future. Politics is risky business, so it cannot be permanent employment. Mr Speaker, I have also met some ex-Members of Parliament who are really in very depressing situations. Forget about former ministers, members need help too. 

Since we have a Parliamentary Commission, I suggest that we sit down and propose what to do. We should plan on how to prepare ourselves to leave politics, and how we live after we have not been elected. This business is highly risky. It is very likely that you may not be returned, and if you are a minister, it is even worse because you are appointed at the whims of the head of state. If he drops you what happens? 

We had better start preparing ourselves when we are still here. Waiting until we are suddenly surprised and shocked may be too late. I really share that concern of the Members. We need to work out a programme, a scheme, and I suggest that the Parliamentary Commission should do that. 

With these few words, Mr Speaker, and hon. Members, I would like to thank you very much for your contributions. All the contributions have shown that Betty was a very useful Member of this House and also a very useful member of this country. Thank you very much - (Applause).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it is my duty to put the question, and I now do so.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Well, this brings us to the end of today’s proceedings. I thank you very much.
     
NATIONAL ANTHEM (ONE VERSE)
The body of the Late Hon. Betty Okwir leaves the Chamber as the Police Band plays dirges.

(Parliament rose at 4.17 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 24 July 2002 at 2.00 p.m.)


