Tuesday, 20 July 2004

Parliament met at 2.44 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House is called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you all but in a particular way I want to welcome back the honourable members who have been attending the meeting in Bangkok. You are most welcome. I hope you had good liberations during the conference.  

I have received a notice from the Chairperson, Agriculture Committee to the honourable members of the committee and other members that Dr Bruce Chassy of USA, an expert in biotechnology will be making a presentation to Parliament, on biotechnology tomorrow Wednesday, 21 July 2004 at 10.00 a.m. in the Agriculture Committee Room 503(B). You are all invited to participate.

2.47
DR FRANK NABWISO (Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to bring to the attention of the House one of the problems in this country, which I think should be addressed, and that is the continuing burning of school dormitories and fires, which have destroyed buildings in various towns.

Mr Speaker, as you will recall, recently we even heard from India of a situation where 80 pupils were burnt at school. I would like to find out from the Leader of Government Business whether the Government is interested in investigating what is causing this burning of school dormitories, where parents are losing a lot of money and why we can even lose children through these fire problems. Has the Government contemplated taking action on the continuing uncontrolled fires in various urban areas?  

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you.

3.50
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am seeking an explanation from Government on a matter of public importance with reference to Article 159(2) of the Constitution, and I would like to read it verbatim.  

“Government shall not borrow, guarantee or raise a loan on behalf of itself or any other public institution”, and I repeat, “or any other public institution” “authority or person except as authorised by or under an Act of Parliament”. 

A few days ago I received an invitation in my pigeonhole to attend the official launch of the BIDCO Oil Palm Development Project. I am not against development but I am strongly opposed to any act, which tends to defy Parliament. We are not here as images; we are here as a respectable assembly, which must respect the dignity and the role of Parliament.  

In light of that, noting that there was a report on the BIDCO project, which was trying to bring out issues related to the provision I have read in the Constitution, was it proper for the President to go ahead and launch the project before Parliament gave sanctity to that project in accordance with Article 159(2) of the Constitution? I need clearance in terms of explanatory notice from the Leader of Government Business.

MR JACK SABIITI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You will recall that this same issue was raised on the Floor of this Parliament when we were discussing the funding of Tri Star Company. I remember you promised this House that you would request the Attorney-General to come up with an answer. Since then, nothing has happened. The fact that Government continues to violate that particular Article, may I know how we should handle such a matter when, according to some Members of Parliament, it is illegal and unconstitutional to continue using public funds by lending it to other institutions such as Tri-Star?  

THE SPEAKER: I did pass the inquiry to the Attorney-General. Unfortunately he died and therefore, I have to address another person. Indeed, as you will remember, this was before we concluded the session, but I will follow it up.  

I would also advise hon. Lukyamuzi that your question should have been in form of a question, trying to inquire whether it is true that Government made this guarantee or borrowed in respect of this. Did it obtain the necessary approval? That is how it should be. So, I think you better make an inquiry and then you will get a better answer than if you put it in that form. I would advise that you do it, and definitely, I will ensure that this question is answered some time this week. Put it in form of a question, then it will be answered.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. But can the Attorney-General constitutionally die?

THE SPEAKER: I am quite aware of that but the Attorney-General’s office is manned by an individual and an individual can die, that I am certain of. An individual can die, unfortunately.

MR AWORI: Supplementary.

THE SPEAKER: On what?

MR AWORI: On the Attorney-General. Mr Speaker, for all practical purposes and constitutionally, the legal adviser to this august House is the Attorney-General and since we lost our dear friend and colleague, I would like to know who is now the legal adviser to the august House.

THE SPEAKER: Well, you will direct that one to another person other than myself, but the question is taken.

2.59
MR JOHNSON MALINGA (Kapelebyong County, Katakwi): Mr Speaker, I would like to bring to your notice and that of the members of the august House a very sad incidence that occurred in Kapelebyong last weekend. Some armed people in army fatigues raided Amaseliko camp in Kapelebyong sub-county. They ran away with 73 head of cattle and took the direction of Bokora, Moroto District. The people were left wailing and are having a lot of mixed feelings as far as their security is concerned; they are not sure of what is going to happen next. This has made the community request the Minister of Defence and the Leader of Government Business to explain to them what happened to the disarmament process so that this kind of thing will not happen again. We are requesting the minister to make an urgent follow-up of the animals so that these people will be resettled. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

3.00
MR ODONGA OTTO (Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Yesterday I was in Kalangala for the launch of BIDCO. It happened to be my first time to be in Kalangala and I was impressed. I just have a small issue to raise. We were about ten Members of Parliament who attended the function, which was officiated over by the President of Uganda. I noted that we did not come back in the good moods we went in because the President started attacking the integrity of Parliament openly, amidst applause of the public. He said this is a very useless institution and those investors should not mind whatever people talk in this Parliament; that is why he wins elections on and off. 

Mr Speaker, I want to implore you –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Rukutana Mwesigwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and hon. Otto, for giving way. I was at the same function; at no time did the President refer to this House or to any Member of Parliament as useless. All that the President referred to were negative press reports on the project. He did not say that Members of Parliament were useless, or that Parliament was a useless institution. I was in full hearing; it is not true that the President referred to Members of Parliament as useless.

MR OTTO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was also at that function and we spent six hours all the way from Kalangala to Kampala commenting on the President’s attitude towards this institution. And as Members of Parliament, we were hurt. So, I want to know if there is any relevant provision within the Constitution that would bar the President from contempt of Parliament. 

I was there in a good mood like a gentleman, and all of a sudden people were just clapping hands - people were clapping hands and we were feeling so low and bogus. If we cannot clear these issues, it will be very difficult for some of us to attend any function where the President is because it is so bad for this institution. The same institutions we make are the same institutions we destroy. Mr Speaker, I beg your advice on this before we take the necessary actions to stop these kinds of things.

THE SPEAKER: Well, there are procedures. Issues of the President are not lightly taken the way we do. There are procedures of dealing with that situation. But in view of what the Minister has said and what you have said, I will personally investigate this matter. That is the best way we can handle it. 

I must say, honourable members, I am happy you are here in big numbers. (Applause)

3.02
MR VINCENT NYANZI (Busujju County, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Some time back I raised the issue of Mityana-Busega road on the Floor here. We all know that this has been the worst road in the whole country. I want to report to this House that rehabilitation of this road has already started - it started in June. They are working on it temporarily but it is going to be under three phases. One phase has already been contracted to ENERGO, and that is from Buwololo to Mudoma.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you for this positive report.

MR NYANZI: So, on behalf of the users of that road, I want to register our appreciation to the Minister of Works. Our people are very appreciative and the Minister confirmed to them that by December the whole road would be finished, and we are moving very smoothly.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, it is a compliment to you.

MR NYANZI: Mr Minister, I want to at least show Parliament that we should learn the culture of appreciating others.  

THE MINISTER OF STATE, TRANSPORT (Mr Andruale Awuzu): Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Nyanzi, for giving way. While I appreciate your thanks to the Ministry for the work, which is being done on this road, I need to make one correction in your statement that this has been the worst road in the whole country. 

I remember when you raised this question last time and said that this was the worst road in this country, I told you that it was not because for example, from Oluyo to Pakwach, it takes six hours yet it is a shorter distance and yet this road, which is 40 miles at its worst, used to take only one and a half to two hours of the users’ time. So, thank you very much for your compliments but please, it is not the worst road in this country; there are so many other roads, which are worse than this. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from hon. Sabiiti and then the Prime Minister answers and then we wind up. This is not a formal item.  

3.05
MR JACK SABIITI (Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Some weeks back, under your leadership and guidance we passed the Vote-on-Account and I recall you requested Parliament to quickly pass the Vote-on-Account so that funds are released to Government departments as soon as possible. At the moment nearly all departments of Government are stuck. May I know from either the Minister of Finance or the Leader of Government Business whether we are so broke that we have reached a point of not releasing money to be accessed by the departments of Government?

THE SPEAKER: No, I think this is a matter of the Ministry of Finance because it is about appointing accounting officers, let the Minister of Finance tell us.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank hon. Jack Sabiiti for this question. All I can say is that there was some delay due to designating of accounting officers; the matter has been resolved and releases on Vote on Account are going to be made as soon as practicable. Actually some of them have been made. 

I understand before I entered the House there was another question on BIDCO –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, first explain –(Laughter)- No, no, clear this issue on Vote on Account, which we were supposed to do at the end of last month but according to hon. Sabiiti things have not worked out. What is the cause and how soon are you going to act?

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: As I explained, Rt hon. Speaker and honourable members, the small delay was occasioned by the procedure for designating accounting officers. But that one has now been sorted out and I know that some ministries and departments have started getting their releases. Those that have not yet got the releases will get them sooner than later.

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, I would request the Prime Minister to move faster and knock at the doors of these ministers because surely the law about accounting officers is very clear. The issuance of letters surely cannot take months. And as you know, Mr Speaker, I was a civil servant and it never delayed like this. There could be inefficiency somewhere and I would request the Prime Minister to intervene to make sure that things are handled very quickly so that departments function. Thank you.

3.10
MR BASALIZA ARAALI (Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have a burning issue. Sometime back 70 students from the School of Clinical Officers in Fort Portal were kicked out by the Ministry of Education and when they were kicked out, they sent a petition to you and you forwarded the petition to the Committee on Social Services. But those students are now still outside their school; they are suffering, their parents are suffering and they have not been allowed to go back. 

We know very well that 15 of them forged documents, those I do not support. But 55 were admitted by the official representatives of the Ministry of Education. In fact there have been conflicting statements. The Ministry of Health wants these students to continue and finish but the Ministry of Education has kicked them out. So, when is the Social Services Committee going to present its findings so that we can debate that issue and then those students either go back and study or a decision is taken rather than making them roam all over the place with anguish? Some of them might develop some psychological problems and start causing problems in the country. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, as you have rightly said, when this matter came to me I sent it to the appropriate committee to investigate. I will have to find out from the chairperson of the committee what has happened. Meanwhile I think we have to wait, the issue is still with us; we shall find out and deal with it.
 
MR TIBARIMBASA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  The member who has raised this issue was out of the country when this matter was discussed by the committee. The committee summoned the officials of the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Education and we deliberated upon this problem. A decision was reached that the students who had joined the school with forged documents be dismissed. The students who entered the school without minimum requirements should also be dismissed and the students who are from outside Uganda should provide their entry documents to UNEB so that UNEB will scrutinize them and guide us. We are writing up the report, it is coming to the Speaker. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Let us wait for the report. Mr Prime Minister, about the schools?
 
3.14
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The question raised by hon. Dr Nabwiso is extremely important and I have no hesitation in directing the Ministry of Education to investigate this matter with the Ministry of Internal Affairs. The question of having fire extinguishers is not enough. The other time you read of a student who wanted to capture attention and he wanted to practice arson. So, these issues are very fundamental and I wish to request the Ministry of Education to interface with the Ministry of Internal Affairs and make a statement, I think within a month, because this is a very serious matter.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, but maybe the question is what precaution or measures are being taken now, to prevent that?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: The precautions taken now involve the following. You need to ensure that someone is left in the dormitories to ensure that they are protected. That is extremely important. A custodian may be necessary and of course we need fire extinguishers, but in case the Minister of State for Primary Education who is here, or any other Minister has something to add with your permission, Sir, I would welcome them to add or even subtract from what I have said.

3.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE, PRIMARY EDUCATION (Mrs Geraldine Bitamazire): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I thank the Prime Minister for giving me chance to clarify on what we are trying to do. I would like to confirm, not to subtract, that the Ministry of Education is already working with security organs to find out exactly who is behind this very dangerous move.

Secondly, the Commissioner for Secondary Education is under instruction to draft guidelines to the head-teachers and school authorities because these issues might involve a lot of factors, which could be prevented, like misuse of electric gadgets, carelessness and so on. So, we are writing special guidelines, which in the meantime school authorities should use so that we avoid some of these problems.

MR SITENDA-SEBALU: Thank you, Madam Minister, for giving way. One of the schools being talked about is Naalya Senior Secondary School, which is in my constituency in Kiira Town Council. About 50 students were affected and most of the mattresses were burnt, even books. I want to know, as a matter of urgency, what the Government is going to do to these children to help them get new mattresses. I thank you.

MR AWORI: Thank you my honourable colleague, thank you, Mr Speaker. I am sure the Rt hon. Prime Minister as a former student, and my colleague at Buddo, you are aware that we lost a dormitory and I am sure by now you have received the report of the cause of the fire at Buddo, England house. I am sure and I hope you can tell this august House the contents of that report.

THE SPEAKER: But are we going to deal with each school? I thought it is a big problem. We want to have a report that may cover all the circumstances. Otherwise, we shall be working on this everyday.  

MRS BITAMAZIRE: I thank my colleagues for the information they are giving and the issues raised here. One Member of Parliament is asking what Government is doing about these. These are emergencies for which we do not have budgets right now. But I think it will come out better after we have carried out investigations to know exactly what is happening and then we shall see how to address the issues, which may arise. As for Buddo, we are going to handle the whole thing together, not school by school. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE, INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Kezimbira Miyingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I promised the House that I was going to come with the report on the fire situations or damages that have been done by fires, and the present status of the fire brigade. My report is ready but I am having it made into the required copies.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, tomorrow.

DR KEZIMBIRA: Not tomorrow; Thursday.

THE SPEAKER: I think we should wind up this particular -(Interruption)

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, supplementary question to the minister who has just given remarks on the fires. As the Minister in charge of Internal Affairs, it is not sufficient to give us a report on the fire brigades. We would want to know the reasons underlying this upsurge of fires in secondary schools. What are the underlying reasons, is it because – especially as a Minister for Internal Security -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the report will be worked out by all sectors in the Ministry of Education and Internal Affairs and they will tell us. It will be one report by Government about the situation.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: With regard to the question of the Attorney-General, His Excellency the President is assiduously handling this matter. But as you know, we have a Solicitor-General and currently he is assisting us to handle legal matters. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this general debate, as I told you earlier, should be only on very urgent matters, not on anything.

THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker, I heard what hon. Johnson Malinga said about the incident of cattle rustling. I had not received that report but I will get more information from him and we will take it up and investigate what it is. Right now I do not have an answer as to what happened last weekend.

On the question of disarmament, as we have had occasion to say here, the disarmament exercise was affected by the activities in the mid-North because of the LRA activities and the going into Sudan of the UPDF. As we wind up that exercise, as hon. Aggrey Awori knows very well, decisively we will be able to resume in full force the disarmament exercise in Karamoja region. I am sure that it will be much sooner than later.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR ARUMADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  At the beginning of the sitting we had air conditioning here. Where I am seated today, I am beginning to feel hot, what could have happened?

THE SPEAKER: Let us look into this; we shall investigate.

 PRESENTATION OF A PETITION TO PARLIAMENT

3.25
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for granting me permission to present this petition. This petition is made by the residents of Buvuma Islands concerning the lack of teachers and scholastic materials at Buvuma College.  

“To the Parliament of Uganda, the humble petition of the residents of Buvuma Island presented by hon. Nsubuga William states that;

The subject matter of this petition is Buvuma College, a Government-funded secondary school, situated in an island sub-county, Buvuma County.  

That the petitioners are residents of Buvuma Islands, committed to promoting quality education and improving the education system on Buvuma Islands and Uganda as a whole;  

That it is Government policy to aid all Government-funded secondary schools in the country so as to improve the education system in the country.  

That Government has for the last ten years failed to provide teachers and other scholastic materials to Buvuma College. Buvuma College is the only secondary school in the county; 

That Buvuma College also lacks a laboratory and library to facilitate the students’ education; 

Therefore, your petitioners pray that a committee of Parliament be mandated to:

(i) Look into the grievances raised by the petitioners in the petition and suggest recommendations;

(ii) Analyse the situation on the ground and recommend on the appropriate number of teachers needed by Buvuma College, the construction of a science laboratory and a school library. 

AND your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray. 

Dated this 12th day of July 2004.”  

Mr Speaker, this petition is supported by 122 residents of Buvuma Island.

THE SPEAKER: Let the Committee on Social Services handle this and then make a report.

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS DELIVERED TO PARLIAMENT ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT ON 4 JUNE 2004.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the debate on this motion was concluded and therefore my duty today is to put the question to the motion. 

(Question put)

(The Members voted by a show of hands)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the results are 3 abstentions; those against are 8, and members in favour of adopting the motion are 110. The motion is carried.

(Report adopted)

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Speaker, I wish to seek clarification. An honourable member of this august House voted twice. I want to find out whether it is in order for a member to vote twice particularly in this august House?

THE SPEAKER: My assessment of the situation is that he continued holding up his hand to emphasize his position.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Given that we have moved from saying “aye” and “nay” and we are putting up our hands – (Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Until some time, yes.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Which looks a bit queer and odd - would the Speaker consider electronic voting as a more advanced method of doing business in the House?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, honourable members, we are pursuing this matter. As I told you, we went to Rome early this year, there are people who want to facilitate us on this one but recently we got a write-up about this issue. Electronic voting also has its problems. In fact many people are complaining about it. We do not want to introduce something with a lot of expectations and eventually people query this and the other. But the matter is being studied.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs published a Bill for amendment of the Constitution in order to help this Parliament to conduct its business in relation to the Constitutional Court ruling. It is now past 14 days since the Bill should have been tabled in the House and there is no clear explanation on what procedure this Parliament is going to take as regards the pending Bills that this House is supposed to handle. Don’t you think we are running out of time?

THE SPEAKER: There is no problem, when the problem arises it will be solved.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I wanted to supplement the very important point, which was advanced by hon. Prof. Kamuntu. At the beginning of this session you reminded us about its seriousness. Noting that we have so many other processes, which will demand a pronouncement of ourselves over certain issues including the referendum and possibly Article 105(2) of the Constitution, I would like to allay the fears of the people of Lubaga South whom I represent that we will follow that process. Because we are moving from an oral pronouncement to show of hands, and eventually we will end up with another process.

THE SPEAKER: If you are talking about rule 105, I am armed with the rules. Presently, I will use those.

PRESENTATION OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2004/2005, SUBMITTED TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT THROUGH THE SPEAKER IN ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 7 OF THE BUDGET ACT, 2001

3.32
THE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Ms Beatrice Kiraso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Since the Budget Act came into place in 2001, it has been the practice here in Parliament, as a precursor to the general debate on the Budget Speech, to present to Parliament the recommendations, which the Budget Committee where all Sessional Committee Chairpersons are ex-officio members, submitted to the President prior to preparing the Budget. This is also in accordance with a requirement in the Budget Act, that is, section 8, which says that; “There shall be presented to Parliament by the Budget Committee, the recommendations submitted to the Speaker under section 7(3).”  

We have already circulated to members the comprehensive report, which was submitted to His Excellency the President prior to the reading of the Budget. It is in two parts; one is on the three years’ macro-economic plan for fiscal years 2004/2005 to 2006/2007, and the other one is the preliminary, indicative revenue and expenditure estimates for the coming financial year. 

Mr Speaker, we have tried as much as possible to condense the two reports into a smaller document, but the big documents are available for members, both in hard copy and electronically through our intranet system.  

The Budget Act also requires that the President, at the time or before the time of reading the Budget, presents to Parliament a report on the total indebtedness of the state in that financial year. I wish to report, Mr Speaker, that this was done in accordance with the Act and that the Budget Committee has considered that report and will come with a smaller report to this Parliament regarding the total indebtedness of the state.  

Mr Speaker, I wish also to report to my honourable colleagues that in the past the Budget Committee has picked recommendations of sessional committees, which they make to their relevant sectors when they interact with the various sectors during the time of considering the policy statements. We have in the past put all the recommendations together, bound them and given them to you as one book. But we wish to apologize that this year we were not able to do that because of logistical problems in the Budget Office, but they too are available electronically. 

Section 8 of the Budget Act, 2001 requires that the Budget Committee presents to Parliament this report. I wish for the record to lay this report on the Table. I lay the two reports on the Table, Mr Speaker, because I am just going to give the highlights of the report.  

The summary of the recommendations - I will start with the macro-economic plan and budget framework. Parliament recognizes that the key Government activities and programmes for improving the social and economic well being of Ugandans are contained in the Poverty Eradication Action Plan, and it notes that the five pillars of the PEAP are:

1. Economic management,
2. Production competitiveness and incomes,
3. Security, conflict resolution and disaster management,
4. Good governance; and
5. Human development.

The committee recommends that the PEAP revision process should not only be expedited, but it should also be brought to Parliament for adoption so that in the spirit of partnership we know what the PEAP is all about, we are on board, and are able to support it.  

Mr Speaker, the committee also recommended that future planning functions and activities such as the PEAP, the Plan for modernization of Agriculture (PMA), NAADS and others that are in process should be duly transferred to the National Planning Authority for better co-ordination so that some of these activities are not conflicting or being duplicated in various sectors.  

The committee notes that realistic targets for macro-economic variables as strategies for attaining them are necessary for economic growth. However, we would like to note that our previous recommendation to widen the scope of key economic indicators was largely ignored. The committee appreciates the attention paid to the human development index under Pillar 5 of the Poverty Eradication Action Plan. Many of the economic variables have been left to the market forces, which are grossly deficient in resource allocation, especially in an under-developed economy like ours. We did note that advanced economies, although they talk of market forces, still make some strategic interventions and have strategic roles, which will enhance economic development. 

The committee notes that targeting the real GDP growth rate at seven percent for the medium-term is too ambitious since it has not materialized in the past five years. Lack of a complementary infrastructure makes the projected growth rate unattainable. The inflation projection of five percent for the medium-term, though it sounds attractive, is a bit low and inflation is maintained artificially. This has resulted into accumulation of domestic arrears accruing out of the monies owed to suppliers and pensioners. 

There are high levels of interest rates as a result of massive treasury bills and the committee feels that the present level of interest is a reflection of the true inflation rate. The Government should work out a comprehensive strategy for clearing out outstanding dues as measures are taken to prevent the re-occurrence of new ones.  

The committee welcomed the pledge to reduce fiscal deficit to 6.5 percent in the medium-term, but concern was raised given the substantial size of the un-funded activities and yet they are considered to be of high priority. Under the proposed level of domestic financing, the benefits accruing from the reduction of the budget deficit are unlikely to be realized until financial year 2006/2007. The committee would like to note that deficit financing in the medium-term will mainly be financed by external borrowing, particularly project loans estimated to be 2.4 percent of GDP. The committee cautions that rapid economic growth generated through external borrowing runs the risk of accumulating an unsustainable debt burden.

Revenue projections: 

On revenue projections, the committee was concerned that Government is not being proactive in raising domestic revenue. Last year the Committee on the Budget did make certain recommendations to Government on how the tax base could be widened. It would be important if we learnt more about those kinds of recommendations because we are as concerned as Government is on widening the tax base.
 
We would like to note, Mr Speaker, that the threshold of Shs 130,000 per month for taxation is no longer tenable because it does not provide a minimum basket of goods and services, given the current price levels. We would like to recommend that the lowest threshold be adjusted to Shs 235,000 per month.  

The committee also noted the international pressure to reduce reliance on trade taxes as a result of economic integration, and recommends that Government should strengthen local revenue mobilisation and substantially downsize public expenditure.  

On petroleum taxes, the committee recommends that the status quo should be maintained as the oil industry is experiencing external instability and for its influence on prices.  

The committee welcomes the reforms that the Government has instituted in collection of non-tax revenue. But we would like to note that the bureaucracies are causing the collection of non-revenue to be very slow. So, the Government should address that.  

The Budget Act requires that ministers who are in charge of sectors that benefit from Appropriation-in-Aid on a quarterly basis should bring a report to this Parliament. But I wish to report, Mr Speaker, as you may be aware, that since the Budget Act came into place in 2001, we have never received any report from a minister who is in charge of a sector that collects money and uses it at source. We think it is a loophole. 

In spite of having the Poverty Eradication Action Plan as a guiding principle for budget execution, budgetary allocations to sectors seem to be presently determined in a manner that is inconsistent with public expenditure priorities. The sector allocations of resources should be determined by sector contributions to GDP growth, taking into account short, medium and long-term strategies. 

We are mindful that the Poverty Eradication Action Plan emphasizes some sectors that will not be immediately productive. But it is also important to have a balance between these social services that will not be immediately productive and those where if we put money, we are able to realise something immediately. 

Expenditure outlook and options:

Resource envelope:

On the expenditure outlook and options, Mr Speaker, we noted that the medium-term expenditure framework for the year 2004/05 has a proposed resource envelope of Shs 2,720.5 billion. This includes Shs 265.2 billion for interest payments, and Shs 41 billion for arrears. The resource envelope continues to be pressurised by un-funded priority activities, which calls for a change from the present incremental budgeting to activity or zero-based budgeting.  

The committee recommended that future budgetary allocations are dealt with decisively so that activities that fail to be accommodated in the budget by replacing lower priority activities, are deferred for future budgets or dropped other than to keep them hanging in the budget. 

Mr Speaker, we have been defecting on our contributions to international associations and organisations. This, we think, is shameful to this country. We had recommended in the past that we could scale down the number of associations and organisations that Uganda belongs to and only maintain a few that we are able to subscribe to. We do appreciate both the need to belong and the budget constraints but we strongly feel that something should be done about this because it is very embarrassing to this country. 
 
Universal Primary Education:

Mr Speaker, the committee appreciates the intentions of UPE but notes the controversies in enrolment, staff numbers, quality, school facilities and high drop out rates especially for girls. The committee recommends that the shortage of teachers for primary and secondary education and their attendant pay should also be resolved, and an appropriate legal framework for UPE should be enacted.

Public Administration:

Mr Speaker, the committee and indeed most Members of Parliament are still concerned about the large expenditure on public administration. Expenditures such as purchase and repair of helicopters, purchase of land for State House Nakasero, reconstruction of Entebbe State House, and the official residence of the Vice-President should be carefully evaluated in light of the present funding constraints. Parliament has consistently pointed out the necessity to reduce the number of presidential advisors, the size of Cabinet, the number of RDC assistants and deputies, and the size of Parliament. (Applause). Some of these establishments exceed their legal limits by far.

Defence Expenditure:

Mr Speaker, the committee has consistently raised concern about the ever-increasing expenditure in defence. The need for security is paramount to the PEAP objectives. Alternative solutions to the security situation should be explored with great urgency and the committee recommends that all areas of wastage, leakage and corruption in this sector should be seriously and decisively addressed.  

The committee notes that high interest rates negatively affect private investment. The interest bill is projected to rise from Shs 227 billion in 2003/04 to an estimated Shs 265 billion in 2005/06. This points to an unsustainable debt situation. Last financial year we recommended that a detailed breakdown of interest costs should be availed to Parliament, together with the assessment of the debt sustainability and the extent to which the burden of monetary policy is shouldered by the Budget. Government did not pay attention to this, but I think between now and the time when the committee makes that presentation, the Minister of Finance has agreed to give us this kind of breakdown. I think he will make that report when we are reporting on the indebtedness.

Mr Speaker, this Act also requires Parliament to analyse programmes and policy issues that affect the national budget and economy, and where necessary recommend alternative approaches to the Government. It is in light of this and in the spirit of recommending alternative approaches that we would like to comment on things like accommodation of Government offices.  

The committee is concerned that rent for Government offices has exerted so much pressure on the Budget. We would like to appeal to Government to change its policy and provide accommodation for ministries and Government departments. 

Pay Reform:

On pay reform, the committee noted that pressure from sections of public servants to increase pay are a result of deterioration of the present pay to meet the required livelihood, but we are concerned about the practice of selective pay awards. It would be a source of widespread industrial unrest and we would like to recommend that if there is to be increased pay, it should be done comprehensively and across the board.

Political activities: 

The committee recognises the need for political activities as an essential and integral part for political stability of the nation. However, the size and magnitude of the budgets for political activities should be in line with what is provided in the legal framework. It would be more prudent to make allocations to electoral and pre-electoral activities after determining the exact activities that are going to be undertaken. In case a new political system emerges, the way the Electoral Commission does its business may have to be revisited and addressed appropriately. 
 
Mr Speaker, there are other policy proposals that the committee would like to quickly comment on:

On the budgetary leakages, the committee notes that there are leakages, which have continued to cause a strain on the Budget and some of these are: 

(a) Court awards,
(b) “Ghost” workers, 
(c) Air supply, 
(d) Shoddy work; and 
(e) Wastages in forms of fraud, embezzlement and outright corruption.  

In recommendations, we are saying in general terms that special attention should be paid to these budgetary leakages.
  
Industrialisation and value addition:

Mr Speaker, the need to industrialise through value addition to Uganda’s exports is a welcome idea. These efforts should be developed in a comprehensive manner, through support to relevant research and development, improved production, quality assurance or control and support to productive sectors such as agriculture, mining and energy, which have a key role in industrialisation and value addition. I think it would be prudent if this value addition was also done in a more transparent manner that is scientific and systematic. 

On domestic arrears, the committee is concerned that in spite of the commitment control system Government has continued to attract domestic arrears. The old ones include pensions and gratuity, wages and salaries of workers, court awards, utilities, rent, compensations, contingent liabilities and interest thereof. This amount is growing and today domestic arrears stand at Shs 650 billion. We think this is quite high. 
 
Capacity building; we do appreciate that we lack capacity in many areas in this country. But the committee and indeed Parliament has been concerned about this component of capacity building in most of the projects. There is a lot of duplication in capacity building. Some of these loans, which are brought to Parliament for approval have got considerable components of capacity building but nobody is coming up to tell us how much capacity has been built over the years in spite of such colossal amounts of money that have gone into capacity building. 

Contingency Fund:

The Minister of Finance - Mr Speaker, this is on another point. I am sorry I am going through this very fast because you have the detailed report. We would like to see a Bill that puts in place a contingency fund so as to avoid – although the Public Finance and Accountability Act mandates Parliament to give prior approval to supplementary expenditures, I think it would be smoother and neater if we appropriated money in a contingency fund and then the utilisation of those funds are brought to Parliament. And this is in line with the provisions of the Constitution.
  
On sequencing of the budget debate, we would like to propose that while the expenditure proposals are tabled to Parliament, the revenue proposals should be tabled at the same time because we find it inconsistent for us to approve expenditure before the Finance Bill is considered, and then the Finance Bill or the revenue proposals are brought afterwards when we have already committed funds. We would like to have a say in the revenue proposals -(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: At what stage would you like this to happen, before the Budget is read or after?  

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, between the Committee - of course I know it would be too pre-emptive to come up with revenue proposals and make them public. But if there was goodwill on the part of the Ministry of Finance, we would work out a programme in which we would look at these proposals maybe immediately after the Budget is read, but before we pronounce ourselves here on the Budget. 

THE SPEAKER: Is that not done? I thought you were talking about before the Budget is read? If it is before the Budget is read, do you not see it is a problem?

MS KIRASO: Technically, it would be a problem. I agree with that.

MR KAKOOZA: I wanted to give –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: This was just to understand it, not to debate it really.  

MR KAKOOZA: It is a problem because as much as they bring the Finance Bill and we agree on tariff rates, there are those rates, which we do not change and are agreed on by the Ministry of Finance and read in the Budget, which affects the businesses. In affecting the businesses, the Government does not correct them and we do not change those tariff rates because the revenue is being estimated. We do it as a rubber stamp instead of changing and suiting it to the business transaction so that the Government can collect the revenue.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, the committee was also concerned about population. The committee noted that in the medium term, meaningful development issues could not be dealt with in isolation of population issues. Government should, therefore, pay special attention to population growth vis-à-vis income distribution issues.  

On preliminary revenue and expenditure estimates for this coming financial year, the report has also been circulated but allow me just to give a few highlights to help focus our general debate on the Budget Speech.  

After the sessional committees have looked at the policy statements - it is expected I am just reminding my colleagues that the policy statement made under sub-section (1) of section 6 of this Act shall be in a form prescribed by the Minister responsible for Finance, and shall reflect specific data on value for money and the extent of achievement of the objective targets on money received and spent. So, while in this report I will mainly touch on policy issues, the objective targets and the achievements during the past financial year in compulsion to the moneys that were released to the various sectors shall be contained in the reports of the sessional committees. 

On the preliminary revenues and expenditure for this coming financial year, the committee found the sector-wide approach a deficient means of delivering goals and objectives. This is because the approach conceals the vital details of sectors without strong spokespeople. This approach should be revisited for further budgets to enable all ministers and departmental programmes and activities of the Government to compete for budgetary resources on their individual merit. This will provide an opportunity for wealth creating sectors, a good call at the resources and avoid large lists of un-funded priorities.  

The committee was disappointed that some of Parliament’s recommendations made in the last financial year were neither implemented nor was there any courteous explanation from Government on why some of these recommendations have not been implemented.

Mr Speaker, I will not go into the analysis of sector by sector the way the report has been written, but in a nutshell, allow me to comment very briefly on the sectors as we did to the President in that report. Very briefly the issues that relate to Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries include: 

•  Provision of Shs 2 billion for beach management units. We think this is very important and this money should be found.

• In compliance with the Maputo Protocol, this Government should consider raising agriculture funding to ten percent of the total budget and not less. (Applause)

• Aware that our budget is constrained, we still think that the NAADS programme should be expanded from the present few pilot districts and few sub-counties, and for this the Government will need Shs 2.74 billion. 

• We are also concerned about the pests and disease control and that the additional funding that is needed for PMA and the National Animal Generic Resource and Dairy Development, seem not to have been provided for in the Budget.  

• Mr Speaker, there is a report by the Washington based International Food Policy Research Institute and in that report it has been proved that Ugandan’s returns to investment in agricultural research and extension contributes tremendously to direct reduction in poverty while increasing agricultural productivity; and that for the marginal shilling invested, for every one shilling invested 12 shillings would be returned.

• The committee recommended that Government seriously considers investing in agricultural research and extension in order to harness this potential. 

• Mr Speaker, Shs 2.5 billion is required to purchase at least 10,000 hectares of land for the Oil Palm Project and we support that this should be raised, but after the outstanding, contentious issues regarding this project have been cleared.  

The rest of the policy recommendations on Agriculture are contained in the report. 

Allow me, Mr Speaker, to make one or two comments on the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry:

• In order to present a realistic picture of the Ministry’s budget, the committee recommended that wage subversions be separated from non-wage shillings. 

• And the committee notes that the proposed Shs 50 billion meant for industrialisation of value addition is now rightly placed under the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry. We would like to commend ourselves for having insisted that this money goes to where it belongs. The selection of where the intervention will be has - I have already said - should be more transparent and the beneficiaries should be clearly on merit. 

• Mr Speaker, the committee was concerned that all over the years, the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry has been persistently under-funded and as a result it is not able to carry out most of the activities under its mandate. Out of the budget requirements of Shs 38.5 billion, only Shs 7.2 billion is available and there is a shortfall of Shs 31 billion. This leaves us wondering about the seriousness of promoting trade and exports. 
 
• Mr Speaker, we would like to urge Government to build capacity in trade negotiations skills because, more often than not, we have found ourselves as a country at a disadvantaged position because we do not match some international levels in negotiating some of these protocols. We are always at a disadvantage.  

• There is some controversial issue on the goat export drive. Money has been earmarked for increasing the stocks of animals, but we are saying there should be a balance between increasing the number and activities for animal disease control, research and securing an attendant certification so that we can conform to the international standards.

• The committee also urges Government to attend to our Museum and Antiquities Department with enough funding in the spirit of promoting tourism. 

• And in view of decentralisation policy, we would like to recommend that districts are encouraged to set up their own tourism committees because there are some places really, which have got very good tourism potential but it is not being tapped and developed because of the centralised nature of this industry.

Mr Speaker, on social services, the committee is concerned that Government is putting up buildings to house health centres II, III and IV and we are saying, what is the whole point of putting up buildings when there are no medicines and there are no staff to work in those buildings? So, we are also asking for a balance on that one. Instead of just mushrooming buildings, we would like Government to focus on recruitment of staff to these health centres.

The committee was concerned about the delay in procurement of theatre equipment for all hospitals, for example, equipment promised under the ORET Scheme, yet most of this equipment, which come in is obsolete. The committee recommended that Government should consider the procurement of theatre equipment as a priority and find alternative sources to finance it. We are mindful that the Ministry of Finance does not want the macro-economic stability to be distorted. However, we would also like to encourage you to source for real equipment rather than money that will undermine the macro-economic stability.

Mr Speaker, on the Global Fund for HIV/AIDS, Malaria and Tuberculosis, we have found that the funds, which come to the ministry under this special programme have been budgeted for and provided under the ceiling. We would like to urge that this fund, the Global Fund for HIV/AIDS, Malaria and Tuberculosis, be treated separately and outside the budget ceiling of the ministry for it to be more meaningful. Otherwise, this programme will start sharing with the other health programmes that are ongoing and we think this is very key.

There has been a project called the Nutrition and Early Childhood Development Project –(Interjections)- I think you can hear that members are not satisfied with the results in the pilot district, and would like to learn more on how the project is going on.

The committee was concerned about disability prevention and rehabilitation. The ministry had a disability prevention programme targeting blindness, deafness and injury prevention and control. An amount of Shs 96 million was requested for. Out of that, only Shs 36 million was provided and there was under-funding amounting to Shs 63 million. Mr Speaker, we appreciate affirmative action and recognition of vulnerable and disadvantaged sections of our society, but this is a manifestation that we are giving them lip service.

The Ministry also requested for Shs 400 million to support the production of mobility assisting appliances such as crutches, walking sticks, surgical boots and other equipment in selected hospitals. I will not go into the details. Of the Shs 400 million requested for only Shs 100 million was provided.  

Mr Speaker, a number of mental health centres are in their final stages of completion, and the committee is concerned about the delay by the Ministry of Public Service to approve structures and take on board the cadre of psychiatric nurses within the structures in order to staff these centres.  

The committee also learnt that land belonging to Butabika Hospital was in the process of being allocated or leased out to investors. The committee was perturbed that the so-called investors have already demarcated the land for re-sale. The committee was informed that the proposed distribution of the land by the Uganda Land Commission, which we have broken down in your reports, are going to Sana Trading Company of Dubai, United Arab Emirates, 250 acres, 100 acres to Property Services Limited of Kampala and 50 acres to Mukwano Industries. The committee recommends that Government immediately halts the proposed allocation of the said land and complies with the Parliamentary resolution of 6 May 2004 with regard to this matter.

Mr Speaker, we would like to note the growing arrears for electricity and telephone bills for regional and referral hospitals, which also do contribute to the frequent power cuts.  

We have a note on reproductive health and blood transfusion, which I would like to interest members to read. I will comment on the –(Interjection)- no, blood transfusion you can interest yourselves in that. I have already commented on the under-funding for staff and medicines for these health centres.  

Briefly on education, the committee noted that funding for the primary education sector has risen beyond the planned 65 percent and is now moving to 67.1 percent. We are concerned about the post-primary education and training in order to cater for those pupils that leave Universal Primary Education (UPE). So, we are calling for a balance here too that while we appreciate that we need to enable an average Ugandan to read and write, there should be a provision for where these people will go after they have learnt to read and write, after primary 7. So, we may need to bring up a balance.  

The committee is also concerned about the high level of drop out especially of girls - I think I mentioned that - and the plight of children especially in internally displaced people’s camps.  

On secondary schools, Mr Speaker, the committee was informed that the Ministry of Education did not have funds to grant aid to private or community secondary schools for this coming financial year so as to be able to accommodate the minimum staff establishment of 12 teachers, and 6 non-teaching staff. The committee was concerned that available secondary schools cannot absorb the UPE graduates.

We would like to recommend that the wage bill for secondary schools be raised as a top priority, to enable the Ministry grant aid to at least 56 private or community secondary schools each financial year, beginning from 2004/05, on the basis of one school per district.

Mr Speaker, in the big report to His Excellency, we have also commented on seed secondary schools - I think I am not going to read everything - and the concern that we have raised on the ADB Education II project, because it has delayed. The loan was passed in 2000/01 for construction and it was recommended that this activity commences without further delay but nothing has been done about that yet. It is the same thing with the ADB Education II project, construction of polytechnics, and this loan was passed also in 2000/01.  

Oh higher education, Mr Speaker, our recommendations were targeting wages for teaching and non-teaching staff in public universities and in particular the committee recommended that a budget with a nominal figure and taskforce be lined up for preparations and planning to be provided for in this coming budget for the public university in the eastern region. The committee recommends that the Minister of Education and Sports reports back to Parliament the Cabinet position on the matter as soon as possible so that we can move together. 

The committee recommended also that the Open University should be started to decongest the existing public universities.  

We were also informed that the search for Vice-Chancellor of Makerere University is on course and the committee recommended that the process is expedited, and that gender balance should be taken into consideration.

I am sorry, honourable members, I am skipping some of the recommendations, which you had in the report to enable for enough time –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Do they not have this in their report? I think this is intended to help them debate the other –(Interruption)

MS KIRASO: Yes, Mr Speaker, I just wanted to highlight a few things, which the committee thought were very important. Most of the recommendations are contained in the report although some members are saying they do not have copies - I think photocopying is going on. So, I do not know, Mr Speaker, with your guidance should I stop or not?

THE SPEAKER: No, you conclude as you wish but I think they have the report. They will use it when they are debating the Budget Speech because their interests may be valid. Somebody may have to stress something here and then you have the other –(Interruption)

MS KIRASO: That was my fear, Mr Speaker, because I had already talked about some sectors. So, when we do not talk about others, it will look like the Budget Committee ignored them. 

Very briefly, we made some recommendations regarding the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and in particular we would like to see a policy regarding orphans and vulnerable children.

The committee also recommended that vocational centres for people with disabilities should be supported.  

On the National Community Based Rehabilitation (NCBR) programme, Government adopted a policy of rehabilitation of people with disabilities in their homes, under the NCBR programme. As of now, the available funds are covering just one district, Tororo, and we would like to see it spread to other districts.

Mr Speaker, this country is in urgent and dire need of child rehabilitation centres, and this should not be ignored because we have got so many destitute children on the streets. This is important.

On the national women, youth and disability councils, the committee recommended that the Shs 2.5 billion – well, I think we recommend that the women councils, the youth councils and the councils for people with disabilities should be appropriately funded. It puts us in a very tricky situation to go down to the grassroots, sit with the women councils, sit with the youth councils and yet these people are not facilitated to do any kind of mobilisation.  

We also commented on public libraries, industrial court, the National Council for Children and a national cultural centre. We were in support of them all and we were saying funds should be found to promote these centres. 

I have already talked about domestic arrears and this is not only in this ministry but it cuts across the board, including arrears for re-allocation.

Mr Speaker, on Works, Housing and Communications, road maintenance has been constrained by the fact that up to now the Government has not honoured its agreement with its donors, who fund 42 percent of the Budget, to increase funding for road maintenance to the tune of US $2.0 million annually.  

We did also recommend last year that instead of embarking on too many roads, being a jack of all trades and mastering none and politicising road construction and maintenance, Government could put its efforts on a few roads, finish them and embark on others later. But the practice is that too many roads are started at the same time and they are not completed and maintained. Work is not focused.

Cases of poor workmanship, shoddy work and corruption have been reported in this sector, and this generally makes work in this sector the most expensive in the region.

The committee notes that maintenance of murram roads is very expensive and in the long run it will not be sustainable. It recommends that the Government should make more investment in tarmacking roads.

The committee further recommends that Government should endeavour to seriously check the axle loading and traffic density on the roads. It should implement the weighbridge system to penalise the culprits and also enforce the offloading zones, and penalise overloaded vehicles. 

We do note that this sector also receives a lot of donor funding but sometimes we are not able on our part as Uganda, to put up the counterpart funds. That renders donor funds, sometimes, very inadequate.

On road accidents, when we wrote this report some of the steps that the Ministry is taking had not started being enforced. But we would like to commend the sector for some of these steps they are taking like enforcing wearing of seat belts and not talking on mobile phones when people are driving, but we are still concerned about the high level of road accidents, Mr Speaker.

On air transport, we recommend that money be found for an appropriate radar system to be provided to the Civil Aviation Authority. The committee also urges the Civil Aviation Authority to be innovative so as to enhance its potential for generation of non-tax revenue, which it could use to finance its operations.

On water transport, we do note and commend Government for the construction of a ship for Kalangala. However, the committee recommends that other landing sites along the shores of lakes Victoria, Kyoga, Albert and Bunyonyi should be considered in the medium-term plans for this sector.

On railway transport, we also did note that this is vital and cheap to transport goods and people. Therefore, an efficient railway network would consequently save our roads from the wear and tear that usually results from heavy trucks and trailers, ultimately reducing the road maintenance budget. We hope the relevant sector will address this. Of course we are aware that there was a privatisation effort of the Uganda Railways Corporation.

On the Housing sector, Mr Speaker, the committee recommended that Government’s intervention in the housing sector by coming up with a comprehensive housing policy should be explored in order to galvanise the above benefits, which are at the heart of poverty eradication. Funding to this sector should be increased so that the sub-sector implements some of its priority activities such as replication of low cost housing and slum upgrading programmes, integrated rural housing improvement scheme, subscription to Shelter Afrik and other programmes. Of course, the implementation of the Condominium Law seems to be way behind schedule –(Interjection)- the Minister says it is on course. Thank you, we did not know that.

On the Communications sector, with the establishment of the Uganda Communications Commission, this sector’s performance has greatly improved and we would like to commend Government for this. However, the committee notes with concern the slow pace for the rollout programme of services to sub-counties, by the mandated service providers.

Very briefly on the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, this sector definitely needs to be strengthened. And the strength of this sector, the committee notes, is key to moral and political stability of this nation –(Interjection)- these are reports, which came to the Budget Committee from the various Parliamentary committees. So, the committee I am representing is that of Parliament, which looks at that sector. The committee is saying that the sector should be accordingly prioritised as a core sector, and its activities should be adequately funded.

The committee noted that the Constitutional Review Commission report was made public as earlier recommended by Parliament, and further noted that the Legal Aid Clinic has started receiving some funding of Shs 80 million annually through the Criminal Justice Reform programme –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, please. This business of air conditioning, has it not improved yet? What is it? Why do they not switch it on? I am receiving complaints that it is not on.

MR GAGAWALA: Mr Speaker, it appears the person operating the air conditioning plant has switched the system on in such a way that they are cooling the lobby and they are heating the Chamber. Actually, it is impossible for us to ask for it to be increased.  

THE SPEAKER: Okay, Sergeant-at-Arms, please look into this. I am receiving complaints. Please wind up, chairperson.

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, we would like to see funding going to the law reform sector so that our laws are consistent and they are modern, and they do not contradict each other. Of course, we are aware that law reform has been going on, but they still have a funding gap. 

We also did comment on the Law Development Centre, and that they needed money because they have arrears of Shs 120 million and court awards are also in arrears.  

The committee reiterates support for the Inspectorate of Government to implement its salary in accordance with the Act, and to use its powers to implement the salary structure.

I may not comment on all the commissions because most of them really were talking about funding gaps and arrears, and since you have the report, I will not waste much time on that. But I think members are interested to hear about the Parliamentary Commission. The committee was informed that a Bill for the members’ pension scheme was awaiting tabling before Parliament. The committee recommends that the Bill be expeditiously tabled and enacted, and some indicative funds be allocated in the financial year 2004/05 to enable Members of Parliament have a pension scheme like most Commonwealth Parliaments in the world. (Applause). 

Let me stop here and ask my colleagues to look at the rest of the report, and look at the recommendations on policy matters that we have made to the Government on the rest of the sectors, to enable us debate the Budget Speech favourably. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Do you have any comment on how we should expeditiously deal with the process?

MS KIRASO: Well, Mr Speaker, this is a general debate but as I said at the beginning, since the Budget Act came into place, it has been our practice to open the general debate on the Budget by giving you highlights of what the Budget Committee recommended to Government. Well, that does not mean that we will not debate the Budget Speech, but it would be good to relate the two and look at the policy issues, which are budget related. This is meant to focus on the general debate so that it is budget related. 

Also, Mr Speaker, if you may allow me to say so, we should limit this discussion because after the various sessional committees have looked at their policy statements and they make their reports here, we shall go again into the details of debating the reports from the sessional committees. And members know that since the Budget Act came into place, we have passed the Budget earlier than we always did in the past because of this participatory approach. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much.

MRS ZZIWA: The clarification I want to seek from the Chairperson, Budget Committee - and I would like to congratulate her - is whether you have had the opportunity to look critically on the policy shift, which seems like it is glaringly coming out. Maybe somewhere in 2001/02, we had a lot of emphasis on non-strategic sectors and they were quite several of them, and now we are looking at several shifts. We are not looking at central budgeting or central planning. Now we are talking about the National Planning Authority coming into play or to coming to forefront and you are advising the NAADS, PMA to be amalgamated.  

I want to find out whether when you are dealing with the whole sectors or different sectors, you are able now to critically look at the whole policy shift within Government, which definitely may need a whole review because it looks like at certain times it is done in an ad hoc way. I want some clarification.   

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, I thank hon. Zziwa. I thought I did say exactly that because we have had different programmes, different policies, things that are sometimes not consistent with each other; so let us bring all the programmes under the National Planning Authority. That did not mean that there will not be PMA anymore, there will not be NAADS anymore but we need a body that will look at all these policies, synchronise them and give different sectors the different programmes that share of the work. We also need a one-stop centre where we can access information on the effectiveness of these programmes, assuming that the reporting mechanism is put in place so that the NPA does not only prescribe work but also receives results from these different programmes.  

THE SPEAKER: Are these clarifications or you want to debate? No, I thought really the idea was to present this report, the recommendations made to the President before the Budget was read to help you when you are dealing with the actual Budget Speech – you know how to use it. Otherwise, if you have to debate this one, then we shall repeat the same exercise when you are debating the motion. This is just to arm you to debate the other one, rather than depend on it independent of the other. You will be given an opportunity but if it is for clarification, you can make it.

MR WAMBUZI: Mr Speaker, I would like to be clarified on page 6, item 17 of the summary report. The committee is suggesting or is concerned about non-reporting by ministers whose departments have reporting requirements for Appropriation-in-Aid. It has got chilling implications when you know that the majority of the budget of Makerere University actually is being funded by the private students.

Similarly, all the secondary schools, which receive Government aid, actually a big percentage of their requirements are being funded by the PTA, the parents themselves. It appears in your submission here that actually this situation is going to change so radically that their budgets will have to be revisited and they must report to the line ministry. This could cause a lot of chaos. I do not know whether this was discussed so that you could see the implications because they are far reaching when you touch all these departments you have mentioned here.  

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, the clarification I would like to give is that these organisations that we have named here collect money and these are public funds. Public funds by law should go to the Consolidated Fund but because of the nature of activities that these departments deal with, they have been allowed to spend these monies that they collect at source. In other words, instead of collecting money like passport fees and taking it to the Consolidated Fund, collect that money (public money) which belongs actually to the Consolidated Fund but use it at source. What the Budget Act is requiring them to do is to come up with a report showing how much has been collected and how it has been utilised. I do not see any contradiction.

THE SPEAKER:  There is none.

MR WAMBUZI: Are you saying that if there is any discrepancy, you end up actually taxing this money?

THE SPEAKER: There should not be any discrepancy.  She is just saying that in case Makerere University has collected Shs 2 billion and they have not remitted it to the Consolidated Fund they should show how they have used it. That is what they are saying.

4.45
CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA (Ibanda County North, Mbarara): Mr Speaker, I want hon. Kiraso, the Chairperson of the Budget Committee to help me understand this. When we come here and we discuss these things, we are not Kindergarten girls and boys and so on. We expect serious partnership in the issues that we deliberate on. Government told us and assured us they introduced a system - I do not remember in which fiscal year the Commitment Control System was introduced. Madam Kiraso, you are now telling us that the Government domestic arrears are in the region of Shs 650 billion. The Commitment Control System entails that before Government consumes any service, the permanent secretary has first to ensure that funds are there. So, I want you to help me because you are the ones who interact with these planners of ours upon whom we rely.  

Secondly, hon. Kiraso, you must be having a report of last financial year’s recommendations to Government as far as the Budget is concerned because I heard you throughout the report lamenting, “This one we recommended, the other one we recommended, the other we recommended.” Mr Speaker, I want the Leader of Government Business to tell us whether when we come here really, we do not have brains because I thought that this is a partnership of looking at these things. And when we tell our colleagues, especially ministers, some of these issues and give our recommendations, it is on the understanding that they will take them up to help propel society of which all of us are members. 

Hon. Kiraso, really you should tell us the recommendations we made last year, were half of them looked at? Were they implemented or we are just here recycling and wasting time, which I do not think really should be the case?  

Mr Speaker, I consider it that a debate or a discussion of matters relating to the economy are so important that they should attract the attention of the entire Government to hear policy options, what views different Members of Parliament have about this vital aspect of our country, because good economics is good politics. So, I want hon. Kiraso to help me conceptually follow what we have been doing so that we can know how to behave thereafter, because I consider this to be very important.

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable member, do you not think you should put this question to the Minister of Finance and say, “In view of last year’s position that you have controls, how is it that there are now domestic arrears arisen in this one?” That way he will answer you, because she has commented; this is what she has found. But I think you will get the answer from the minister. You will raise this issue to the minister during the debate and then the minister will answer, because we want to know.

4.48
MS ALICE ALASO (Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Chairperson, Budget Committee. The clarification I want is on the question of synchronising activities of PEAP, PMA and NAADS. My interest is particularly on NAADS. I have been made to understand that NAADS is more of an extension service, in laywoman’s language. It operates in Soroti at pilot level. I am wondering whether NAADS really fits into what the Chairperson, Budget Committee, is suggesting because I see it as direct service to farmers. 

Shifting NAADS to the National Planning Authority gives me a feeling that it will be misplaced. Maybe the chairperson would like to justify her position to really convince me that NAADS should be one of those that should leave the Ministry of Agriculture and shift to the National Planning Authority.  However, I am conscious of the missing linkages, which NAADS really must have if it has to impact seriously on the lives of the farmers down there. But for now I am not very convinced and I think she should help me.  

Secondly, on the question of Universal Primary Education (UPE), the clarification I am looking for from the committee is on the question of controversies. They highlight controversies in enrolment, the question of drop out, school facilities and the rest. I wonder if this committee also looked at controversies in policy itself. UPE is a situation where all children are supposed to pass, nobody repeats a class. I think that is the policy. And then when they reach senior 4, if you failed primary 7 you are not allowed to sit for UACE. I thought this is a major controversy in UPE. I thought probably the Budget Committee would help us understand it so that we do not get into a scenario, which happened in Fort Portal - children are admitted, children are denied to sit exams and then at the end of the day they take the head teachers to court for making them waste their time in the first instance by being enrolled. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, I am not rising to react on any of the concerns by honourable members. But the procedure I am raising is that these were recommendations supposed to guide the Ministry of Finance in its formulation of the Budget and the Budget Speech. The Budget Speech was delivered; the recommendations have served their purpose. Whether they were complied with or not is an issue that should be debated by honourable members after looking at what Government put in place. 

I think procedurally we would first present the Budget Speech, put it on the Table and whoever has any clarification to raise or any concerns, raises them as we debate the Budget Speech. I thought that these points members are raising could be adequately handled as we debate the Budget Speech to see to what extent they were accommodated.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, I personally think so because – but they were points of clarification: “I have not understood this and the other.” That was so because as I know, after I had sent these recommendations to His Excellency the President, copies were given to the Ministry of Finance. There was subsequently a meeting between the committee and the Ministry of Finance. They agreed on a certain position, maybe others did not agree. So, I would think that other than getting clarifications of not understanding this and the other, we use this time to debate the main motion by the Minister when he moves that we become a Committee of Supply. 

The kind of clarifications I was expecting were about maybe certain paragraphs, which were not understood, and somebody wants to clear her mind so that when she starts the debate on the other one, she is clear of what was in the report. But as others have said, this is going to be used in the main debate. And I think, if you have to make clarifications, just wait for the clarifications then you answer them at the same time. 

4.55
MR JACK SABIITI (Rukiga County, Kabale): I agree with you, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, for those who have not got copies, I understand more copies have been produced so you will get your own copy.

MR SABIITI: Yes, I agree with you, Mr Speaker, that most of this report is certainly linked to the Budget and that we are going to discuss it but there are areas on which I think we need clarification on. I have a few clarifications, which I need to be attended to by particularly the Prime Minister and the Minister of Finance.

The first one is on page 5, where we are talking about the threshold - in the summary -(Interruption)

MS KIRASO: Sorry, hon. Sabiiti. I want to give a small clarification. This small report is not a summary of the big one, no. The small report is on the three years’ macro-economic plan and programmes for social development. It is on the medium-term because Government gave us two reports. They gave us the three years’ plan and they gave us the preliminary indicative allocations for this financial year. So, the big one is different from the small one but I think you mean the small report. You mean the three years’ macro-economic report.

MR SABIITI: Okay, noted. I want an explanation from the Prime Minister or the Minister of Finance, why did Parliament pass a budget and recommended to the Government to increase the income tax threshold from Shs 130,000 to Shs 235,000? This was intended to alleviate the problems being faced by the low-income earners, like teachers. May I know why you have continued to use Shs 130,000 as threshold?  That is number one.

Number two is on the public expenditure. I would like the Prime Minister to clearly explain why Government has continued to defy the laws and the Constitution in the recruitment exercise of certain public officers. This is, for example, in the case of the Resident District Commissioners (RDCs). Article 203 (1) demands that all RDCs should have been public servants and there should be only one, it says: “There shall be for each district a Residential District Commissioner….” But we have had so many and most of them do not have the required qualifications. 

We have a proverb, which says that, “Rotten wood cannot be carved even by the best carver”. If you do not have the right people in the right jobs, however much you want them to do your work, sincerely they will cause problems, like some RDCs have done in Kabale and other districts. So, I want the Prime Minister to respond to this question -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Sabiiti, that is a valid point, which you will bring when you are dealing with the budget and say, “This expenditure is unnecessary because you have very many RDCs in one station” and this and the other. That will be part of the main debate, so the Prime Minister does not have to answer it now. But I will give you opportunity to contribute to the debate and then you raise this issue.  

MR KAKOOZA: More clarification, Mr Speaker?

MR SABIITI: I thought I was still continuing, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: No, leave it because we will be debating it later. If you give the information now, we will deal with it when dealing with your motion; you will bring it again.

MR SABIITI: Yes, but I am still continuing I am making my points. Mr Speaker, the papers talked about leakages in the Budget and this is one of the most important points raised by the chairperson. A lot of money is spent but because of mismanagement of public affairs in this country, you find the executive seems not to be accountable. I am going to give an example. We received a White Paper on the chopper helicopter scandal. In this White Paper it was clearly stated that, “the following will be implemented…” - this was in 2002. Officers who messed up the entire transaction were identified in that report and up to now - this is 2004! These are the leakages we are talking about. Billions of monies just spent and you cannot account for it, the Tri Star and other companies. 

So, I would like the Prime Minister to comment on this. I would like the Prime Minister to also -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Sabiiti, again, you will raise that point then because we do not intend to spend much time on this one. It was equipping you with material to use during the general debate. You reserve this for the other day.  

MR SABIITI: Okay, lastly, this is for the Minister of Finance -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member, you have many questions to the minister; reserve them until we debate the Budget.  

MR SABIITI: With your advice, Mr Speaker, I hope you will give me enough time when the Budget debate starts to touch on most of these important issues.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Certainly. Be on time here when we start, then definitely you will be the first one.  Yes, hon. Dora Byamukama?
5.05
MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA (Mwenge County South, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just have one clarification. I want to thank the Chairperson, Budget Committee and I am referring to the three year macro-economic plan and programmes for economic and social development. When you look at page 12, number 37 says: “The Public Finance and Accountability Act removes the latitude for the Government to reallocate resources without approval of Parliament”. This is a good thing but imposes on Parliament - and then the statement goes on to state that: “It also slows down the reaction time to an emergency” and proposes the enactment of the Contingency Fund Act.
  
There is nothing essentially wrong with this but I have a problem in that when you look at Chapter 9 of the Constitution, on finance, it highlights the role of Parliament in the budgetary process as well as re-allocation. In particular Article 164(3) says; “Parliament shall monitor all expenditure of public funds”. 

I remember when we were debating the reports of the Public Accounts Committee there were several issues raised where Government had re-allocated resources without the approval of Parliament. So, in this case when you say it imposes this on Parliament, I think we may need to rectify that because there are some instances where Parliament is mandated by the Constitution to re-allocate funds. Article 157 talks about establishment of a contingency fund and that Parliament shall make laws to regulate the operations of that fund. Again when you talk about laws for its regulation, it comes back to Parliament. I just want this to be reflected so that we capture what we as Parliament have already had in form of reports so that we also respect what the Constitution provides under Chapter 9. I thank you.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The report that the Chairperson of the Budget Committee has presented is a result of input of various committees and I can see we are digressing and putting questions to ministers because most of us know which committee recommended what. Isn’t it procedurally right to say that having heard this information, it is going to act as a tool to help us debate the Budget Speech? Is it not time that we went to the Budget Speech to avoid contradictions?

THE SPEAKER: This is what I have said many times. This is going to be used when contributing to the debate. The only clarification I expected was what you have not understood, but people are going on and on. Why don’t you –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mine is technical clarification.

THE SPEAKER: What is the technical –(Laughter)- okay, what is it? Let me hear it and I see whether it is technical.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. You know, as Members of Parliament one of our main –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, you put the technical question.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mine is in regard to the three-year macro-economic plan, page 8. The chairperson’s report says – it is on political activities, which is why I say mine is a technical inquiry. “However, the size and magnitude of budgets for political activities should be in line with the legal framework.” 

In light of that statement, which I glorify, I would like the chairperson to clarify whether, following the recent passing of the Vote on Account and the ruling of the Constitution Court, the Movement Political System is no longer present, whether we should go ahead to spend money on Vote 135 related to mass mobilization and even the referendum activities? Because you have already ruled out certain –(Interjections)- yes, she has got my –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: If it is technical, let me answer you this way. If there is a petition challenging your election as a Member of Parliament and the petition succeeds and there is an appeal, do you not continue to sit in Parliament and be paid money? Therefore, things are still moving. We do not know the position yet, so we do not close offices until it is finalized.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mine is really a clarification. Sometime this year we passed a supplementary loan for the Lake Victoria Management Project, which is supposed to handle beach management. I don’t know whether I heard you clearly say that the Government has budgeted Shs 2 billion under the Ministry of Agriculture for the same project? We have toured Lake Victoria and other East African countries, and we have seen part of this project. Please, investigate and tell us what the other money is going to do under that project, and then this Shs 2 billion under Agriculture.

Two, we also passed another loan for the Animal sector, which is supposed to cater for disease control all over the cattle corridor. This was supposed to cover issues like atomic energy, NAADS and so forth, and you are talking of shortage of funds. Can you investigate and verify this? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: If it is investigation, we are going to investigate, but what I think you want are answers and these answers will come from the Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Agriculture, instead of her investigating. When is she going to report when –(Interjections)- honourable members, let us utilize this time and start the real business of dealing with the Budget for the fiscal year 2004/2005.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF: 

I) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2003/2004 AND

II) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2004/2005

5.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that Parliament do resolve itself into a Committee of Supply for the consideration and approval of: 

i) The revised revenue and expenditure estimates for the fiscal year 2003/2004; and 

ii)The budgetary proposals for the estimates of revenue and expenditure for the fiscal year 2004/2005. 

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, seconded by Prof. Kamuntu.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, on the 10th of June 2004, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development delivered a speech in which he highlighted the revised revenue and expenditure estimates for the past financial year, and he gave projections for the estimates of revenue and expenditure for this financial year. In that speech, it was pointed out that last financial year Government expenditure was Shs 3,168 billion against the projection of Shs 3,090 billion. For this financial year, it was pointed out that the projected expenditure will be Shs 3,381 billion out of which the expenditure of Shs 1,933 billion will be recurrent and Shs 1,449 billion will be development.  

The Budget Speech was read; it is now before this House for this House to do its constitutional obligation of scrutinizing and passing the Budget. It is my duty now to move that Parliament does exactly what it is mandated to do constitutionally, and approve the Budget Speech. I beg to move.

5.16
PROF. EPHRAIM KAMUNTU (Sheema County South, Bushenyi): Mr Speaker, in seconding the motion moved by the Minister and to add value to the debate, without repeating what the Chairperson of the Budget Committee has said, and what is contained in the Budget Speech, I want to raise a couple of questions regarding the Budget and indeed the macro-economic performance. In doing so, I am motivated by the fact that the role of a Member of Parliament in partnership with the executive is an oversight function to raise questions, and to subject what has been put to Parliament to scrutiny with the aim to do better and to improve on the performance of Government. Therefore, I will confine my remarks on only three areas.  

One is the challenge of maintaining macro-economic stability and how it relates to the well being of our people - the challenge of sustainability of human development. 

Two is the transformation and competitiveness of the national economy, particularly the modernization of agriculture and its productivity, touching on the elements that bring about this modernization and transformation.

My last two comments will relate to how the budget is affected by the continued insecurity. I want to touch on the opportunity cost of insecurity; how much would have been achieved if insecurity did not exist.

If time permits, there are questions that are relevant and current relating to democratization and governance, especially as it touches on the Budget, transition and reaching crossroads, and which road and how much it costs.  

Mr Speaker, let me begin with macro-economic stability. I appreciate that a sound macro-economic framework is very fundamental to growth and development, and empirical evidence is available to confirm this fact. We need stability to plan; we need stability to compete. Over the years, Government has achieved stability and an impressive record of performance in growth, and honourable members, friends and foes alike, I think Government deserves commendation on this front. (Applause)

The average growth has been six percent over the years, and this growth, compared to that in most of African countries, is very impressive. What is needed now is to address the question of sustainability. To do so you need to disaggregate this growth and raise several questions, which will help in this sustainability. 

The first question you want to address is which sector of the economy has been contributing the greatest to this growth? And if you relate it to the Budget, how much resource are we allocating to this very sector that is generating this great growth? It is very significant. 

We provide safety nets for social sectors but it is very important in allocating resources to bear in mind the most productive areas of the economy that will make the growth to serve the present and future generation. If this question is not asked, you could have growth, which raises other questions, which I am going to raise. Growth is intended for whom? So, the question of who benefits from this growth becomes significant as well. Who is benefiting most from the growth? Within the social groups taking into account gender issues, who is benefiting from the growth? Across regions, which region is benefiting most? 

In talking about sustainability to maintain this growth, you must address the question of equity. This is the question I am trying to pose. It must be equitably shared within social groups and across regions. This is the only way you can sustain this growth. That is the question I am raising to the Minister; you could have growth without development. So, we relate this growth as well to the question of human development because, ultimately the purpose of this growth must be for human development. 

Mr Speaker, we measure it, there are indexes; the human development index is a measure on a scale of one for the best and zero for the worst. When you rank Uganda on the human development index to associate growth with the well being of the population, this growth is still worrying. These are fundamental issues I am raising for the Minister to pay attention to, because you could have growth without development. If you really want to know whether this growth is translating into development, then you need to relate it to the human development index and you ask, how are we doing on the development human index measurements?  

Using the poverty index, Uganda is ranked as one of the poorest countries in the world. We have people who are chronically poor and the number is increasing. So, when you look at the absolute numbers of people who are poor, Mr Speaker, we make a distinction between percentage increase and absolute numbers. 

I support the Minister in growth because it is very important to have growth. Equally important is to translate growth into reduction in poverty and we commend Government. In percentage terms, yes, the proportion of poor people living below the poverty line was 56 percent in 1992, it was reduced to 44 percent in 1997, and it was reduced to 35 percent in the year 2000; that is commendable, Mr Minister.  

What you want to do now is compare the percentage reduction in poverty with the absolute numbers of people living below the poverty line. When you do that - the absolute number of people has not declined. That is the issue. That when the population was 15, when you reduced the percentage to 35 percent, the number of poor people is more. Right now we have about nine million people classified as living below the poverty line. So, the point, which is a technical point, which I am raising, in addition to percentage decline, is that you need to address the absolute numbers of the people living below the poverty line; you take a head count.  

Mr Speaker, another measure of stability for which Government must be commended is the control of inflation. Honourable members, to control inflation in single digits over several years is a commendable effort. Those who appreciate what damage inflation can do will know that when inflation is high, it is a silent robber because the savers are most hit; and once the savers are most hit, the investors are most discouraged; and once they are discouraged then development growth becomes very difficult. But controlling inflation is very hard when you have constrained resources. If you can imagine the demand for money – from the President to the Prime Minister demanding for resources, plus districts, plus Members of Parliament; for the Minister to control that pressure requires determined focus. It should be appreciated that you can maintain that focus over the years.  

What we need to observe, Mr Minister, is to disaggregate this inflation. Inflation has two components: you have the underlying inflation, which excludes food prices and you have the headline inflation, which includes crops. When you separate these two components of inflation and you relate them to the terms of trade between those who are in the food sector and those who are not, you will find that the commendable rate of inflation, which you have controlled, has not benefited those who are contributing most to its control. So, milk is one shilling, but when you want to buy acaricide, the price of acaricide relative to the price you get for milk makes the terms of trade between those who produce most and those who import, to their disadvantage. So, the issue we are raising, Mr Minister, which is again a technical matter, is to relate these two components of inflation and to look at improving the terms of trade between peasants who as you know are supreme and sovereign. The peasants who are in the food sector, they produce most of the food crops and yet they are not benefiting to the same extent as those who are not in the food sector. This is very important, Mr Minister.

Another index, which I can touch on, is the interest rate. Again, honourable members, the interest rate has been stable because stability does not mean low. Stability is a relative definition that you can predict and the interest rate over the years has been declining. But what is worrying Members of Parliament and I am sure, which must worry the Minister, are two components. The first one is the Treasury Bills’ rate and the cost Government pays on the interest paid on the Treasury Bills. This then translates the rate of Treasury Bills to the interest rate offered in banks, and relates it also to the risk perception of banks by wanting to buy Treasury Bills at the disadvantage of investment opportunities across the economy, which hurts. When you combine the three, you realize how importantly you need to pay attention to the interest rate. 

One, the cost of borrowing becomes very high. Second, the banks buy Treasury Bills because it is less risky. Third, Government pays heavily by using Treasury Bills to finance the budget because you have the cost on that element. When you add all these, Mr Minister, you have to pay particular attention and put in commendable effort. Much as you have done, more needs to be done in that area.

My final comment on macro stability relates to the exchange rate. The exchange rate is the price we pay and the price is so important because our input in development work is heavily dependent on foreign exchange and the price you pay determines the outcome. You have two competing interests. You have the interest of exporters, who would like an exchange rate, which is stable. You also have the importers, who would like a strong currency. This is the balance, Mr Minister, which is challenging for you. For export growth to be viable the exchange rate must be competitive and, Mr Speaker, it is not very clear from the documents – the indicative figure of a competitive exchange rate.  

Recently, the shilling has become strong. When it becomes strong, the exporters get hurt and yet the importers celebrate. So, as a Minister in charge of Finance, you have to address these conflicting interests, which impact on the overall development growth. I am not sure the documents we have received address this issue, which is so significant.

I want to talk about the next comment, which is very central. I have left the rest because they are covered in the documents. But the question of transformation, which is now a vision, talked about very frequently and at a high level and competitiveness, touches on productivity. More so, when it comes to agriculture, Mr Speaker, it is very important for the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to be absolutely clear that to transform an economy, which is predominantly agricultural, the productivity, meaning the input related to output, must be increasingly less. In other words, you should get more increasingly, and that can only happen with the increase of knowledge and application of technology. When we relate these matters to this issue, it is not clear from the documents.

Productivity of agriculture, producing more on the same land, productivity of soil, producing more on the same land without expanding, because the land size of Uganda is fixed more or less. That issue is a big one; we continue to depend on rainfall. You wait for the elements in heaven to bring rain; transformation cannot happen if that remains a predominant activity. A hand hoe, it was said here on the Floor, the extent to which this is being used should be the focus if transformation is going to happen.

Mr Speaker, I know I am on record; transformation cannot happen in agriculture when 98 percent of your work force has no access to electricity. How would you transform the agricultural coffee beans into something else when you have no electricity? How can you increase knowledge in schools when even a vocational training institution cannot use the tools because they have no electricity? How can you improve even information technology, which is at the cutting edge of global integration when you have no electricity? How can you even improve cooling, whether blood tests in a hospital; all these require electricity, when only five percent of your population have electricity and the rest do not. It is very difficult, Mr Speaker.

The final comment for which I want to thank the Minister is access to finance. I think it is in documents like the outreach program and the Micro Finance Deposit Taking Institutions Bill, which you passed in the House. All these show an intention, yes, it is a well-intentioned programme. The challenge we are posing is the implementation capacity of the Ministry. When the Micro Finance Deposit Taking Institutions Bill was being passed, it was on condition that within six months the Minister would come with a Bill relating to Tier 4. Are the savings and credit NGOs registered and all these institutions, which are now operating? By the way, Mr Speaker, they have become so forceful, so formidable that if there is no legal framework, the danger of these institutions going under is real. That is why we are urging the Minister to come forward with some legal framework that can give us protection. 

They have mobilized savings, they are extending credit and indeed they are responding to the need. The challenge that remains, is product development suitable for the rural communities, the length of time that would be related to agricultural production. These are issues, which are not very clear from the reports. 

So if modernization and transformation is going to be the key, driving force in sustainability of economic growth and development, issues of productivity, access to electricity and finance become a very significant element. I am sure the Minister is addressing these issues. It is simply the speed at which it is being done that is worrying us. Because you can talk about outreach plans for one year, after which plan the six months, which you promised pass, after which you are debating it, which becomes ritualistic. Your debate reminds me of Fredrick the Great. 

Fredrick the Great is credited to have been the greatest dictator in world history. He said; “Me and my people, we have agreed for them to say what they want and for me to do what I want”. We can say what we want but if the Minister is going to do what he wants regardless of what we have said, it becomes a very critical element.

Mr Speaker, this question of security as it relates to the Budget is very a significant point. Peace is a precondition for development purposes and indeed I am sure Members of Parliament would be willing to give any amount of funding if they could be assured that it would end the insecurity. I sometimes put it to the Minister, if you can show us a relationship and tracking that for every shilling we give you in the Budget related to defence and security there is corresponding increase and improvement in the security; if you can show us how much money will bring insecurity to zero, that would be good. Otherwise, to continue asking for budgetary provisions for security without achieving the security for which we are voting, continues to beg the question – we scratch our heads to find a solution; genuinely we want this to end. But if you cannot show that the shilling we spent is indeed going to security-related functions; if you track every shilling and you find it is ending in Muyenga and Kololo and not security related issues, that becomes a disturbing feeling for Members of Parliament when we are debating the Budget on Defence. 

Otherwise, there is no doubt in our own minds, and you saw it when the report on the Northern region humanitarian situation was being debated, that peace and security is a desired goal. What disturbs us is somebody playing on our nerves, asking to increase security without necessarily improving it and you continue to give and give and no positive results -(Interjection)- yes, show us the positive and I am sure the Members will give the money but show us how positively these are related.  

Mr Speaker, I thank you very much that as we move to the crossroads of democratization, this report has made a point. We would like to achieve the transition period in a most cost effective manner; that should be the guiding principal. We should adopt methods, which are efficient in resource use in our bid to achieve the transition that we are all interested in and which we all pray will be peaceful and orderly. Everybody would be happy when it is achieved but it must be done cost effectively. I thank you very much and I beg to support the Minister for his exposition and his points. (Applause).

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. It seems you are not prepared for the Budget. This is the opening of the debate. Come prepared tomorrow; we shall be going on with this debate for five or six days. Go and study the report presented by hon. Kiraso, the Chairperson of the Budget Committee, to assist you to make your contribution to the debate. 

With this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 5.42 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 21 July 2004 at 2.00 p.m.)

