Wednesday, 28 July 2004

Parliament met at 2.40 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, sometime early this year we passed the Foreign Exchange Act, 2004. However, I have received a letter from State House, from the President, which I would like to read to you. It is dated 24th July.  

“The Rt hon. Edward Ssekandi, 
Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda
Parliamentary Buildings 
Kampala.  

Dear Mr Speaker, 

FOREIGN EXCHANGE ACT, 2004

The above was forwarded to me for assent in accordance with Article 91(1) and (2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda on 24 June 2004. I am concerned about the following amendments, which were inserted by Parliament into the Foreign Exchange Bill, presented by Government:

Clause 18(1):

Clause 18(1) of the Bill as presented to Parliament originally stated as follows: 

‘The Bank of Uganda may, by Statutory Instrument, make regulations generally for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of the Act.’
At the recommendation of the Parliamentary Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Parliament amended it to read as follows: 

‘The Bank of Uganda may, with the approval of Parliament, by Statutory Instrument, make regulations generally for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act.’

The very purpose of the statutory instruments is to authorise a designated person or body to make rules for the speedy implementation of Acts of Parliament. It is the practice throughout the world that statutory instruments are not subject to prior review by Parliament. This amendment may also be in violation of the letter and spirit of Article 162(2) of the Constitution and may, therefore, be void for the same reason. 

Clause 5(4):

The parliamentary Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development also recommended to the House, and the House agreed that a new sub-clause (4) be inserted reading as follows: 

‘Whereas a person carrying out the business of dealing in foreign exchange is licensed to carry out the business of transfers, the minimum share paid up capital shall be two thousand and five hundred currency points.’

This clause is not acceptable because it paves the way for forex bureaux to apply to be licensed to carry out the business of money transfer. Our strong opinion is that this type of business should be restricted to licensed financial institutions because it is easier to supervise them and stop money-laundering activities.  

Clause 8(3):

Clause 8(3) originally provided as follows:
 
‘Every transfer of foreign exchange to or from Uganda shall be through an authorised dealer.’
 
This clause was amended by Parliament to read as follows: 

‘Every transfer of foreign exchange to or from Uganda shall be through a person licensed to carry out the business of money transfer.’

The provisions of clause 5(4) and clause 8(3) will effectively pave way for forex bureaux and other money transfer houses to be licensed to do the business of foreign exchange transfers. This is a policy reversal, as Government’s position has always been that forex bureaux should be restricted to dealing in spot transactions. This is regarded as international best practice in laws dealing with international transfers.  

Pursuant to Article 91(3)(b) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995, I am returning to you the Bill with a request that Parliament revisits the above-mentioned clauses.

Signed:
Yoweri Museveni, President” 

And it is copied to a number of others. So, that is the position with this particular Bill, which we passed. This is under the Constitution.  

2.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE, ENTANDIKWA (Mr Agard Didi): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the Bill, which has been returned to the House, on the Table, for consideration.

THE SPEAKER: It has now been returned. Although I hear from papers about judgments, I must say that I have not been informed about these judgments. But it has affected our work and now I do not know what to do. Since I have heard about it, I am sending this Bill for consideration back to the Standing Committee on Government Assurances and they will report back.  

2.48
MR THEODORE SEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): I thank you, Mr Speaker. Last Friday the country woke up to a great shock –(Interruption)

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, I know you have ruled on where the returned Bill should go in terms of standing committees of Parliament. But if relevance is a factor to consider and qualification and discipline is relevant to the laws that we make, a financial institutions statute or a statute dealing with foreign exchange either should go to the Standing Committee on National Economy or Budget Committee. But to go to Government Assurances –(Laughter)- I need your clarification.

THE SPEAKER: As I have said, officially I have not been informed about it. This is a fact and I meant it. It is not a question of picking from newspapers that you follow. There is a way of communicating a decision of court; that has not been done. So, I really do not know. But if you ask me about relevancy, I would ask you, which is the relevant committee to deal with refugees? Which is the relevant committee to deal with the referendum law? None. Each of them qualifies. So, until things are sorted out that is how –(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, I do appreciate that you have not been informed by the court officially, but I believe you have received information somehow. But to choose the Committee on Government Assurances, knowing very well –(Interruption)

MR KIWANDA: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member to doubt your ruling? You have made a ruling that this should go to the Committee of Government Assurances and we know all committees are capable of handling Bills. So, is he in order not to respect your ruling?  

THE SPEAKER: In fact, I want to advise that some Bills can be handled by the Committee on Appointments. (Laughter)

MR MWANDHA: Well, Mr Speaker, by virtue of our rules, you have a lot of these powers, which obviously in some cases we cannot question. But considering the mandate of these committees and without necessarily challenging your decision – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, I think let us really deal with this issue. I have sent it to the Committee on Government Assurances to handle but this committee can decide also to bring in other committees, like the Budget Committee. It can come in but the responsibility for handling this one is for Government Assurances.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Mr Speaker, to my recollection this Bill has been returned the second time. The committee had –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: The other was the Financial Institutions Bill and it was signed.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I am seeking your guidance on a matter of procedure. A Bill that has been returned to the House for reconsideration by His Excellency, the President is definitely a serious matter. The procedure is equally important. We have had some difficulties in this House before on a matter of procedure. In the preamble to your ruling you indicated the fact that the procedure had not been followed. Would it not to be proper for you, Mr Speaker, to return this message to whoever delivered it to go through the proper procedure?

THE SPEAKER: Which procedure are you referring to?

MR AWORI: Well, officially you have not been informed.

THE SPEAKER: Informed by what?  

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, in the preamble to your statement, unless –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Informed by what? The President has evoked the Constitution and has returned the Bill. That I know he has informed me of. This is the letter, which I read from the President on returning the Bill.

DR KIBIRIGE: Mr Speaker, I am not very conversant with parliamentary procedure. (Laughter). After you have ruled on the matter, is it prudent for us to begin to debate on that ruling? I just want to know. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: No, I think they were seeking information and clarification, which I have given but I have said the Committee on Government Assurances will handle the Bill.

MR SEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This country last Friday woke up to the great shock on learning how prisoners are treated, at least suspects for that matter. It was in the New Vision of Friday 23rd, they showed a picture of a brutalised human being, a Ugandan. Issa Masifu of Buwola village in Najjembe in Mukono died after being tortured by Police for alleged robbery of money. According to Ssekandi, one of the survivors, Police tortured them using hammers, batons and metals to extract information from them.

In another incident, on September 7th a local businessman, Sunday Sekamatte, was also subjected to the same harsh methods by the Police. The Police tortured him using metals and stones. The Police torture suspects by piercing their noses, using acid on their buttocks and genitalia, among other shocking experiences.
  
Even on 3 August last year, Mr Speaker, every Ugandan remembers how Police in Kiboga District killed a civilian and injured two others in the process of evicting 1,800 peasants from bibanja and in Bushenyi. A similar incident happened.  

In Lwemiyaga there is a petition from Sembabule to the national leaders. One called Mohammed Mukasa is appealing to Government, to the minister that he was arrested at 3.00 a.m. in the morning, he was beaten up, tied the infamous three piece, handcuffed, badly tortured and dumped in the cells in Ntuusi where he is languishing up to now. The problem being that he had refused to vacate a piece of kibanja.

Mr Speaker, there is a lot of trickery being used by people to evict peasants. After disagreement or if they fail to chase you off in the conventional way or through paying you, they turn around to accuse you that you are threatening violence. And it is very common. A lot of people are being tortured.

Could the minister inform this House why the Police, which was so trusted by Ugandans, are degenerating to such levels? How can such conduct and misbehaviour on the part of Police be tolerated? Unless we are or otherwise informed, I feel like regretting why we poured praise on the Police why we, even as Parliament, participated in facilitating the Police and they are here brutalising Ugandans from left to right in the countryside, in towns and everywhere! Where can Ugandans run to? Why should we look on when the Police turn against the people they are supposed to protect? Can the honourable minister inform this House and the country at large what is happening to this institution? Short of this, we are losing confidence in the otherwise respected institution of Police. I put my case.

2.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE, INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Kezimbira Miyingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I want to thank hon. Sekikubo for his report. Everybody knows that the Police are in place to keep law and order, and that the Police have also got a code of conduct by which they operate. And I am sure honourable members will appreciate that the majority of the Police personnel do not torture citizens of Uganda because you should isolate individual incidences from the general practice that is going on.

I want to assure honourable members that the Police are in action in every part of this country. But that action that the Police continue to carry out is for keeping law and order, ensuring that the lives of Ugandans are safe and their property is also safe. And if the Police were not doing their work, there would be extremely many and abundant reports that are reaching all of you in your constituencies and in all districts about the conduct of the Police. 

However, I would like to say that individual acts of torture and of violence that are carried out by individual members of the Police force are not acts that are condoned by the Police leadership or by Government.

MR KIWANDA: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform my honourable colleague that the institution is made of individuals. So, individuals’ acts lead to blaming the institution. Actually, what we have in the Police today, the situation is deteriorating so much. What used to be like a police bond - last weekend I was in my constituency - the Police are asking for real cash that, “We are releasing your person on a police bond of Shs 100,000. Bring it.” I found a lady selling off her goats and hens at home, selling off everything to make sure that she goes to Police and pays this bond. So, Mr Minister, you should not take this lightly. The institution is made out of individuals and in Luganda we have a saying, “Omulya Mamba ab’omu navumaganya ekika kyonna”.  

THE SPEAKER: What does that mean?

MR KIWANDA: That “Once an individual does something wrong in a group, they might blame the whole group.” That is what it means, Sir.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to first of all thank the Minister of State for Internal Affairs, in charge of the Police. Of late Police have to some extent co-operated. I am very happy that at one point or the other, when we asked for their permission to allow us to celebrate our court victory, they did accept and allowed us to do so. I am very grateful and I hope that type of co-operation will continue.  

Having said that, Mr Speaker, when a police officer is donned in official uniform and is executing official duty, and in the course of executing official duty he mistreats a Ugandan or a suspect for that matter, I think we cannot say that it is an individual act. It is the arm of the state at that particular time because he is in his official capacity, executing official duty. In that case, therefore, Mr Minister, you will have to re-think. You cannot just come up and say that the police officer did that mistake in his private capacity.  If so, what have you so far done with those other few cases that have taken the law into their hands and have misbehaved in their individual capacities? Why has the law not caught up with them? Could you please clarify on that? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think hon. Sekikubo was making a specific complaint about somebody in his constituency and he used an example, which was in the newspaper, to show that there is evidence of torture. Would you like to take up this matter and investigate so that we provide a solution, so that this is not an issue of debate? A complaint has been made. Please, take it up.

DR KEZIMBIRA MIYINGO: You see, Mr Speaker, why I did some elaboration on this was to inform honourable members that the law catches up with individual police officers who misbehave while in uniform, as hon. Kassiano is putting it. They are on duty and representing an arm of Government. The people referred to in the newspapers have already been apprehended, and the Inspector General of Police has made a very clear statement. Investigations are going on and these people are going to be prosecuted.  

The question of Lwemiyaga, honourable members should be kind enough to let us know. If you have a problem in your constituency and you want to be helped, why do you not talk to the minister, who is your friend, who is your colleague? Does it require you really to come to the Floor of Parliament to talk like this? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.06
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On a different note, last weekend I visited my people in Ndeeba and for the first time I came to know that the people you call ordinary people are very serious on matters of state. (Interjection)- yes, I became more informed about the seriousness the people attach to the Constitution of Uganda.  

Mr Speaker, the people of Ndeeba said there is a constitutional matter of public concern, which must be clarified as soon as possible, and it is based on Article 271(2) of the Constitution and I will read it verbatim: “Two years before the expiry of the term of the first Parliament elected under this Constitution, any person shall be free to canvass for public support for a political system of his or her choice for purposes of a referendum.” 

Mr Speaker, after reading that contention, the people of Lubaga South would like to ask the following questions: One, if an individual like John Ken Lukyamuzi moves from district to district trying to canvass for support for the multi-party system, what law does he violate? (Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I think the provision quoted by hon. Lukyamuzi is already spent. (Interruption)  

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, let me conclude on behalf of the people I represent. (Laughter). I was elected by the –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable Member, since this is really a matter of constitutional interpretation, why do you not go to a proper place where they will assist you to interpret the Constitution? (Laughter)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, since it is Parliament that amends this Constitution, I find it necessary for Parliament to know ahead of time what is happening with my people. I am just concluding - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think you want assistance over the provision of the Constitution. Why do you not go to the proper place where they can interpret for you that provision?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I wanted to bring it to the notice of the government ruling us so that they know about this concern.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, they have noted.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Yes, out of what I have read in the constitutional provision they are stating as follows: That canvassing for public support for a system is not dependent on whether or not political parties have registered. That is one observation.

The second observation is that the implementation of Article 271(2) has no relevance to a matter of subjudice.

The last concern is that Government’s failure to spearhead the implementation of this provision is part of a hidden agenda to keep political party activities in total abeyance -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Lukyamuzi, since you have said your statement does not require this and the other, why do you not go on campaigning for a referendum, for a change of a political system of your choice?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Yes, I am saying, Mr Speaker, with honour –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Advise them.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Yes, Mr Speaker, I am saying with honour that the least one can interpret this provision that an individual like John Ken Lukyamuzi, can even move across the Republic and articulate the concerns without breaking any law.

THE SPEAKER: Agreed.

MR LUKYAMUZI: And when I begin tomorrow they should not attack me. Thank you very much. (Laughter)

THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to first of all echo the point made by hon. Ruhindi that the whole of Article 271 that hon. Lukyamuzi was reading, lapsed. If you had read it properly you would have known that it is no longer on our statute book in the Constitution. 

Secondly, I want to say that if he had read the whole of it - he read clause (2)- if he read clause (4) he would have realised that Parliament was required to make a law, which law would be the one that then those individuals that would canvass would use and that indeed Parliament did pass that law and that law has been followed all along.  

Therefore, I want to make a clear clarification to hon. Lukyamuzi and others who may be like him elsewhere - I am sure they are very few - that when Government acts like it has done, it is acting in accordance with the laws, which have been passed by this Parliament in accordance with constitutional provisions. There is no question whatsoever that the individual Lukyamuzi or Mbabazi or anyone who may wish to act according to the law has been stopped. Nobody has been stopped who has tried to act in accordance with the law that is in place at the moment. Thank you.

3.13
MR PATRICK MWONDHA (Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on some urgent matter. We are all heartened by the fact that peace is finally returning to Northern Uganda. But I wanted to warn Government, particularly the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment that while people are away from their pieces of land and are in the camps, time may come when they have to go back to their land and find their land already titled and in somebody else’s hands. This has happened before. We had it in Busoga South. In 1942 when sleeping sickness overrun those areas, people were evacuated and taken to other places but after the sleeping sickness, when the bona fide people started to return back to their land, they found their land had already been taken. I would not like a situation like that to happen again to a massive place like Northern Uganda. (Interruption)

MR BAMWANGA: I am just getting a clarification, Mr Speaker. The example that hon. Mwondha has given, about the people having been evacuated from the area of Busoga because of sleeping sickness, cannot be compared with an area in Northern Uganda where rebels have been abducting civilians and throwing them out of their areas. Does he mean that while Kony is actually abducting and killing people, he is also busy carrying out surveys and trying to demarcate the areas for land titling? That is the clarification I want to get.

MR MWONDHA: I am comparing situations where people are away from their pieces of land and you cannot rule out unscrupulous people coming to the land office in Kampala and saying that, “A piece of land between this and that place belongs to me. I want to register it.” It is - can I be protected especially from hon. Minister Kagonyera?  

THE SPEAKER: You are protected, carry on.

MR MWONDHA: This is a situation that can easily turn explosive, Mr Speaker, and I would be happier if Government put a stop to all land registration in these areas, especially now that we are starting to see light at the end of the tunnel.

THE SPEAKER: Well, it is a warning. I think you have just put on notice that that thing can happen.  But, honourable members, I think this opportunity is being misused. It should only be on very urgent matters, I say –(Mr Awongo rose_)- yes, hon. Awongo.

3.16
MR AHMED AWONGO (Koboko County, Arua): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As we appreciate the peace that is coming to Northern Uganda now, including in West Nile, last Sunday there was a problem in Arua Airfield. First of all, there was traffic jam and most unfortunately it had rained so much that the planes were unable to land for quite a long time. Because there was too much rain and the airfield was so bad, the planes had to remain in the air for quite a long time. And if it were not for the mercy of the Almighty God, there would have been a very serious accident in Arua Airfield. 

While there are plans to have another international airstrip in Kampala, why can this plan not be moved elsewhere, maybe to Arua, where we can have a better airspace? Because if there is airspace in Arua, Mr Speaker, the whole of Southern Sudan would benefit from that airstrip, and the whole of Eastern Congo would also benefit from that space. I pray that this be seriously looked into because if the state of Arua Airfield continues in the way it is, there is bound to be a very serious accident on that airstrip. I thank you very much.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.18
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Dr Wilberforce Kisamba Mugerwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. With your indulgence, may I lay on the Table a certificate of financial implications of, “The Uganda Tea Authority Decree Bill, 2002” to facilitate the committee to accomplish its job? 

THE SPEAKER: Now, what is this? How does this –(Interruption)

DR KISAMBA: I am just begging for your indulgence.

THE SPEAKER: How does this come in? The item next is “Ministerial Statement”.

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA: I was asking for your indulgence so that I could take this opportunity to –(Laughter).

THE SPEAKER: I do not see how it is - do you have a Bill?

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA: The Bill is already with the committee, but the certificate had problems and now it is ready.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe we shall deal with it tomorrow for procedural purposes.  

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr Speaker, in light of the situation I want to make a ministerial statement on the food security situation in the country.
 
The performance of rainfall between March and May 2004:

·	The performance of rainfall between March and May has been poorer than expected especially over the central region, Lake Basin and eastern parts of the country where normal to above normal rains were expected according to the meteorological weather forecasts. As reported by the Department of Meteorology, these areas recorded departures of -25 percent to -50 percent below normal.

• The rains were short, inadequate and unevenly distributed in most parts of the country, and resulted in reduced harvests.

• The onset varied from region to region. In some places rains started in March and farmers planted. This was followed by a dry spell at the end of March and early April. By mid-April rains had picked up all over the country and this is when most farmers did their planting. End of May and early June marked the end of rains all over the country. 

Field reports on the food security situation:

The ministry sent teams composed of senior staff to various regions of the country towards the end of June, among other activities, to monitor the performance of crops during the first season, and the prevailing food security situation. This exercise has just been finalised and in brief, their reports indicate that the food security situation in the country is not as alarming as the people may think. 

Despite the short and poorly distributed rains, some regions have still had a fairly good harvest of maize, beans and groundnuts, especially the farmers who planted the quick-maturing and drought-resistant varieties on time, at the onset of rains. On the other hand, those who planted late, end of April early May, have ended up with total loss; with maize drying up at the tussling stage and beans at pod formation stage. 
 
Western Region:

Mr Speaker, the western region made use of the early rains of February and March. They have had a fairly good harvest of pulses and cereals, and root crops are also doing well. In Kasese District in particular, which lies in the rain shadow and is vulnerable to drought, reports say the harvests for beans and groundnuts were good, between 60 percent to 70 percent. However, maize has performed poorer; only between 30 percent to 50 percent of the expected yield for maize has been harvested.

Central Region and Lake Victoria Basin:

Regarding the central region and Lake Victoria Basin, the districts in this region especially where the cattle corridor passes: Mubende, Mpigi, Luweero, Nakasongola, Sembabule, western Masaka and Rakai have had reduced harvests of all food crops due to the early onset of the dry season. Rakai was the most hit. Harvest for maize and beans are estimated to be about 30 percent of the expected yields, while the rest of the districts like Masaka achieved about 50 percent of the expected yields for the same crops.
  
Eastern Region:

Regarding the Eastern region, the maize growing districts in this region have also been equally affected. The yields for maize and beans in Iganga, Jinja and Kamuli have been reduced by as much as 40 percent, while in Mbale District the reduction was up to 60 percent. On the other hand, rice performed better in Mbale, where about 80 percent of the expected yield was realised. Kapchorwa is another district in Eastern Uganda that produces a lot of maize that is mostly sold to Western Kenya. Insufficient rains have also affected the development of maize in this district, but a better harvest than in Mbale is expected, being in highlands. 

Karamoja Region:

This region is vulnerable to the drought situation. Currently, populations in this region are still surviving on the stocks from the previous harvest, which was good. The next harvest will be in October but it is not expected to be good because of the dry spell the districts in this region experienced during the month of June. 

Food insecurity due to insurgency:

An estimated total of about 1.647 million people in the North and Northeastern parts of the country have been affected by the insecurity and are internally displaced, living in camps and depending on World Food Programme for food aid as indicated in Table 1, on page 2. 

Most farmers in the districts of Katakwi, Kaberamaido, Soroti and Lira lost their crops during the previous harvest time, despite the good crop performance in the season, due to insecurity. Unfortunately, even those who had access to their fields are expecting crop failure due to poor rains this ending season. Such farmers will, therefore, continue to need food assistance. Thanks to World Food Programme and Food and Agricultural Organisation (Disaster Management Programme), for the assistance rendered to all internally displaced people in the country. 

The table on page 2 shows the number of people displaced: Gulu, 439,000; Kitgum, 273,000; Pader, 280,000; Lira, 294,000; Katakwi, 145,000; Kaberamaido, 98,000; Soroti, 88,000; and Apac, 30,000; totalling to 1,647,000. the source is the World Food Programme.

The general picture of the food security situation:  Generally, at national level, food is available, which can take the country up to the next harvest season in November and December, although food insecurity within some individual households cannot be ruled out. The problem is distribution of the available food to the food deficit areas, which I believe will be done through the market forces of demand and supply.

Bananas:

Bananas have become a major source of food security in all the regions of the country that receive bi-modal rainfall. Currently, the crop being harvested is still fairly good because of the previous rains. However, reduced yields are expected for the next crop to be harvested due to the effect of the ongoing dry spell that has caused lower flowering rate.

Upland Rice:

This has also become a major source of food security, but in most districts it has not performed well due to the dry spell that started when the rice was still at a young stage.  

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries will continue to advise local governments on the importance of sensitising the local community, to use the available food cautiously to ensure enough food for their households up to the next harvest period. The main threat is that due to poverty, farmers tend to use this chance of the readily available market and improved prices to sell off most of their crops immediately after harvest. Right now, there is a lot of cross border trade going on to the neighbouring countries, which already have food scarcity.  

In the eastern region, maize, rice and beans are being sold across to Kenya, while in the western region livestock (mainly cattle and local goats) and dry fish are being taken to the Democratic Republic of Congo. This cross border trade, if not controlled, will be the main cause of the food insecurity considering that this season, there is no surplus production for sale in the country.  Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, according to our rules this statement attracts a debate of not more than 20 minutes. Honourable Member for Rakai.

3.29
MS SARAH KIYINGI (Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I wish to thank the honourable minister for the statement. I, therefore, wish to seek clarification from him especially in relation to sub-heading 2. He says the districts in the central region and Lake Victoria Basin and one of the districts is Rakai, have had reduced harvests of all food crops. Now, in the next sub-heading on page 3, “The general picture of the food security situation” the last sentence says: “The problem is distribution of the available food to the food deficit areas, which I believe will be done through the market forces of demand and supply”.

Mr Speaker, I believe and I am sure the Minister knows that the people affected by this shortage are the peasant farmers who depend solely on their fields for food as well as selling the surplus for cash. How does the minister expect these kinds of people to benefit from the demand and market supply? Because when he talks about market forces of demand and supply, he is in effect saying that where there is surplus of food, it will somehow find its way or will be taken and sold and bought by the people who do not have enough food. But how does the farmer or the peasant in Rakai District, who lost all the crop and depends on the field for food and cash, get to buy food? How is this demand and supply thing going to help such a person? Thank you.

3.31
MR WILSON ASUPASA (Busiki County, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the statement on the food security in the country. He has indicated that we have food to eat in the country, which is barely enough, and that we do not have any surplus. This is a very threatening statement. It threatens our people and it requires an answer. Right now we are very sure there is cross border trade in the food and yet we barely have any surplus. So, the question I have, Mr Minister, is what do we have in place? What mechanism have we put in place to make sure this food takes us to the next season? 

Mr Speaker, I would like to put another question to the honourable minister. There are problems of transportation of this food from one area to another. We are making assumptions that food will move from one area to another, through the mechanism of demand and supply. But when we look at our peasants in the villages and wherever the food might be needed, especially in areas where drought had hit, by the time the food reaches there, it is very expensive. I was really wondering how our people would afford this food. Is there any mechanism anywhere in the government or in the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness preparing for this also as a disaster? The way I look at it, we seem to be heading for another disaster -(Interruption) 

LT GEN. MOSES ALI: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform my colleague and the House that the Prime Minister this morning informed us in Cabinet that he is going to chair an inter-ministerial meeting to discuss these very problems. It is only after that meeting that we shall come here with the position of the government. Thank you.

MR ASUPASA: I thank you for that information and for that clarification. Somehow it puts my mind at rest that maybe at last we are not going to take fire brigade action, where we wait for something to strike then we begin preparing for it. Maybe this time we may have something in store before we are stricken by famine -(Interruption)

MR WAKIKONA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. I would like to inform my friend that last week I was in Tororo and Jinja and this followed the headline in the newspaper attributed to the Minister in charge of Disaster that anytime hunger is destroying the country. I looked in the silos, which were supposed to store grains, and they are all empty and yet this disaster is threatening. So, I would like to inform my friend there that it is true actually your vision of fire brigade is not misplaced. Thank you.

3.37
CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA (Kibaale County, Kamwenge): Mr Speaker, as we talk the Kenyan Government has already declared disaster as a result of the looming famine because of the failure of the food crop. The Minister in Uganda - from press reports, this might be his last statement, so I do not want to make him feel bad when he is going. But my concern is: a country, which is boasting of Plan for the Modernisation of Agriculture (PMA) and with the abundant water sources and the land, and here we are at the whims of weather? The rains have failed us with PMA, a very ambitious plan? 

I feel disappointed that this statement is from the Minister of a country, practicing the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture, and he is at the whims of the weather conditions! So, I think this is the chance we should take to redress our programme of PMA. With the abundant sources of water, should we have to stay at the whims of weather conditions? Then drought will continuously cause looming famine, even in Rakai, which is near Lake Victoria. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.39
MR WADRI KASSIANO (Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for this very important statement, which I believe is his gift to Uganda. However, the statement falls short of a national image. When I read this paper, my own civic knowledge tells me that there are 56 districts in this country, but it has only covered 51 districts; West Nile region has not been represented. I do not know what the minister has in his coffers for us?  

There is a lot of justification as to why I felt the minister should have taken West Nile into consideration. We experienced a very long drought until last week, as reported by my honourable colleague, when we received torrential rain, which even barred planes from landing and taking off. You also need to appreciate that even West Nile hosts a lot of refugees, both those who are internally displaced and those from neighbouring countries. Over 1,000 people displaced from Nwoya County are in Nebbi District, and from the Democratic Republic of Congo we have over 2,000; from Sudan we have close to 20,000 refugees in these five districts of West Nile, but the Minister has in his own wisdom chosen particularly to leave West Nile out. 

I hope that it is not going to be reflected in the overall planning of the relief or whatever arrangement Government is trying to put in place. Because when I look at this, the minister has been very succinct in terms of mentioning the districts, which he covers under the Northern region and regions which are insecure. I have not seen any district from West Nile. What does the Minister have for us, was it deliberate? (Interruption)

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Speaker, I think even the minister’s statement in some places is a little bit superficial. For instance, the statement on Karamoja is really not reflecting the situation on the ground. In fact, I was looking for any Member of Parliament from Karamoja in the House to tell the minister what is actually on the ground. 

I happen to be a neighbour of Karamoja and last week in a place called Nyakwai, which is hardly ten miles from the border of Otuke, inside hon. Omwony Ojok’s constituency, ten people died of famine. People are literally dying of famine and this is really what I expected the minister to come out with. It was in the press, it was over radio stations around Kampala here, it was actually on Radio Uganda and the Minister has written a report, even on Karamoja, as if nothing is serious and has so far taken place? The situation is already bad and people are dying in a place like Karamoja, and the Minister does not reflect that one?

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, honourable member, for that very important and useful information. The point I want to underscore to the Minister is that, that is very important for planning purposes, and if he chooses to leave out West Nile with all that magnitude of people suffering, I think he will fall short in his planning process. Thank you.

3.43
MR JOHN ODIT (Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Minister for making this statement, however brief it is, because it was a demand from our committee that he makes a statement on the status of food security in the country last week. But I want to make a few references.

One, he says even the banana growing areas are better off now. I want to inform him that we are having a very serious epidemic of banana wilt disease in the country. So, even the assertion that these banana-growing areas are fairly secure is not correct. We are trying to work around the clock to make sure that the ministry addresses the issue of disease control in bananas. So, I think you should really revisit this fact.

Two, when we talk of food security in the country, it is too narrow. The economy in this country depends more or less on agriculture. So, what we call food crops are also considered to be cash crops, which are otherwise known as non-traditional cash crops. In this case, therefore, the economy in general is also going to suffer. This is a big challenge, which Parliament has always been urging Government to address.  

The matter of water for production is becoming much more important now than ever before. When we get rain, we get too much of it and we do not make use of it because of lack of technology, and when there is a dry spell, we suffer from lack of water for agricultural production. So, we want the Minister to inform the House whether there is really a specific concern to address water for production so that we do not have this kind of situation repeating itself.

Mr Speaker, I want to inform the Minister that he talked only of food crops, but even livestock is equally affected. When there is no water, the animals are suffering. On the other hand, if there is lack of food, even those who are keeping animals are bound to sell the animals and they dispose of them cheaply in order to get food. So, there are shortages in both sub-sectors and I thought the Minister should have addressed these areas more critically than what it is now.  

Lastly, as we said yesterday, we really do not have any data on agriculture and the problem has been there since 1988. We have never carried out a household agricultural survey. So, it is really difficult to say with authority that we really have food in stock, which can feed this nation for a long time. We want the Minister to reflect this and inform us if there are inadequacies in some of these areas, we should present a complete report as soon as possible. I thank you, Sir.

3.46
MR BEN WACHA (Oyam County North, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am disappointed on two or three counts. One, that this statement coming from my colleague who is soon leaving us should be so shallow. I would have expected my colleague to leave us with a bang for which we would remember him forever. (Laughter) But I am afraid it is going to be very difficult for me to think about him.

Two, Sir, I would have expected that this statement should have come a long time ago. What happened to the forecast? I remember the last time that some form of forecast was given to us, was actually to warn us against planting. We were told that, “These are short rains, do not attempt to plant” and yet the Minister is now telling us that some people took advantage and, therefore, we who did not take advantage are suddenly the fools.  

Three, Mr Speaker, what has happened to the food security policy of this nation? Why is nobody giving us that? Why are we being ad hoc? Why are our silos empty? (Interruption)

MR MWONDHA: Thank you for giving way. Mr Speaker, I would like to inform hon. Ben Wacha that we have no silos; actually what we had have already been sold. Even the Produce Marketing Board, which would buy bumper harvest and stock them, has also been sold off. This drought is knocking on our door to remind us of how naive we have been.  

MR WACHA: I thank you hon. Mwondha because I think we have talked about this one before and nobody has been bold enough to tell us that we cannot formulate any food security policy because there is nothing. There is no background upon which we can act. 

Mr Speaker, is it not a shame that over and over again, in statements of this nature, we keep on thanking the World Food Programme? Is it not a shame that we are happy that we end up with handouts? Is it not a shame that even today we are still waiting for the World Food Programme and yet the World Food Programme has started now buying food from Uganda? Is it not possible for Uganda Government to buy this food and put it aside and wait for a rainy day? What is wrong with us? What is wrong with our planning? Do we have to wait for a catastrophe of this nature in order to start pretending to think?

Finally, Mr Speaker, what next? What is the Minister telling us? He gives us an elaborate essay of nothing and stops by saying nothing. What next? I am very disappointed!

THE SPEAKER: Well, I will take hon. Mallinga from Pallisa. Actually, time has run out. 

3.49
DR STEPHEN MALLINGA (Butebo County, Pallisa): Mr Speaker, I do not know how the Minister of Agriculture who has been in the Ministry for a number of years now, has seriously taken his ministry as a salvation of famine in this country.  We have experienced a cycle of drought leading to famine in this country. 

In the middle of every decade, I hope the Minister remembers that in the mid 1980s there was famine especially in the Eastern region, including Pallisa. I hope the Minister remembers that around 1996 and 1997, even 1994, there was again famine in this country -(Interjection)- of course we remember, when the hon. Minister of Agriculture then Mrs Sekitoleko advised the people in Pallisa to eat mangoes and geckos. (Laughter). In spite of that, that minister was promoted. This minister has led us into a disaster without planning, he is now deserting us, leaving the country in a very –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we need not be personal. This is a national issue; address it as a national issue.

DR MALLINGA: I am sorry, Mr Speaker. It was the emotion, the misery that is in my heart to see in this country where there is potential to export food, but because of lack of proper planning people are now starving to death. In Pallisa, people are starving; in Karamoja people are dying of famine and the minister gives this kind of statement? I would say it is criminal! 

I do not understand what the honourable minister means in the top paragraph on page 3. It reads: “Generally, at national level food is available, which can take the country up to the next harvest….” When is the next harvest, honourable minister? If there is drought now, and we cannot plan -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: I want to inquire from the member holding the Floor. He talked about something being criminal, can he elaborate on what he means by being criminal and what steps can be taken?

MR LUKYAMUZI: The statement advanced by hon. Dr Mallinga reflecting that the statement is criminal is very important because in accordance with our Rules of Procedure, Parliament is in itself a court. Noting that we are a court, are you implying that the person who made that statement should be arrested? (Laughter).

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, it is the tradition in every country, if somebody fails in his responsibility and duty and leads to death just like it has happened in Karamoja - the Ministry of Agriculture has not planned - it is a cyclic situation in Karamoja. Almost every year people die of famine and nothing concrete has ever been done to alleviate this situation. I think that is negligence. I am not a lawyer, I cannot interpret whether the minister deserves imprisonment or not.

The Ministry of Agriculture has failed us. On one hand they encourage people to practice commercial agriculture, on the other hand they are now telling us to keep our food. What is the Ministry of Agriculture telling us? What plan do they have for this country? We have stood up here, I personally have stood up and advocated for the storage of food. I have said that Government should buy food, store it because there are areas of Uganda, which are vulnerable especially Karamoja. Nothing has ever been done; they seem not to take good advice from experienced people like us.

I have lived in this country for a very long time. I think we had better start to seriously consider having a policy in agriculture, which will protect the people of this country against famine. We should not just wake up day by day, pretend to carry on our duties, when we have no plan, when we have no vision for the country. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.59
MS ALICE ALASO (Woman Representative, Soroti):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to observe first and foremost that the initial problem, like my colleagues have said, was when we got the forecast wrong and it has been persistent. I have a feeling that as we continue to do something repetitively, we endanger our lives. Would the minister not consider either stopping giving us that type of misleading information on weather forecasts, or totally abolishing the Meteorology Department, which is always misguiding the farmers in this country? 

I would like to -(Interruption)

MR WAKIKONA: Thank you, my sister Alaso. My sister, the Department of Meteorology is very important. I have had chance to interact with them; they also provide information to the aviation sector. But we depend on the World Meteorological Office in Europe, the information is relayed to Dagoretti in Nairobi, and this information covers a very wide part of eastern Africa. That is why you see even discrepancies of up to 50 percent because they lack up-to-date equipment to get precise information on the weather factors. Therefore, the results are as seen, planting and getting stunted crops. Thank you.

MS ALASO: Thank you, hon. Wakikona. I want to restate that by the time you have 25 percent to 50 percent deviation, that is as good as very bad and it is not a desirable situation. (Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, LANDS (Mr Baguma Isoke): Mr Speaker, the hon. Alaso has made a very serious statement about the Department of Meteorology in my ministry. I wish to add to the information given regarding meteorology and weather forecasting, by the hon. Wakikona. Even in the advanced countries where they have the most modern technology, of which we are partners in sharing information on the global weather situation, prediction is never 100 percent precise. 

In our circumstances, weather forecasts are accurate by up to 70 percent and we have always given an early warning to all users of meteorological information three months ahead of time. This information is always collaborated by the ten Horn of Africa partner states in the weather –(Dr Mallinga rose_)– maybe my colleague knows my ministry better than I do, let me take the information.

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, the honourable minister is talking about the Department of Meteorology. Our committee visited this department in Entebbe. The constant complaint there is total neglect of the department, it is under-funded and there are not enough people to do the work. So, I do not see really what the minister is telling us. Is he satisfied with this department in his ministry, the way it is funded and the way it is managed at the moment? Is that the best we can do in this country?

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable member, the minister was still going on with his statement. He had not completed it - maybe he may conclude with that. Why do you not allow him to complete?

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I was just wondering if the minister might not like to respond to all of us after we have made our submissions. 

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: But his is specific on meteorology, Sir, I will come back to sum up. I need to make a clarification at this stage otherwise the country will be misled. 

In 1997 my department made a very clear prediction that there would be floods in this country and that early warning system was heeded to by all stakeholders, and preparations were made to cope with the likely disaster. 

This time round in January, this Parliament received meteorological information. A statement was made here by my colleague, Lt Gen. Jeje Odong, warning and alerting the public that the rains in most parts of Uganda would be normal to below normal. The agro-meteorologists interpreted that information and, through the Office of the Prime Minister, also gave an early warning message regarding agricultural production in the sectors of livestock and crop culture. 

My department approached the Minister of Finance and before the end of last financial year, a supplementary budget was passed by which my department received Shs 300 million for equipment and also to facilitate the staff. What we received then has been built into the Budget we are discussing now. We hope to build capacity onwards as we go on.

The meteorological information given by Uganda is also taken by the rest of the world. They have not doubted it and they have incorporated it within their information matrix. Sir, I plead with hon. Alaso that our metrological service is not below standard. It is reliable and it should – (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Let me thank the minister and simply urge the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment to stop predicting weather as though they are witch doctors. You better become a bit more scientific because at this pace we are very worried.  

Mr Speaker, let me get to my actual concern in this statement. My problem with the statement is the way the Ministry of Agriculture has downplayed the magnitude of the problem. By downplaying it, it means to me that at the end of the day there will also be less attention to the consequences. I am disappointed that the minister comes here with a narrative as my colleagues have called it. I would urge the Ministry of Agriculture to go a little further and do a comprehensive survey, tell us how many households are going to fall short of food this coming season. 

As far as I am concerned, in looking at the Teso region and the Karamoja region, talking about maize is not a key issue. To us maize is simply a commercial thing. Most households do not produce maize for usual subsistence. But when the ministry fails to tell me about the future of sweet potatoes, cassava, millet, sorghum I get very worried. I get the impression that they totally missed the point on this concern of food security – (Interruption)

MR PAJOBO: Thank you very much, my sister Alaso for giving way. I want to inform you that it is not only in Karamoja where people are suffering from hunger. Even the workers get one meal a day instead of two meals. At lunchtime you see people sitting.  In fact, hunger is not only in villages, it is also in urban areas, even MPs some of them do not get lunch. (Laughter)

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I emphasised the question of the relationship between Teso and Karamoja. Most of the time, owing to the climatic conditions in Karamoja, the Teso region feeds Karamoja. If we are worried about cassava, sorghum and whatever other harvests then Karamoja is definitely condemned. We have heard reports of people dying. I want to urge the ministry to come back to us with a plan for addressing this situation. It is dangerous for a people who have been in an insecure area, a people who have consistently - like the people in Karamoja – had food shortage, to listen to this type of thing without a plan from the ministry that will address their plight.  

I am so confident that even the second harvest is likely not to be very good as we continue, because people do not even have the seeds now. The first crop failed, they do not have the seed and they are going into the second crop without the seed. I would rather the Ministry of Agriculture takes this situation very seriously. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have three statements, and we have to complete the Budget debate. I rather think that we take up these issues with the Committee of Agriculture so that a comprehensive report is made. Otherwise, we have three statements –(Interruption)

MRS MASIKO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is unfortunate I have not been given the opportunity to contribute. But if you allow me, I would like to move a motion that the minister takes back his statement and comes back with a comprehensive, well-researched statement with clear and consistent recommendations. I beg to move, Mr Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member, will that solve the problem? Why don’t you solve this problem by our committee? Is that your view; that he takes the statement back?  

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.  

THE SPEAKER: Those in support of the motion – but do you think it is going to solve the problem?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the results are as follows: those abstaining are 10, those for are 20, those against are 30, and there is no quorum. (Laughter). 

(No decision made on the motion.)

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

I) The Revised Revenue and Expenditure Estimates for the fiscal year 2003/04; and

II) The Budgetary Proposals for the Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure for the fiscal year 2004/05.

(Debate continued.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have a problem with the rules in that we have to end the debate on the Budget tomorrow. I have got two ministerial statements, but as you see, this one almost took an hour. I suggest that we get your contributions on the debate on the Budget and then tomorrow we handle them (Mr. Baguma Isoke rose_)- if you are travelling, there will be the Minister of State to handle it - no, the ministry will not stay empty; you will have to assign some other person to it. 

I think we should continue with the debate, honourable members, because there is a time frame for this debate. On my list I actually had hon. Omach who was supposed to make his contribution yesterday. 

4.15
MR OMACH MANDIR (Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion as moved. I would like to start from the area of the country’s rating. For any country to have the courage to appoint internationally rated agencies to give the country rating, means that that country is sure of what its destiny is. This rating, according to what the Budget Speech states, is that it will serve as an indicator of investor and business confidence in the economy. Whatever this country’s rating will be, I urge the people of Uganda to own it and if need be let it be enhanced to a level that will make us walk with our heads high at any level in this continent.  

The second issue that I would like to talk about is the issue of the shilling appreciating vis-à-vis the United States dollar. This is a very great achievement by the Ugandan economy. By the time we started last year the shilling was going at Uganda Shs 1,900 plus to the dollar. As I talk now, it is around Uganda Shs 1,700 to the dollar.

I am also happy to mention that the Treasury Bills rates have gone down very effectively. By this time last year it went as high as 20 percent, but as I talk now, it is about eight percent. This is a great achievement. In the last financial year alone we used an excess of Shs 155 billion in externalizing the economy and once the Treasury Bills rates are lower, definitely the cost of externalizing the economy will not be high.  

The shilling’s appreciating has a negative effect on the export, and this Budget is stating that the growth of this economy will be export-led. Therefore, I would like to appeal to the minister to consider to what extent he can allow the shilling to appreciate vis-à-vis the United States dollar, without jeopardizing the export sector.  

Mr Speaker, the third point that I would like to articulate is deficit financing. I would like to appreciate the fact that the –(Interruption)

MR MUSISI: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. From the submission of my colleague it seems he thought that the appreciation of the dollar vis-à-vis the Uganda shilling is just a disadvantage for one simple reason. It is just because right now all businesses are low and collapsing. The would-be importers cannot import anymore because of the low demand of all the consumable goods in this country. I am in the business sector; I know this very well. Our sales in all spheres are terribly down. So, for the dollar’s appreciation today, we must know that there is something wrong in our economy.

It is not because there is so much supply of the dollars. For sure there is not so much supply but the demand from the business community is terribly low.  

THE SPEAKER: You mean the dollar is appreciating or is it the shilling appreciating?  

MR MUSISI: It is the shilling appreciating. But what I am saying is that for the shilling’s appreciation today, you must know the factors why. It is just because the local demand is very low and, therefore, it is just because the business community cannot import anymore. The importers –(Interruption)

MR OMACH: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. May be I should have been informed -(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, HOUSING (Capt. Francis Babu): Mr Speaker, I think when we are analyzing the appreciation of our shilling and the depreciating of the dollar we must also come in because when you give an impression that it is because of only our importers, you must look at the economy in total. You must look at the dollar itself. The dollar has been going down on all currencies in the world. So, you cannot determine this dollar’s value basing on the Uganda shilling alone. You have to look at it in the wide spectrum. 

I also want to inform the honourable member on the floor that actually we do not sell our commodities in Uganda shillings. So whether our shilling appreciates against the dollar, it does not stop us from selling a shirt in the United States for three dollars. All the sales that we carry out, our fish, our shirts, our clothes, our commodities are sold in dollars and they are determined in dollars. So, as far as I am concerned, whether the shilling appreciates against the dollar or not, it does not affect our sales abroad. Thank you very much.

MR OMACH: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think the Minister of Finance has a lot of work to do in as far as this is concerned because when you export your commodities you are paid in dollars but when you exchange them into shillings, you will have a loss. So, I would like the Minister of Finance to take note of this to ensure that this appreciation does not negatively affect our exports. 

I also appreciate the fact that the pump price of fuel is going down, but there is need for us to ensure that they are talked to so that it continues to go down further and further because it has got a positive multiplier effect as far as this economy is concerned.  

Mr Speaker, my third point is on deficit financing. The donor support to the budget originally was as high as 52 percent. Last year it came down to 48 percent and this year we are happy to see it go down to 46 percent and we say hats off to Government. However, deficit financing still stands at 11.5 percent, which by any standard is still very high. It is budgeted to go down this financial year by only 0.5 percent. This will take us over ten years to reach what the ministry thinks is the 6.5 percent deficit, which is sustainable. We would like the minister and this House to come out with a position on how we can reduce on this deficit financing within the next five years so that it comes down to about six percent rather than waiting for the year 2013 when they are expecting to be through with this.

The fourth point that I would like to talk about, Mr Speaker, is the issue of the savings. Saving as a factor of GDP in this country is still below the average. We are having a saving ratio of only up to 8 percent and yet in sub-Saharan Africa the average is 18 percent. For our economy to have a total effective takeoff, we need up to 30 percent of savings as a factor of GDP. Like we have handled the issue of AIDS in this country, I would like to appeal to the Minister of Finance to ensure that there is a protracted effort towards uplifting the savings as a factor of GDP from the current eight percent to at least 15 percent of GDP. And this we can achieve if we can put our heads together and see the way forward. 

In all these statements the Minister says savings play a critical role in economic development as they generate resources for investment. These resources for investment, if they come from within, are in a position to generate an effective takeoff for the economy. Therefore, we are prepared to attend whatever forum the minister invites us, to ensure that this is worked upon.  

My next point, Mr Speaker, is on unutilized funds that are returned from the districts. A number of districts are unable to utilize funds that are given to them. If these funds are not utilized that means whatever the government has projected as a plan would not be effected. In the final analysis, this will disturb all the plans of this nation. So, what step is being taken to ensure that funds that are disbursed are not returned to the Consolidated Fund? 

And what is happening to these funds that are being returned to the Consolidated Fund? How much, for instance, was returned last financial year, what is it being used for? Is it going to be taken back where it was returned from, or - where is it going? Because, when we look at the Budget of this financial year, it is not reflected anywhere.

Mr Speaker, the minister should let us know how Uganda is performing vis-à-vis the AIDS Millennium Development Goals. Since we signed this protocol, we have not had any report on how best Uganda is doing as far as the AIDS Millennium Goals are concerned.

Finally, on the issue of the Uganda Development Bank, which was restructured in 2001 being merged with the Development Finance Department of Bank of Uganda. The minister also says that the management of this new institution will be contracted to a private firm. Mr Speaker, we would like to know what details are there so that we do not go into any problem because we still need our Development Finance Bank. We need whatever was happening in Bank of Uganda to be articulated to all the people of Uganda. So, we would like to get more information from the minister as to what exactly he means by this being contracted to a private firm. Do we have no people who are now working with Uganda Development Bank who can actually manage this new institution? With these remarks I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.29
DR OKULO EPAK (Oyam County South, Apac): Mr Speaker, in support of this motion, I would like to make the following observations. 

Both the President’s State of the Nation Address and the Budget Speech tend to paint a very glorious picture of our economy, which of course would appear to be absolutely true. But if we go by the saying that, “All that shines is not gold”, then I think we should at least be able to reflect the degree to which we are distressed as well because that gives us encouragement to work harder. Otherwise, a glorious picture could lead us simply into complacency.  

Nevertheless, I would like to appreciate whoever wrote the President’s State of the Nation Address this year. He gave the figures for our performance, then gave the comparative figures for performance with our sister countries and we appeared really miserable. He went further to give the performance in the relative area globally, and there we would find ourselves looking as if we are really not anywhere near where the world is moving to. I took this statement as a very important picture of encouragement because if you are not able, as they say, to compare yourself with the way other people are performing, you may never know how fast or how slow or how midway you are moving. 

There is a saying that a man who has been eating the food of his mother all the time may believe that his mother is the best cook, when in fact there are other mothers who cook better. So, I think this was a very good statement; the draftsman was very good to have given the President the three comparisons so that he would know that whatever pride we have in our achievement, we are nowhere near what is optimum.  

Mr Speaker, we must encourage the National Planning Authority. Without a medium-term and long-term development plan for this country, and without the participation of Parliament in deciding those long-term and medium-term goals, and when we are left here to lament on this annual budget, I do not think that we are going to carry this country forward in a manner that is encouraging, harmonious and equitable for the development of the entire country. 

The Budget Act is very good but as the name suggests, the budget is an annual plan for implementing a long-term plan. So, I would strongly say that we must support the National Planning Authority, whose long-term or medium-term plan should be presented to this House through a White Paper or whatever paper. That way all of us coming from different parts of the country can participate in setting the long-term and medium-term development goals and priorities for this country. 

MR MWANDHA: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, I think the point being made by the honourable member on the Floor is very important. Unfortunately, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has never been convinced that we need the National Planning Authority. For instance, we as a committee have been advising the minister that the planning functions in the ministry should now be taken to the Planning Authority, but he has turned a deaf ear. So, there is duplication in the ministry and now the National Planning Authority has also to do the kind of things the ministry has always been doing.  

Secondly, the National Planning Authority is an independent body, which should actually be commented on by the minister. The minister has reduced the budget for what has been requested by the National Planning Authority from Shs 4 billion to Shs 1.8 billion. In fact, he has only approved the wage element and the non-wage is not provided for. This means that these officers will sit in their offices and do no planning. So, honestly I do not know why Government does not take the National Planning Authority as a major instrument for long-term planning for this country. Thank you.

DR OKULO EPAK: I appreciate the information from my honourable colleague and I am glad I am making this statement when the National Political Commissar is entering because he is a great supporter and sympathizer of the National Planning Authority and the national planning systems. I also have no doubt that the Rt hon. Prime Minister is a very strong supporter of the institution of the National Planning Authority. 

I am requesting both that we must separate the Ministry of Finance from the Ministry of Planning. The two ministries must be separated so that the function of planning is different from the function of financing. Financing is supposed to look for resources to implement plans, which are prepared elsewhere. It cannot be performing the same functions simultaneously. So, I am really dwelling on that issue.  

The second point I want to make, Mr Speaker, is on pensions. Pension is not only a constitutional requirement but also a reward to those people who had in the past contributed tremendously to the development of this country. Pension, therefore, in my view, should not be treated lightly. To keep pensioners waiting for what they have already earned - and some of them may even die before making use of what they have already earned - is a very serious omission, and it is unconstitutional. I am, therefore, appealing to the government to make sure that it becomes necessary to borrow any amount of money and settle the question of pension arrears. I would be the first to support that kind of borrowing rather than the type we have been supporting in this House.  

4.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE, PENSIONS (Mrs Benigna Mukiibi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank hon. Okulo Epak for giving way. I would like to inform the House that at one time we made a statement here and we informed Parliament that the government has decided to pick up a soft loan to cover pension arrears and the process is on course.  

Secondly, in this year’s budget Government has made an effort to cover some of the pension arrears. We have got a total of Shs 8 billion to cover some pension arrears this financial year. So, Government is not neglecting this important issue. We are working very hard to see that pension arrears are cleared as soon as the loan is secured. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR OKULO EPAK: I thank the honourable minister. When I was making this statement I was not unaware that Government is making efforts; I thought I was reinforcing that effort from my own side of the world. We are not in contradiction at all.  

Further on -(Interruption) 

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Thank you for giving way. Mr Speaker, I think before the honourable member leaves that point, we as the Committee on Public Service and Local Government have clearly told the Minister in charge that when she says Government is on course, especially on the issue of borrowing a soft loan, she does not really answer our question. We know that getting a soft loan in certain circumstances from the World Bank takes as long as three years. So, when she says she is on course where is she? Has she covered one year, because there are certain procedures that have to be followed? So, we need to get a very clear and concise answer from the Minister. Saying, “We are on course” is not enough.  

The other issue she has raised is that Government has given Shs 8 billion. This is a welcome move considering that her budget had always gotten zero from the government. Shs 8 billion is good but page 8 of the Budget Speech says that the present stock of pension arrears is estimated at Shs 300 billion. I am not an economist but if you get Shs 8 billion per year, how long will it take for this amount of money, which keeps on increasing by the day, to be settled?  

Mr Speaker, this is serious considering that in certain circumstances pension attracts interest. It is also serious considering that the Local Government does not have the capacity to pay even monthly pensions, let alone pension arrears. So, it is an issue, which I hope that the Ministry will continue to take seriously. And the honourable member should also continue raising this because as far as we are concerned, it has not been adequately addressed. I thank you. 

DR OKULO EPAK: Thank you hon. Dora Byamukama, for that clarification. Honestly, the minister is one of those I would not like to put under terrible pressure. Otherwise, I would have dismissed her statement quite contemptuously because you cannot say you are on course, which course was never there; you are only looking for a course. But, really I sympathize with her; the situation she is dealing with is difficult and it requires all of us to put in concerted effort. That is why I am emphasizing the fact that this is a constitutional issue; it is not an administrative issue. 

The Government has no option on this matter except to prepare pensioners to pay them, particularly the East African Community workers whose money was even eaten by Government. You cannot be talking about being on course when you have stolen some people’s money. Which course? (Mrs Mukiibi rose_)  So, please, excuse me, my time is running out. I would like to thank you very much for your information. But they are ringing the bell. I beg the people who are ringing the bell to know that I am making quite important points; points coming from a backbencher supporting a frontbencher are not minor. You know this is important. 

I will now go to paragraph 43 of the Budget Speech, on public sector reform. Honestly, as far as I remember, this country first instituted public sector reform in 1982. Has it become a permanent process? What sort of reform is this, which does not end? Every year you are getting a statement on public sector reform, and on pension reform. I think those who are carrying out this reform must themselves be reformed, because unless they are reformed we are going to have an endless process of reformation. 

The other point I want to make on paragraph 26 concerns domestic arrears. Domestic arrears are heavy, it is a debt and we seem to treat it lightly. There are three elements of it, which I want to make clear: first of all, to incur domestic arrears means this was expenditure unauthorized by Parliament. It is expenditure over and above what was authorized by Parliament. Therefore, it is unconstitutional. 

Secondly, for anybody to even be singing and reflecting on it as if it is a credit that we should have domestic arrears is really unforgivable. 

Thirdly, domestic arrears is one area we are now discovering in Public Accounts, that it is an area of linkage. It is an area of corruption, because I cannot see a businessman who knows very well that for three years the government will not pay him and he can deliver goods and services and sit back waiting for payment without interest. I think this begs a lot of questions that you can have domestic arrears of business people supplying goods and services on credit to Government. So, this is an area in which you can expect air supply. (Interruption)
	
MR KAKOOZA: I think Government should clearly pay off domestic arrears because it has got a multiplier effect on the economy itself. As much as you are fighting poverty, you are creating poverty on the other hand. Shs 650 billion is quite a lot when you go to effect it and do not pay it. Suppose it goes into the economy, it has a general revenue collection, which Government can depend on. So, this is a serious matter, which should be addressed by the government. Pay it off quickly.

THE SPEAKER: But, I thought he was doubting –(Interruption)

DR OKULO EPAK: The third point I wanted to make, Sir, is that we cannot be advocating for a private sector-led economy while we actually take goods and services from the private sector on credit and fail to for pay them. And even when we pay we do not pay interest; we are crippling business. If people had borrowed this money and were paying for it an interest, then obviously domestic arrears is counter productive to the policy of a private sector-led economy.

Finally, I am gratified by the statement on graduated tax, which is on paragraph 86. The Government has woken up to know that there is need to study the problems of graduated tax in order to resolve it. I am also gratified to know that the government has put off this matter up to 2005/2006 in tandem with my motion. My motion also desires that the abolition of graduated tax should come in 2005/2006. The Government is saying meanwhile it is going to find alternative ways of filling the gap that shall be left by graduated tax. I think on this point we agree. 

I am, therefore, begging this House and Government that I do not see why there is now a delay. You see, unless you make a decision now on what you are going to do with graduated tax, you are bickering. You cannot wait until 2005 and then say, “Now we are abolishing it or suspending it and we are going to do the following”. Let us agree that this is going to be abolished so that the government can start planning more seriously. Otherwise what is happening now is speculation; it is a hoodwinking tactic. I am, therefore, still going to table my motion here. 

However, I would like to inform you, hon. Speaker, that ever since I wrote for a certificate of financial implications, I am not getting it. I am getting the signal that it might be used to sabotage the whole effort. But let me warn those who think they are very clever and they will sabotage it, that they are not going to beat me at that game. Thank you very much.

4.48
MR OTHMAN ALONGA (Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank you for giving me this opportunity to make a few remarks on the Budget Speech that was delivered on 10 June 2004. I support the motion and there are a few issues I want to comment on. 

On value addition, which aims at obtaining value from the limited resources, unless there are clear guidelines for how to go about it, then we shall be in trouble. Last year we heard that about Shs 1 billion was released for value addition for coffee. We do not know how far it went and how effective it was. That is why I am saying that unless some of these issues are properly guided, we are going to have problems, and the value addition will not serve its purpose.

On good governance, Mr Speaker, I am happy to note that human development in Uganda has somehow improved and our ranking has improved according to the United Nations report. That is good. However, there is still a problem with corruption, and the National Political Commissar yesterday somehow talked about it. Corruption is really becoming a big hindrance and a headache to our economy. I am made to understand that Government has made efforts through the IGG and other institutions to try to stamp out corruption. 

However, I am also informed that there are a pile of files of corruption cases in the office of the IGG, which are pending prosecution. But I do not know whether there is a strong will in the government to prosecute such people. If we take what happened recently between the IGG, the Solicitor-General and whatever, I do not know whether there is a strong commitment and will to fight corruption. And yesterday the National Political Commissar was telling us this is a joint and collective responsibility. I think it is upon us to take this opportunity and take action so that action can be taken against such people. 

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank my colleague for giving way. I want to assure this House that we have the will to fight corruption. The problem we are facing is that people who would have given evidence to incriminate wrong doers tend to be cowardly. But if people are willing to give information, people are imprisoned, there are whole professors imprisoned on this matter because those who were supposed to give evidence were firm and strong and they gave evidence.

MRS MATEMBE: Actually, the information I want to give the Rt hon. Prime Minister is that at one time there was a will in Government to fight corruption, but this will has been waning as reflected through actions that take place. You remember, Mr Speaker and honourable members, how we struggled here to pass, through Parliament, the IGG’s Statute strengthening the institution so that it may bite? You also know how the Cabinet sat and agreed to trim these powers. 

As if that were not enough, you know how seriously we struggled to pass the Leadership Code, and after it had gone through, who is shooting it in the foot? The Office of the President and this Fox Odoi and whatever; you know what happened to the Leadership Code now.  

Thirdly, you know very well the Sebutinde Commission. This helicopter thing, which went through so many commissions until Sebutinde came in, the White Paper came in. By the time I left that place people who had caused loss had been identified and were supposed to be prosecuted. Instead some of them just get promotions when others cannot. I mean, Rt hon. Prime Minister, for sure the will to fight corruption is waning day by day and this is a fact. In any case, the professor you are talking about, who was prosecuted, was pardoned. In any case, the Member of Parliament here whom we prosecuted was pardoned. Excuse me, how do you reflect political will? (Applause). 
 
MR NYANZI: Rt hon. Prime Minister, as you see honourable members complaining, they are really concerned. Last weekend I read the Auditor-General’s report. What is in here is in fact alarming. There is a lot of corruption in every ministry here. If at all there is political will, let us start with these officers. We are here approving money, which is going to be embezzled in ministries.   

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, before I raise the exact issue I want to raise to the Rt hon. Prime Minister, I want to refer him to the Bible. When Jesus Christ was about to be crucified, in his last prayer he prayed to the Almighty that “Father, the heart is willing, but the body is weak”. Indeed that is what the Rt hon. Prime Minister is trying to drive us to. They have got the will to fight corruption, when on the other side they as a state, do not seem to be organized in the way they are fighting corruption.  

At the beginning of this session I raised an important issue on the Floor, that is the seeming war between Maj. Kakooza Mutale and the Office of the IGG. Maj. Kakooza Mutale has been reported obstructing the IGG in the course of executing his legitimate duty of curbing corruption. It even further went to say that troops were deployed to give protection for an officer who was required to produce documents for the attention of the IGG. Surely, where is the will that you are talking about? Do you really have the will, are you sure of what you are saying, Rt hon. Prime Minister? I think we should not just cushion reality. 

The reality is that this Government of the Movement has been infested with corruption. Unless these corrupt officials are removed, the days of this Government are numbered because every Ugandan is watching with keen interest as to where the resources of this country are going. I think let us be sincere. I still challenge the Rt hon. Prime Minister, which will is he talking about when the whole House is not united? A house divided against itself will never stand. Where a father is quarrelling with a mother, a daughter is quarrelling with a brother; then you know the end of the world is near. This Movement Government, unless it checks itself, its days are numbered. Thank you.

MR BESISIRA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Although my friend says the days are numbered, they are not yet numbered; it is only re-organization. If we can realize what our mistakes are as Government, because we all belong there, we can really move forward. We are asking, what have we as Parliament failed to do for the Executive to enable them fight corruption?  

Yesterday I asked a question here to which I have not got an answer. What happened to the Sebutinde Commission into URA? Was there no evidence? Was nobody implicated? Where is it? Is there the will? 

There is another question that the people in the villages are asking themselves, the peasants as we call them: why is it that every time Government goes to court, it loses cases? Is it true that we have very weak lawyers? Is it true this is due to having very weak lawyers, or is it corruption? So, where is the will? Who has lost the will? Is it the Judiciary, is it the Executive, is it the Legislative arm of Government? If there is anyone of us who has lost the will, then possibly we address that one. Otherwise, we are really willing to help the Executive to fight corruption if they are willing to work with us. 

What do we see on the Floor of this House? As I said yesterday, they are always on the defensive; when are you going to say that at least here we have faltered and let us see how we move forwards together. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, I think the Prime Minister must be aware that to demonstrate the will to fight corruption we must start from the top. If you are a father and you always came home drunk and you beat your wife while your child is looking, do not get surprised if when that child grows up, it does exactly what the father was doing. Government must demonstrate this from the top! 

A Minister said here that he was being asked to give a bribe in order to be paid money due to him and nobody has said a thing about this. The Prime Minister has said nothing about it - as if he is not the Leader of Government Business; the Vice-President has not said anything about it, and the Minister continues to work in Government as if he did not make such a serious statement. Honestly, if we are to fight corruption, do not start with small people, start from the top. 

Furthermore, stop wasting taxpayers’ money in establishing commissions upon commissions, which are not going to be useful to anybody. These commissions are not intended for taking action against the perpetrators of corruption, but they are intended to cover them up! Indeed, I want the Prime Minister to quote one commission, which has been useful to this country, the junk helicopter, what has happened? The thefts, which took place in Congo, what happened? Honestly, do not waste people’s money by establishing these commissions; let us keep quiet and accept corruption as the order of the day in this country today. Do not add insult to injury by spending money, which would have been used for something else and spend it on commissions. For heavens sake! Thank you.

MR SEKIKUBO: Hon. Prime Minister, please take this kindly. I have always held the Rt hon. Prime Minister in the highest esteem as Leader of Government Business but to my astonishment, when he stood on the Floor to declare that only witnesses have not been available to prosecute such corrupt cases, I felt it was an insult to our intelligence and understanding. How many cases have been dismissed as a result of lack of witnesses? 

Mr Speaker, it is high time that the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business gave us well thought out responses, not to respond for the sake of it. I was surprised to find that by now Government is lacking a substantive Attorney-General. The one we have in place, Tibaruha, is a fugitive. We know the IGG issued an arrest warrant for him.

THE SPEAKER: No, no. That is a wrong term. When you say fugitive, what do you mean?

MR SEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, maybe I used a rather strong word.

THE SPEAKER: No, the thing is you do not know the details about this matter and, therefore, you cannot conclude and call somebody a fugitive. A fugitive is a criminal.

MR SEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, maybe you could throw more light on it, but the IGG, with authority and power to arrest, issued an order –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, maybe the IGG is wrong. I am not saying so but you cannot decide this case simply by getting information from one side. I think we should be fair especially when we are talking about people who are not with us here, because you cannot hear their case.

MR SEKIKUBO: It is circumstances, Mr Speaker. It is not parliamentary but I was trying to look at a situation – I withdraw that particular aspect of a fugitive, but I maintain that he was shielded from appearing to answer cases.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are problems, which we have to address ourselves to in strengthening institutions that we set up to deal with these issues of human rights. As you have heard from the hon. Matembe who was Minister in Charge of that sector, we passed a law here but you very well know that when the matter went to court - and everybody has a right to go to court if he thinks he is aggrieved - they succeeded against the law we made. That is what happened. That is what watered it down. It is not any other person but the court’s interpretation made it so difficult that you cannot enforce it, and that is the rule of law. 

So, what you have to do is to go back to the drawing board and see how much we can take into account, considering the decision of court, which makes it very impossible for the IGG to operate. So, we have to come back and see what went wrong. How do we plug the loopholes? This is the sort of thing we have to address.

MR SEKIKUBO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. I therefore would like to see in the coming amendments to the Constitution that the government pick that out and address the wounds. Let us not enfeeble the IGG. In fact the blame now is at the steps of Government. Let them show us the will by strengthening the institution. This is when we shall applaud them that they are on course as it has been stated. I thank you.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, if I were the Rt hon. Prime Minister, on the issue of justifying whether there is a political will to fight corruption, I would just make a public apology because certainly there is no will to fight corruption in our Government. For the last five years or so I have been reading the Auditor-General’s reports, each of those reports implicate the State House in financial embezzlement. What action have you taken about those senior officers who are involved in embezzlement?  

As if that were not enough, we passed here in Parliament several censure motions against ministers who are corrupt. As soon as we censured them, the following day you re-appointed them. Where is the political will to fight corruption?

Lastly, as an environmentalist, I am very much disappointed because one international report associated to the World Bank mentioned several ministers as having participated in the depletion of the natural resources of the Democratic Republic of Congo - in that international report. You ignored it and re-appointed one man to a very key ministry related to the environment. What are you talking about?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Those who dwell in glass houses should not throw stones. That is what I want to say because –(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, I have the greatest respect for the Rt hon. Prime Minister. Members have expressed concern over issues and quoted concrete cases. What the Rt hon. Prime Minister is implying is that we dwell in glass houses therefore we should not throw stones. In other words, we are all corrupt in this House and, therefore, we have no right to talk about corruption. Is it in order for the Rt hon. Prime Minister to imply that every Member of Parliament in this House, who has spoken about corruption, is corrupt and therefore he should not throw stones because he lives in a glass house since he is corrupt himself? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable members, sometimes you make it difficult for me to make rulings on such matters. I think the Prime Minister had just started making a statement; he had not rested it. Somebody comes up with a point of order because of a quote he used. He never related it to anybody. I think you should have waited for him to continue and then you come in, then I would have been in a position to know more. 

So, honourable members, sometimes when you seek clarification I think you should give chance to the person on the Floor to conclude his statement. Then after his statement is complete, that is when you can seek clarification. Right now he may say, “No, I did not refer to anybody.” That is the problem.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When we talk about corruption we should be very humble because we have all been involved in some form of corruption. Let me illustrate. When you do not keep time and you do not turn up and there is no quorum, it is some form of corruption. Why is it so? Because we do not transact business when we are supposed to transact business. So, the point I am making is that we should all be humble –(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, does the Rt hon. Prime Minister mean to say that when you come late, when you have a good reason for coming late, that you are corrupt?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: When it is a persistent problem, it becomes a matter for which we must all repent. The point I am making is that we must all be very humble before we start castigating others. We must all repent; we are all sinners, that is the point I am making to hon. Members of Parliament.  

I now want to deal with specifics. I have allowed you to speak and I think you should be good enough to listen carefully. Beginning with those who were censured, when they were brought back, were they not vetted by Parliament? What do you say? They were vetted, they were given a chance to be appointed as ministers, so –(Interjection)- No, please, you should be a good listener, hon. Lukyamuzi. I suggest that you should be a good listener. 

The second point I would like to make is that if someone makes a mistake, he/she can recover from that mistake because if we are to punish people indefinitely, what would happen? People recover from their mistakes. There are those, for example, who were sent down when they were in schools; they have recovered, they have been allowed to go to universities and they have become great professors, and I am one of them. At King’s College Buddo there was a rebellion and I was sent down. I had to do my High School Certificate (HSC) by correspondence; I am now a professor and a technocratic Prime Minister. (Applause)

Hon. Mwandha raised the issue of commissions of inquiry. I want now to contribute and you should be a good listener. He said there have been many commissions of inquiry but they have been of no consequence. We had a commission of inquiry into the Police and heads rolled, and I think there have been important changes.  

On the ruling of the Constitutional Court on the Odoi case, the Speaker has put it very well; it was a technicality, which we have to secure. There was a problem, which we had to secure but the courts of law had to rule according to the rules of the game. It does not mean that Government is determined to diminish the role of the IGG. On the contrary, you have yet to read what we are going to submit to you in the White Paper. (Interjections)- I think I have to contribute now because you have listened to several contributions. So, you should wait and hear from us what role we have recommended for the IGG. You are now speculating -(Interjections)- yes, you must listen because the White Paper is coming; we are not diminishing the role of the IGG. I would request Parliament not to speculate on the matter. We are on the brink of bringing that matter.  

You recall that the IGG wanted some records and I directed the Solicitor-General to give those records to the IGG; he complied and I do have a written statement to this effect, and all the details. He submitted them to me, and I am moving steadily. I request you listen.

Someone was saying, “Why are we losing so many cases?” and he assumed that this suggests we are corrupt, but I do not see the logic in that. When you lose a case it does not mean that you are corrupt. You may lose a case because it is a bad one; you may lose a case because you may lack the competence. It does not follow that when you lose a case in a court of law you are necessarily corrupt. Indeed, the question of the people who are supposed to deal with these matters is being addressed by Government. 

The matter concerning Okumu-Ringa when he alleged that some people wanted a bribe, I did request the honourable member to make a statement but up to now he has not made a statement. This has very serious implications. Because if he says some people, he must indicate the names of those people so that they are punished. But he may have been misquoted; I do not know. So, it would be up to hon. Okumu-Ringa because the last I heard of him, he wanted to meet His Excellency the President before making a statement here. That is what he said to me. But he may have been misquoted, he is not here, that is up to him to verify. 

The point you must realize is that if someone says people wanted to be bribed, it is incumbent upon that person to name these people. If that person fails, the consequences must be clear.

The Sebutinde Report, we studied this report very carefully. There were some technical matters when a number of the commissioners disowned her report and that was unprecedented. It raised a technicality; that is why we decided that although there was that technicality, the report would be used to handle important cases. It will be up to the organs of the state to examine those people who have been accused of being corrupt. But if something appears in the report and one is alleged to be corrupt, it does not necessarily mean that one is corrupt because even the investigator may be wrong. It may require a court of law to prove that you are either corrupt or not; you are assumed to be innocent.

Let me say finally that we are all sinners; we need to repent. I thank you.

MR OTHMAN ALONGA: Thank you. Little did I know that I was opening a Pandora’s box, but all the same it has helped us to understand the amorphous nature of corruption. Yes, the will may be there but as hon. Matembe put it, it is really waning and the days are not numbered as yet. The days are numerous and there is still plenty of time to correct the mistakes that we made.

Mr Speaker, on the performance of the economy, I am not going to discuss that because I understand there was some growth of 6 percent and it was attributed to higher agricultural output. This may be testimony for why we have always been asking for more funding for agriculture. I am also happy to note that Government this year has increased the funding for agriculture but we actually need more if agriculture is going to have an impact on the growth of our economy.

Mr Speaker, on infrastructure, I am happy that Government has done a lot in the construction of schools, roads, health centres and so on and so forth. However, my question is about the road maintenance equipment. Some of us, especially some of the new districts, have not had road maintenance equipment and we are really finding it very difficult to maintain some of the roads. When are we going to get this road maintenance equipment? Is it in this year’s Budget so that we can do regular repairs and maintain our roads properly?  

On the same page 9 the minister mentioned several roads, which are under construction and in particular he mentioned the road from Atiak to Moyo, which is going to be re-graveled. My question is, from there where do we go? It will just stop at Moyo; is that the dead end or is there a way of continuing with the re-gravelling to Arua via Yumbe or Terego, something like that, so that we can benefit from some of this infrastructure?

On security, I want to congratulate Government on making significant achievements, more so in making Uganda more secure. In the Northern Uganda we hope the war will be over soon. But even then, I want to thank Government for achieving total peace in West Nile. I must also thank the UNLF II. I thank the government for living to its expectations, for fulfilling its obligations with UNLF II. I hope they will continue to fulfill the rest of the obligations of the peace agreement.  

But before I end, how we are going to consolidate that peace? We now have to facilitate the law enforcing organs like the Police. Despite the bad image given to the Police, I believe they can still do a very good job, and they have done a very good job to a certain extent. For example, when two American couples working with a local missionary in Yumbe were brutally murdered, the Police really did a very good job, despite having no transport. I wanted to inform you that the Police in the whole district of Yumbe have no transport. They borrowed a vehicle from the Electoral Commission, which vehicle later on got an accident and the Electoral Commission is asking for its vehicle back and the Police is trying to look for money to repair that vehicle. So, I think they really need transport so that they can cover the border areas, which can also be a source of insecurity in terms of arms that may enter illegally through Southern Sudan, so that they can follow it up and stamp out all sources of insecurity. I urge Government to look into this, not only for Yumbe but also those districts where the Police has not been given transportation facilities.

Finally, I wanted to comment on the Presidential Scientific Innovation Award. That is very good and it is a commendable, innovative action from the President, like he has always done with others like AGOA and the Technology Initiative Award. But my caution is about the methods of benefiting from these awards. They should not be a State House affair like the scholarships and so on, so that many people can benefit from such. I am sure a committee will be formed or maybe it will be under the National Council of Science and Technology; I am not aware as yet. But that would really be good –(Interruption)

DR MATOVU BYATIKE: Thank you very much my colleague. Mr Speaker, I would like to give the information that this innovation award is competitive and people are free to write their proposals and innovations, and send them to the National Council of Science and Technology. That council vets and has a special committee, which looks at these proposals and decides those who merit this award and even some financial assistance. If you have a good proposal, you can be assisted financially. So, if you have bright West Nilers who have got innovations, encourage them to send these innovations to the National Council for Science and Technology. There is a special committee, I think they call it Committee for Innovation Fund; it is quite useful and a very important committee that can deal with such situations. Thank you very much.

MR ALONGA: Thank you, honourable colleague for that information because I was just trying to express my fears, now you have allayed them. So, this is what I could contribute and I thank you very much.

5.30
MRS TEOPISTA SSENTONGO (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice to those who have already thanked the minister for a well-analyzed speech on the budget. 

First and foremost, I would like to get some clarification on the report of the Budget Committee. In bullet 17, about the non-reporting by the ministers, whose departments have reporting requirements for the appropriation of aid in accordance to section 17 of the Budget Act; it stated that some institutions were not reporting accordingly. One of them is ITEK, which is now part and parcel of Kyambogo University. Does this also apply to ITEK because today we know that Kyambogo is a composition of UNISE, UPK and ITEK? So, does it still have to report independently? This is the clarification that I would like to get.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, HIGHER EDUCATION (Dr Beatrice Wabudeya): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you honourable colleague for giving way. I would like to inform you that ITEK was one of the institutions, which made up Kyambogo University so reporting on it independently, at the moment, is not regular. It is part and parcel of Kyambogo University.

MRS SSENTONGO: Thank you, Madam Minister, for your information. Again in the Budget Speech the minister indicates that there is a positive trend in poverty reduction and social service delivery over the past period. I am happy to register my appreciation on this. However, the minister did not endeavor to indicate the level of unemployment because I believe that this is one of the contributing factors to poverty. There is a need to show how many people are employed and how many are not employed so that maybe some plans through the National Planning Authority could be put in place to help those who are not employed.

I also want to urge the government to continue the initiative that has been put in place to help those who want to go out and sell out their labour, like the nurses of recent that have been helped to go to the United Kingdom for some work out there. We have seen that those people who have gone to sell their labor outside the borders of Uganda are contributing greatly to the economy of this country in terms of foreign exchange, and we must appreciate this. To this effect I would like to urge the government to help those who are willing to continue doing the same in other sectors.

Mr Speaker, in the recent session of this Parliament there was a Financial Act that was passed and among the clauses was one of raising the threshold of the Pay As You Earn (PAYE). But to my surprise this particular article on PAYE has not been implemented. I want to get some clarification from the Minister of Finance probably to tell us why, because the rest of the provisions have been implemented effectively and PAYE has not been done as expected.  

May I also know, Mr Speaker, that there is an effort because this issue of Police has been put to this House on many occasions to look into the welfare of the policemen and women more so on the accommodation part of it. These people are really living in very uncalled for conditions where you find them sharing accommodation in such tiny houses, which are called uniports, and this forces immorality on other people. I do not know whether the Minister of Internal Affairs has made an effort to this effect because it is so inhuman – very inhuman as it erodes these peoples’ human right of privacy.  

I also want to suggest that the Minister of Internal Affairs should provide enough facilities and we should appreciate the work these statesmen of this country – those policemen and women - are rendering to this nation. They are working through hardships. Any good worker will perfect his job only if he is provided with adequate tools. But you find a police station without enough stationery like my colleague has just said, no vehicles and the like. So, is there any effort put in place to help the policemen and women to be perfect? They are being accused of corruption and all this kind of thing but they have a problem, which problem I think the Minister of Internal Affairs has not taken into account; and this has been raised on this Floor on many occasions.  

I also want to say something about the police surgeon. We have a very limited number of police surgeons and they have so many people to attend to. If you look at the rate of accidents that take place in this country, if it would be possible, I would suggest that these police surgeons should maybe be put at division police level other than wherever they are today because there are so many people who go to be attended to. And again these surgeons start late in the day, around 2.00 p.m., and yet people travel long distances and incur a lot of costs to see them, and they are poor people; who are not attended to in time. So, I would suggest that the Minister of Internal Affairs could as well look into this to make sure that at least the local person is being relieved of the costs that are normally incurred unexpectedly or unwillingly.

I also want to appreciate the effort put in place to see to it that our economy is at least progressing much as the workers are still crying so much that they are wondering what is happening to their labour laws. You cannot imagine that the labour laws that exist today, which are not even enforced by the Ministry of Labour officials, are dated as far back as the 1950s. Many laws have been repealed here but our labour laws have never been brought to this House. The workers want to find out, are they not part of the growth of the economy of this country? 

I believe that the workers are partners in production and partners in development but when they ask for their rights, we should adhere to it.  Please, could the Minister of Labour be kind enough to bring the labour laws here for discussion and enactment? I would like to stop here and I thank you so much.

5.38
MR VINCENT NYANZI (Busujju County, Mubende): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to join others to thank the Chairperson and Members of the Budget Committee for their comprehensive report. I would also like to thank the Minister of Finance for the Budget Speech, and the previous contributors.  

Hon. Minister of Finance, Mityana Town is one of the fast developing towns in this country but without piped water. In 1997 I accompanied the President during his working tour of Mubende District. The President promised piped water to Mityana Town and in fact last year hon. Nshimye raised this issue here on the Floor and the Minister promised to consider us this financial year. We have Shs 112 billion allocated for water and sanitation. Should we think that part of that is going to Mityana Town? If not, could you at least think of allocating part of it to Mityana trading centre?  

THE MINISTER OF STATE, LANDS (Mr Baguma Isoke): Mr Speaker, I thank the hon. Nyanzi for raising the Mityana water question. Seven years ago Mityana Town together with Iganga, Mukono, Apac, Pakwach, Paidha and Kigumba were to receive piped water through a loan Government was going to get from the African Development Bank. But the re-organisation of the Bank and its subsequent relocation to Tunis delayed the acquisition of this loan. 
Last year the Ministry of Finance concluded talks with ADB and very soon we are going to see an agreement signed between the Bank and the Government of Uganda for the purpose of concluding this deal. While interfacing with the Sessional Committee on Nature Resources, I will give details on the timeframe for concluding this deal. Thank you, Sir.

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me use this opportunity to ask the honourable minister in charge of that sector. Mpigi is one of the towns also, which has no water, and during His Excellency the President’s campaign or his manifesto, he promised us piped water. But up to now we have not got that water. Recently we got a communication - it is unfortunate that the Minister of Finance is not around - we got some information that we actually had a donor who had offered to give us water in Mpigi District but this money was blocked because of fiscal implications. I mean if the money came, it would interfere with the monetary policy in our economy. Mr Minister, can you clarify on that because I am a very good supporter of the Movement but if I do not get water in Mpigi town, there might be a problem. Thank you.

MS MUGERWA: Mr Speaker, it is a pity that Government is thinking about piped water mainly, yet there are some other ways of getting water like rain water catchments and boreholes. I would like to tell the minister that the whole of last week I was in my district and I visited Lwengo sub-county. People are starving, there is no water and the houses do not have any ways of getting rain water; the system has not empowered them to do so or forced them to do so. So, rainwater is wasted like that.  

Secondly, most of the boreholes there - if you have 100 boreholes maybe only two are working; the others do not work. What arrangements do you have to repair the boreholes that are not functioning, because children are dying? I was told that at Kyazanga alone children are fetching water from ponds and as a result there is Tuberculosis because of sharing water with animals. What steps have you taken to repair cheap boreholes or cheap means of getting water instead of thinking so much about piped water? I thank you. (Mr Baguma rose_)

THE SPEAKER: I would rather suggest that you take note of these points for your ministry and then later you come in. But now it seems the way these things are being done, the person who is on the Floor loses an opportunity to make his points. You take note and you will answer these questions at the end.

MR BAGUMA: But, Sir, when the member who raised the issue accepted information –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Yes, he has raised the issue and I am saying the proper way of doing it is for you to answer at the end.  

MR NYANZI: I thank the minister for his information. However, I want to inform you, Mr Minister that the issue I have raised is very serious. I remember four years back when I was still a Minister of State for Industry; in my duty of persuading investors I took about five of them in Mityana. All of them refused to invest in Mityana because they were saying the town had no piped water. So, the matter is very serious. We had buildings where to put them, in Wamala Union, but all of them refused.

Hon. Minister of Finance, in the Budget Speech you are saying you are remitting seven percent import duty on safety belts to encourage their utilization. By doing that, were you intending to curb accidents? If at all that is what you had in mind, it would have been better to reduce the import duty on new tyres because many accidents here in Uganda are caused by the old tyres, which keep on bursting. But by putting it on seat belts, I do not see how we are going curb road accidents. 

However, my people are saying that this has been the best budget for the people of Mubende because of provision for the Mityana-Busega road, and our people are very appreciative. At the moment there is temporary work on that road because as far as I know the money, which is in the budget, you have only just started with the designs, which are supposed to be concluded by March next year. Let us hope that when this money is through you are not going to divert it because of this temporary work. On behalf of my people, we are saying, when time for bidding comes, at least do approve these people who are now repairing this road to continue up to Mityana because this is the company, which has worked on Mityana-Mubende road up to now. In fact it has taken time but up to now the road is still very nice. So, we are begging you that at least let the same people continue from Mityana to Kampala when the money is out. 

Many people have been talking about industrialization in Uganda. I would like to tell Parliament that as much as you want to industrialize Uganda, let us not forget history. Uganda has got a very bad image outside the country due to the expulsion of Indians. There are many Indians who were expelled in 1971 and they went all over the world. Even now when you go to any other country, the first question they ask you when you tell them that you are from Uganda is, “How is Amin?” I wonder whether they have - because for me in all countries I went to they were asking me that question. In fact –(Interruption)

MR PAJOBO: Thank you very much, honourable member for giving way. I want to inform you that when we say industrialization, we are not referring to only outsiders to come and invest here. The intention is that Ugandans should also come out and invest in their country. So, we should not only look at Indians who left Uganda and European who want to come here. Why can’t Government create a good atmosphere for Ugandans to invest in Uganda, create employment and money remains in this country? We cannot talk of only outsiders investing here. Thank you.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much. He is saying that when you get out the first question they ask is, how is Idi Amin? I would like to find out, one, which part of the world is that where people do not know that Amin died long ago?

Secondly, do you want us to imagine that Amin is still more popular than our President? With all the HIV/AIDS achievements he has made for this country, Amin is still that popular?

MR BASALIZA ARAALI: I want to inform the members that actually recently I was in Bangkok; I met two people who asked me, is it true that Amin used to eat people? I said, “Well, I do not know about that”. I said, “How could the president eat people?” So, I think the image has to be corrected so that people change that poor impression about the past of Uganda. Thank you.

MR NYANZI: I thank members for their information and I want to clarify on some of them. Maybe it is a pity to some of us who have not got a chance of going to so many countries but if at all you happen to go out, this question will be put before you. 

Why are we talking about foreign investors? In some countries like India, their Government has come in to assist anybody who has an interest in putting up an industry. Many of these Indians you see here they are getting money from their Government. They are almost in every country because their ministry for small-scale industries - which is not the case here - is assisting them. In fact there are very many Ugandans who want to put up industries but due to lack of capital and because Government has failed to come in to assist them, they have not been able to. So, Government has to persuade foreign investors to come to the aid of our Ugandans.  

DR NSABA BUTURO: Mr Speaker, two weeks ago I invited the Executive Director of Uganda Investment Authority to my weekly press briefings. One of the revelations she gave was that the biggest numbers of investors we have in this country are Ugandans. Ugandans own 60 percent of the investments in this country. It is not correct, therefore, to say that Ugandans have not taken advantage of the conducive climate that we have today.

MR NYANZI: Well, let us not argue much on this. I was a minister in charge of Industry and I visited all industries in Uganda. I know all of them very well. I am very well informed because I know every industry in Uganda. Even if you go to these industries you will find my signature there. 

Honourable members, when we go outside, this is my appeal especially to people who are not supporting the Movement Government, the language we use when we are outside Uganda is also scaring investors. People opposing this Government, in fact, when you listen to their speeches outside -(Interruption)

MS MUGERWA: Mr Speaker, I just wanted to remind the member who is on the Floor that actually every Ugandan is a Movementist. I thank you. (Laughter)

MR NYANZI: Even Lukyamuzi? Hon. Lukyamuzi, are you a Movementist? Mr Speaker, -(Interruption)

MR MUTUULUZA: Thank you -(Interruption)  

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, let us debate. Continue with your speech because now it has become, you know –(Interruption)

MR NYANZI: Mr Speaker, I want to thank the Ministry of Finance for the provision of money for the industrial park. This is one way forward. As far as I know, if this industrial park is serviced, some investors will be able to come to this country. But we have -(Interruption)

MR MUTUULUZA: Mr Speaker, according to our Rules of Procedure, if an honourable member holding the Floor gives a fellow member a chance to give information, I think he should be respected and allowed to go ahead. Is it really procedurally correct to block information, which I think would be important?

THE SPEAKER: There must be some control somewhere. (Laughter). And whereas it is true that you cannot give your information unless the person holding the Floor gives way, if you have to turn it into a dialogue as the honourable member was saying, “Is it true hon. Lukyamuzi you are a Movementist?” For that kind of thing the person who is controlling the House cannot accept it.  

MR NYANZI: Mr Speaker, I would like to ask the Minister of State for Industry to work in collaboration with the Uganda Investment Authority to make sure that after this industrial park is set up we try to identify investors in the areas of chemicals and herbicides. Another area is of food processing and then another important factory is of tyres. In fact, these industries are lacking here in the country.

The committee talked about court awards, which have been found to be a source of budget leakages. I was not surprised because Government is yet to lose a lot more money because of the innocent people who are rotting in our Ugandan prisons. There are very many innocent people in prisons all over the country. In fact before I went to Luzira I did not know that many Ugandans are suffering. When people are talking of supporting the Police, I just wonder because I found out that many of our innocent people who are in prison are there because of mere allegations. The Police here have been given a lot of power, it can frame a person anyhow and nothing is done to help that person. 

The investigative section in the Police is rotten, all those people are just only after money; yes, that is true. When the committee talks of recruiting more people to the Police force and equipping them, I do not support the idea. Instead of doing that let us lay off some of the corrupt officers in the Police, many of them are known and I must tell you the information I got in prison. There is no thief here in the country that is not known by the Police. Some of them are collaborators –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: How about the one who starts today?

MR NYANZI: Pardon?

THE SPEAKER: Someone who was not a thief at all before today, does the Police know him? Proceed.

MR NYANZI: In fact, Rt hon. Speaker, you know I am a farmer and I live near a Police post. I use roads to transport my food. I know what traffic officers do on the roads. I use taxis and I know what they do. I was in prison and I got a lot of information from prisoners. So, whenever you talk about the Police I really get worried. I pity Maj. Gen. Katumba Wamala; a very good man to head such an institution –(Interruption)

MRS SENINDE: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank my honourable colleague for giving way. I would like to clarify something to him, because he says that he does not agree with members who support the Police. I would not like to agree with him. I would like to make it clear to my colleague that we support the Police because we want the government to look into their problems so that they are motivated and probably that kind of corruption will die away. 

So, whatever my colleague is talking about is because the Police are de-motivated and they have to survive. The Bible says, “A man eateth where he worketh”. That is why -(Interjections)- whatever it is. But what I want to put clear, Mr Speaker, is that my colleague should understand that we need to fight for the Police in order to help them –(Interruption)

DR NSABA BUTURO: Mr Speaker, this is extremely challenging. Is the honourable member in order to misquote the Bible? I cannot recall for a moment where it says, “A man eateth where he worketh”.

MRS SENINDE: Anyway, I just wanted to put it clear that of course when you go to work you want to get something to eat. That is what I wanted to clarify. But my colleague should understand that as Parliament we must struggle to see that corruption is stopped. 

THE SPEAKER: The point of order, which the honourable minister raised that “A man eateth where he worketh”; I think it is proper in the sense that if you do not work you will not get something to eat.

MR NYANZI: Well, we need the Police; that is true. But we need a disciplined Police, not any Police. When President Museveni came in here he cared most about the Army side and he forgot the Police. In fact when he was taming the Army men to respect human rights, the Police was forgotten. For me to meet or to come across a single policeman, I would rather come across 200 army men. Because with army men you know that they will be gentlemen; you will talk together, which is not so with the Police. That is why I am saying that I pity Maj. Gen. Katumba Wamala for heading such an institution. I would advise Government if possible –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nyanzi, is it a blanket accusation of the entire Police force?

MRS MATEMBE: Surely, we Ugandans here, all of us as the Prime Minister said, have been infected really with unethical conduct, bad morals and that kind of thing. Therefore, every institution is constituted by Ugandans and the Police is one such institution. As far as I know, when the Ssebutinde Commission report came out, there was such a re-organization and structuring of Police to such an extent that the Police started cleansing itself. 

I am telling you they have done a very good job in terms of catching thieves. Long ago thieves and murderers were never caught. But the Police has been doing its best in the midst of all this insufficiency of funds; they are really trying. Is it in order for hon. Nyanzi to make a blanket accusation and castigate the whole institution of Police, which is trying its best? Of course it has wrong people but there are right people there just as in this Parliament there are right people and in the Judiciary and everywhere else. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Well, honourable member, I have already said it is not fair to make a blanket accusation of such an organization.

MR NYANZI: I said some of them are; that does not mean all. Mr Speaker, hon. Matembe was a Minister of State for Ethics when I was in prison. I asked her, “Why is it that I am in prison when I have never handled a gun?” Hon. Matembe came back to that building there - she knows it and you all know it - she came back and the answer she gave me and Maj. Gen. Katumba Wamala is that, “The gun cannot be examined because it was tampered with”. From the moment I was arrested I told the Central Region Police Commander, “If they are saying that I shot somebody, the gun is there, you have removed it from the Policeman, go and examine it and find out the person who touched the gun –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable member, your case was handled by many people. I did handle your case, you know that and the due process was taken and you eventually came out. 

MR NYANZI: That is why I wanted to show hon. Matembe that there are some people who are wrong in Police, and we have to get rid of them. That is why I am begging Government, let us put more army men in the Police force while we are re-training them, or we take them for refresher courses in order to discipline them.  

Mr Speaker, that prison, Luzira, is meant for politicians. You have never gone there. I was there and many of you are going to follow me. Hon. Moses Ali was there before me. That place is for every politician, that is your destination however innocent you are. Imagine Nyanzi being in that place! It is really terrible! I want to tell you that colonialists put up that place and all governments, which you have been following –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nyanzi, your contribution may be prejudiced by a subjective approach to the issue. So, you have really mentioned this already. Approach it objectively and then people will understand it.

MR NYANZI: I am saying colonialists put up the infrastructure and all governments, which we have been following, have not been caring at all to renovate that place. The place is very bad.  Sometime back I went to Mpigi, the prison is too bad and it needs renovation. I am requesting the Ministry of Finance at least to put aside some money for renovating that place. One day you will find yourselves there. If you happen to find it as it is now, you are going to regret. You will regret. 

Surprisingly, whoever comes out from that place does not say anything about it. That is because when you go there, you will find names of politicians on the wall who have been there. But what have we done to renovate that place? Even people who are there are human beings and many of them are as innocent as I was. Is it not very painful?

Hon. Minister of Finance, we have many old people in our constituencies. We are getting money from our pockets to assist the old people and at times we even assist them to go to cast their ballots during elections. But what I have found out and what I saw in other countries is that there are settlements for old people. Can we put some money aside or think about putting up a settlement for the aged in Uganda?  

The last point is on education. The Minister of Education is not here. Many people have been condemning UPE. I must tell you that Busujju has benefited a lot from UPE. (Applause). I was a councilor to the district from 1993 but I must tell you that in my sub-county the school, which had the biggest number of pupils, had about 215 out of the 12 primary schools. But after 1997, all my schools are accommodating more than 600 pupils. That is why some of us admire our President; at least there is a reason why we admire him. We are leaders but we could not see that there were many pupils who were not in school. But after UPE those pupils came on board and it was because of the President. 

And if at all people are saying that the President or this Movement Government has done nothing, I must tell you that in my constituency in 2011, if at all we find anybody during elections putting a thumb on a ballot paper, that will be a person who lived in Obote’s Government or Amin’s Government. At least that is an achievement. I must tell you that according to what I see here, President Museveni has –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Please, could you wind up hon. Nyanzi?

MR NYANZI: This is the last point hon. Speaker. Our President has declared universal education at all levels and this is true. I must tell you that Ugandans are very lucky. You see to some of us, our academic qualifications are not challenged by anybody whenever we stand. It is because during our time secondary schools were very few and we had only one university. A student to go to a certain secondary school almost in the whole district people had to know that somebody’s son is in a certain boarding school, which is not the case now. You can be in a university when people even near you do not know that you are in a university. If I ask Members of Parliament, you will find out that people who got degrees before 1986 are very few in the country. Most of you got degrees during President Museveni’s time. You can even put up your hand. I got my university degree in 1976. We are just less than ten here who got degrees before Museveni. (Laughter).

My worry is only on the shoddy work. Katuntu, you are one of –(Laughter)- I had a number of points but due to time, I will stop here. I will keep on giving you information to cover other areas. Thank you very much.

6.17
MR BASALIZA ARAALI (Fort-Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I would like to thank the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for this good Budget Speech. I have got a few points to make arising from the speech. 

The first point is about the infrastructure, Mr Speaker. Specifically on transport, it has been mentioned on page 9 that Government has now embarked on construction of the Northern Kampala by-pass, which will provide an alternative route to traffic from the Kenya/Uganda border, Southern and Western Uganda, Democratic Republic of Congo, Rwanda and Burundi. This is a welcome plan and it has been long overdue.

Mr Speaker, as you have already heard from this speech of the minister, the vehicles that will use this by-pass will lead through various towns of Uganda, especially Western and Southern Uganda. I am of the view that there should be various bypasses along the old towns like Fort-Portal, Mbarara and Masaka. Because when you travel on the main streets of these towns you find that the roads are corrugated, the roads are poorly shaped because of the heavy vehicles, which are already passing through these towns. Therefore, it is important that the government should have a wholesome plan to see to it that the bypasses are planned so that people are not disturbed in future when these bypasses become necessary. They should be done now so that the roads are not destroyed in these areas, especially in towns where there are bypasses.

Mr Speaker, I also thank the Ministry of Transport and Communications, for urban transport. It has done a lot in that area, especially in Kampala here. There is a lot of work being done. Even hon. Lukyamuzi’s lake has been destroyed; you know the road leading to Lukyamuzi’s house, there used to be a pool there. Hon. Lukyamuzi, there used to be a pool of water there, but now it is no more. I hope the honourable member will support the government for that. So, there is a lot of work being done here. 

However, I am of the view that work should also be done on roads and streets in other towns because if there is no work done there, then Kampala will remain congested. The ministry is now trying its level best to decongest Kampala by creating one-way routes in Kampala; but the people are buying more and more vehicles. So, in order to decongest Kampala, other towns in Uganda should be developed and investors should be encouraged to invest in these towns so that instead of people coming to Kampala, they stay in those towns.

Mr Speaker, my other point is connected with water. I thank the government for trying to give clean, piped water to the people of Uganda. In this Budget Speech it is stated that the plan is to see to it that the government moves from 65 percent piped water coverage to 67 percent. I would like to say that this is very important. But how many people drink this piped water? It is very important that the government should look into this important aspect because water is life and water should be for peasants, as well as people in towns. 

You find that in Kampala here most people do not drink piped, clean water. In fact they drink water from contaminated sources. Mr Speaker, I would like to suggest that the government should see to it that water is cheap for the people. As we talk now, a jerrycan of water costs between Shs 50 to Shs 100, which a peasant cannot afford. Actually people in the suburbs of Kampala are worse off than peasants. They do not have money so they cannot afford to buy that water. If it were possible people should have free but controlled water, so that they do not misuse it.

Mr Speaker, my other point is on education. I thank the government for UPE; it has been a success. It has passed through a long history of hardships but now we are seeing light at the end of the tunnel. Students are coming out of the UPE system, they are going to higher institutions of learning, to secondary Schools, and in fact it has been found out and analysed that students who have gone through some of these UPE schools have performed very well. So, we should commend the government for that.  

But, Mr Speaker, I would like to request that Universal Secondary Education should be looked into very fast although it has got its own complications. But in this Budget Speech the issue of tertiary and university education has been left out. The problem is that tertiary and university education is very expensive. Some of these courses like Medicine cost a lot of money, Shs 960,000 per semester. Can a peasant afford to pay that money? Can a peasant afford to raise that money? If you analyse this carefully, who pays for these people? It is the peasant who pays for these people because the peasant is the one who grows coffee and cotton. Then the sons of the rich are being paid for in universities. People who pass through these good schools are sons of the rich; schools like St Mary’s College, Kisubi; King’s College, Buddo; Gayaza High School –(Interruption)

MR NYANZI: Mr Speaker, I thank you and I thank the honourable member for giving way. The honourable member has mentioned that people are studying on people’s effort. I would like to inform the Minister of Finance that at the moment all coffee nursery operators have closed their projects because they have not been paid for some time. The rain season is almost starting; we are going to find it very difficult to get clonal coffee plantlets for our people. According to the President’s wish, at the end of 2006 every homestead should be at least with two acres of clonal coffee. But coffee nurseries have been closed and many operators have stopped because they have taken years without being paid by Government.

MR BASALIZA ARAALI: Mr Speaker, I thank the honourable member for that observation, which he has sneaked in. I am talking about tertiary and university education. I am, therefore, calling upon the Ministry of Education to look into the plight of the poor because the poor, the peasants, their children will stop at secondary education or at primary seven. So, it is very important to look into the plight of these people so that they control these escalating charges in higher institutions of learning, that is, school dues. I hope that will be looked into.

Mr Speaker, let me come now to another important issue –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, please. I have got some other members who have to –(Interjection)

MR BASALIZA ARAALI: I am winding up, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Please, do.

MR BASALIZA ARAALI: Mr Speaker, I am winding up, but I want to conclude the point about education. I am talking about teachers. When it comes to teachers, teachers do not go on strike. Sometime back we stopped them as politicians but there is a need for teachers to be facilitated or to be motivated. I have heard the government has increased their salaries. I am not quite clear as to how much they have increased their salaries. I am informing the government that the disparity is still there between the salaries of the headmasters and the teachers. So, we need to know by how much the government increased the salary of primary school teachers.  

In connection with teachers, I am suggesting - I can see members are concerned here about the teachers but please give me chance to complete. Their children could be assisted to have free education. The Government should meet their pay in higher institutions of learning because some of these teachers cannot afford to pay for their children in higher institutions of learning. 

Mr Speaker, I know you want me to give a chance to other people but I kindly request you to allow me to mention two points. I have not been having a chance of talking in this House. Let me wind up by thanking the Minister of Transport again for the road between Kyenjojo and Kyegegwa. Now Mityana is also our road, those roads are on course and the minister has assured us that the project is on- going and it will not stop. So, we want the time frame, but people are generally happy. They are saying like Thomas in the Bible that they will be happy when they see that road is finished. Mr Speaker, although I have some other points, I thank you very much.

6.29
MR YERI OFWONO (Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Minister and the Budget Committee for what they did.  

Rt hon. Speaker, my issue is on allocation of resources within the districts and the municipalities. Districts have accounting officers and the municipalities also have accounting officers but there are other items, which are given in terms of grants, from which the municipality does not benefit. There is water, as a municipality we do not get any grant in terms of water. So it is a serious issue. There is no way we can repair the boreholes and there is no way we can repair the spring wells. We do not get any grant and when they were demarcating these municipalities they assumed that they were okay but they are really poor. You find that they are really urban poor and they cannot afford piped water. So, it is a real serious issue. 

Even if you check on the budget, even the current one there is no grant completely for water, which other districts are getting. So, I do not know whether I should join hands with the Committee of Natural Resources to make sure that this is part of the budget.  

When you come to roads in the municipality, in the last budget we got about Shs 65 million and you know very well that tarmacking one kilometer of road costs Shs 300 million. So, what do you do with Shs 65 million; and the municipality is the sitting room of the district? I do not know why they tend to ignore the municipality. There is no equipment so you end up contracting the road works and that is a very big problem.  

As I have already told you, when they were gazetting these municipalities they thought that these are main streets with shopkeepers and businessmen, but there are so many farmers. One of the parishes is just like a rural area but even the PMA money and NAADS money is not provided. They say the municipality is always okay. Really the ministry should look into these issues so that this money is allocated accordingly. I will try very much, when we are passing this policy statement, to make sure that they are at least incorporated. I want the House to support me on this issue.

I want to thank the government for the UPE. When they were giving the code to the accounting office, they gave us money separate from the district. So you find that we benefited from that money and we have classrooms, houses for teachers and furniture. But we have a problem. I do not know whether we have a record of the foreign people because they are benefiting from our grant. We do not know how many are they. It is a big problem because we may be thinking that we are assisting Ugandans but when we are assisting Kenyans and others. That should be on record. How many foreign students and pupils do we have? Even at the university we may be granting these people sponsorship. 

Is there a record, which the ministry can give us that these are Ugandans? Let us have a record here, and we are going even to electioneering now, these may end up voting. You give them free education here when it is scarce and it is not for everybody. In their country they are very strict; when you go there you will end up - they call it “fanta nyayo” and you will be arrested immediately. So, here we have a liberal policy, we do not mind and our resources are scarce. We really need to see how many of our nationals are benefiting from this grant. That is why others were arguing over the quota system of education because I will know how many people came from my parish or my village and I will take them for that sponsorship in the university. But this we do not know. A Kenyan can enter here in primary one or in a secondary school, he scores the rightful marks –(Interruption)

MR PAJOBO: Thank you very much my brother. Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the member that before finishing senior six a student fills a form to indicate that he is a Ugandan. That system is there and the local council, LC I, LC II, they sign those forms. So if he has not come across them, kindly, they are there. 

At the same time we cannot deny non-Ugandans to penetrate the system through collaborating with local councils since corruption is the highest in this country. That I cannot argue, but there is a system.

MR OFWONO: I am not accepting any further information. So, it is an issue, let us have the record. I am from the border town, I can identify some of these students who are being sponsored by Uganda but they are not Ugandans. So, you take care. Let us really come out of this issue – (Interruption)

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member to continue misleading this House? We know that we have in our schools students from Kenya, Tanzania, Sudan, and they come here and they partake of our education. As you know Makerere University was one of the best Universities in Africa and, therefore, this exchange of students is beneficial to us in the spirit of the East African Community and Pan Africanism. They also do pay school fees, which definitely enrich our population. Is he in order to continue talking along the lines of making Uganda exclusive for only Ugandans? Is he in order, Sir?

THE SPEAKER: His concern was about sponsorship, using our money to sponsor foreign students. They can come in, get their financial backing from their homes, but they should not use our money. His concern is that many of them are actually here and they get sponsored to go to the university at our cost. But then the Member for Workers informed him that there are forms, which are filled to justify that they are citizens. I think his concern is sponsorship.

MR KAKOOZA: It does not only create that problem, but also this country has no employment policy. We have many foreigners here. What happens if you do not protect citizens? They get involved in the jobs within the country and it is a disadvantage, as we have no employment policy. 

MR OFWONO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for that ruling. I know very well there are so many private students and we encourage them to come, but we do not want them to take over our sponsorship in the university and UPE. They feel our forms – people have already talked about corruption here – they go to the local council I and fill our forms, and they are endorsed. These are Kenyans but they are being sponsored here in Uganda because in Kenya at least they have some guidelines right from primary one up to whatever level to make sure you are a Ugandan or a Kenyan. So, that is my concern. 

Lastly, on page 11 of the Budget Speech we are happy that they are putting up a dry port in Namanve here. But really, if you have a lake and so forth that is where you benefit from, you benefit through fishing. We are at the border town; we have the advantage of exporting. Why do you bring it to an already congested town with many industries here? Why do you not take it to Tororo? In Tororo we have the entire infrastructure, talk about water, telephones, airport, railways and so forth. So, take it to Tororo. Recently when the President was addressing the Members of Parliament he told them he is taking the coffee factory to Tororo because of the advantage that Tororo has. So, why do you bring the thing to Namanve here, a congested place? This thing should be taken to Tororo so that Tororo can really develop –(Interruption)

MR KIWANDA: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. Mr Speaker, as the member was beginning his speech he told us Tororo Municipality is really in a very bad state; they do not have money for water and their roads are not tarmacked. Now he is contradicting himself – can you clarify? What is in Tororo really? Is it really in a bad state or it is so well developed that you even need this facility? What is your position?

MR OFWONO: I want to clarify that we have tap water, we have the roads, but you very well know that they are not well done. Tap water has not covered all the areas, but the tap water is there so you can easily connect it. The road is there, you can improve on it; there is a railway line. This is what I mean. Really, clearing all these goods is important. 

We want to start the Northern route up to Sudan. It is funny to carry goods from Kenya, bring them here to Kampala then you go to the North – even in terms of costing. Why do you not just pass through Tororo, Mbale, Lira and you are already in Sudan? It is cheaper that way and this will bring development in that area. So, I do not see why you congest everything in Kampala. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this time.

6.44
MR TOMSON ANANG-ODUR (Kwania County, Apac): Mr Speaker, I wish to thank you and the Minister of Finance for the Budget Speech, which is our subject today. I wish to thank the minister that this year’s budget theme is “Promoting economic growth and reducing poverty through public expenditure”.  

Mr Speaker, owing to little time I will confine myself to an area, which I think is central to the successful implementation and sharing out of a good budget. I am happy that PEAP is being revised. I am particularly happy that we are looking again at production, competitiveness and income. We are also looking at good governance. Good governance to me is the pillar of good economic growth. It is only when you have got good governance that Government can be able to implement whatever programmes it has, successfully.  

I regret to say that in this country we have a lot of problems with the issue of good governance. If you look at the Uganda human rights report, if you look at Amnesty International and other human rights organisations’ reports concerning the way we treat human rights in Uganda, Mr Speaker, there is a lot that is left to be done. Our human rights report is so poor, the behaviour of CMI and other agencies of Government is creating a lot of problems for Ugandans to concentrate on economic development. And of course you will note that because of poor management of human rights, we have a lot of complaints and we cannot be able to concentrate seriously on what we should be doing. 

Mr Speaker, in this particular respect, does the issue of treating our political opposition and the harassment of our political opposition stop them from meeting and so forth? This is the routine in this country, putting up roadblocks through laws and so forth. It is a hindrance to good governance and, therefore, to good opportunity for development.

Mr Speaker, if we are to promote competitiveness in business, which of course is a cornerstone for efficient production, then we must do so within the institutional framework. In this country this is lacking in many areas. I want to point out that the application of what they call Strategic Intervention Fund is most discriminatory. We have talked about this on this Floor of Parliament, the way AGOA and others were favoured by individual approach through the Presidency. I think this should be stopped. We must use institutions, which are able to analyse and make recommendations as to which investments Government should put money in. As of now we are not only discouraging investment from within Uganda but also outside Uganda. People who, knowing what is happening here, might be unhappy about coming here because an individual can have authority to change anything anytime and that of course will not encourage them.

We have talked about growth in this country and we have discussed this at length. I want to repeat in my own words what hon. Kamuntu ably put across on the Floor of this Parliament. If you look at the growth figures, we were told that last year, in five years we developed GDP growth at 5.2 percent and of course we were proud that we beat the African average of 4.1 percent. I want to note that at a Shs 3 trillion budget figure, this 5.2 percent is much worse off in real terms for a country, which develops at four percent but which might have the best figure of GDP of 10 trillion. 

This comparison is misleading and I wish to ask our Government not to concentrate on misleading people but deal with issues as they are. But, Sir, of most importance, we must always see the fruits of this growth, where is it going? Last year Government did a survey and we found out that poverty level has increased from 34 percent to 38 percent but we have grown. We have been growing at five to six percent. What does that mean, Mr Speaker? It means that there is a small group in this country that have taken away all the benefits of the growth of this country, and this is a serious matter. There is a class of people who are poor and who are becoming poorer and poorer in spite of the growth you are talking about. I wish to ask Government to take this into account very seriously because it does not auger well for the future of this country when you have just a small group of people making a lot of money for themselves at the expense of the Ugandan population.   

Mr Speaker I want to relate this to another important issue, which we have talked about here and I want to – unfortunately our able Rt hon. Prime Minister, is not here. But I was a bit disappointed when he was responding to the issue of corruption. We have been begging Government to agree to work with us on certain issues on which we all agree are a problem. Corruption in this country is a very serious problem and we have noted it. We have people in very high Government positions that have made it a habit to steal the money of Ugandans and enrich themselves. We have some senior people in Government who have become so corrupt and they have so much money and some of them are now threatening their other colleagues in their own constituencies because of this money. Mr Speaker, when you become so rich and you now want to spend your money to defeat other people in their constituencies, I think that is misuse of money. The most important point is that he does not require money. That is why he can spend it that way – (Interruption)

MR SEKIKUBO: Thank you my friend for giving way but you have made insinuations, which I thought I should not allow to go unattended to. You see, when a country is fighting immorality in the form of corruption, Government must have ears. I think the hon. Third Deputy Prime Minister is here to take note. Government must have ears and eyes. 

On the 26th of June there appeared a photograph of an honourable minister distributing Shs 4 million to people when he had earlier made a statement at a rally in Kawanda, that is in Mawogola, that he would use Shs 100 million to unseat Ssekikubo. The daily New Vision showed him giving out that money to my own councilors and people from my own constituency and Government kept quiet about this. So, is Government committed? Does it have the willingness to speak about this let alone taking action against this? It appears either Government does not read its own newspaper or it is quiet about it and only turning a blind eye. So, I rise to support the honourable colleague that Government is really lacking the seriousness. It is preaching what it cannot practice on its own and this is corroding and eroding away the public trust and confidence we have in Government. I thank you.  

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Thank you honourable member for giving way. When you touched on the issue of poverty levels I thought there was another dimension that needs to be addressed. Whereas we have the average increasing to 38 percent in Uganda, you find that there is a geographical disparity whereby in Northern Uganda the poverty levels have risen up to 60 percent. The issue that is related to this is that when you look at the money that is being injected into that particular region, it is very difficult to rationalize as to why these poverty levels of course continue to increase. 

War is one particular element, but I think it is an issue that we would like Government to address very speedily because when you have these regional disparities, then it does not reflect in the spirit of equal opportunities that we would like to enhance in this country. I thank you.
 
MR ANANG-ODUR: Thank you very much for the information. Hon. Dora Byamukama, I wish to tell you that in fact the figure is 69.7 percent poverty levels in the North and we are the ones who pulled this figure to 38 percent. That means in some areas it might be as low as about - in fact the study says in some areas it is about 20 percent or 25 percent. That is for Government to take into account.  

We have been crying about the deficit in our budget. I want to submit that part of the problem with the deficit comes from the money, which we steal from the coffers of Government. Why? Because money, which is stolen is transfer payments; it is not worked for and it is just money removed from Government and put somewhere else. And money, which you remove from departments, which should be used, those departments do not have enough money, they have to come here for supplementaries and Government is forced to over-spend. I want to say that if we were able to put our foot down and eradicated or seriously reduced the levels of corruption in this country, even this deficit would be handled.  

Mr Speaker, I looked at page 7, paragraph 22, talking about financial services in this country. I am very sorry, and we have talked about this here - these people are advocating and they are probably saying they have introduced micro finance institutions to help the people in rural areas. But these institutions charge much higher interest rates than the commercial banks. We know agriculture is the least paying sub-sector of the economy. How do you expect somebody in Kwania to borrow from these micro finance institutions and pay 30, 40 or 50 percent when you calculate per annum, and be able to subsist in the business? This is what I call a service, which is being given but which everybody knows is not going to work. This is a shame.

It is a shame because we know we are actually deceiving our own people. We know they cannot develop through this, Mr Speaker. We had proposed here before that Government should think about having a different system of finances for this sub- sector. Other countries like India, which care about their peasants, who actually I am told are their employers, give them these services. They have banks, which are run by Government, which charges lower rates, and which they can afford to pay back to in agriculture. I propose to Government that they should look into this very seriously.

Mr Speaker, the higher education sector in this country - the way we are financing is not fair for some areas of this country. We talk about UPE, my colleague from Mityana was very happy. I am sure I am happy for him. In my area the UPE standards are very low but I am not going to make it my subject today. Where we have this poverty in the North, and one speaker before me has talked about this, it is not feasible. First of all, our people in the rural areas cannot pay fees for the good schools in Kampala. Even if they might have had the little money, these UPE primary schools cannot produce graduates who can go to Kisubi, Buddo and Namilyango; it is not feasible. You cannot come from a primary school in those rural areas and go there. Of course we shall be proud if they can write their names and become porters of others. But I am not satisfied that students in my area cannot go to these good schools. Those who struggle very hard and pass to go to Makerere, because of the nature of their schools, cannot be accepted on Government sponsorship.  

My colleague from Fort-Portal put it very well. It is true that the students who go to good schools in Kampala are from the upper class, the class we are talking about. Those fellows with the money, Mr Speaker, are the ones who pay tuition for the students at Makerere using our taxes. Those other fellows who have to pay taxes and they have no money, when their children come to Makerere and other institutions of higher learning, they have to pay. We have been asking, and one time I remember we approved a report of the Committee on Social Services last year and Government said they were going to consider this issue; we agreed that there should be a proportion of the government scholarship specifically aiming at the rural areas.  

The other week the Minister of Education was saying the policy is still in the Cabinet. I am very disappointed. I know for a fact that there are people who are opposed to this but, Mr Speaker, I want to request Government that this matter should be handled very fast.

Mr Speaker, I do not have time but allow me to make this last point about Makerere. I read in a newspaper recently, in fact I think it was two or three days ago, that there is a gentleman who has been working here, co-ordinating German scholarships for Makerere. He was complaining that the standard of education of Makerere has fallen and they are worried. If I remember correctly, they were re-considering their position as to whether they should continue having this programme with Makerere University. 

How can a University like Makerere have so many students who now attend lectures like they are attending a rally? Are we really serious in this country that some students now have to stand and they attend rallies through the windows from outside? How can any lecturer or professor attend to these students? Why can he not divide them into tutorial classes so that he can coach them and they become good material? Are we really trying to kill Makerere University? What is this, Mr Speaker? I feel offended. I am sorry, but I feel bad that we can have a Government talking good of many things, being so proud and the most important thing, which is the foundation of our future education at Makerere University, is treated like - I do not know.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Practically what is on the ground and what the lecturers do is that you can find that a lecturer is teaching 700 students in a class. What he does is to give out copies to students to go and research. Even in terms of marking and teaching students, the lecturers do not mind because the class is huge. Seven hundred students in a class is a problem. 

MR SEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, it also has happened that students find no vacancy and places from which to sit their exams. A case in point is last year where Makerere University students were taken to Didi’s World to sit their examinations from there. Even at the main campus they have lectures in halls of residence. We really appreciate the constraints of the structures in place but the corresponding number of students and intake should be matched with efforts to put up structures to cater for them. 

What is threatening the future of academics in this country is that beauty pageants instead of academic brilliance, have taken over these institutions: Miss Makerere, Miss Nkumba, Miss Nakawa. The beauty pageant, instead of debates and academic excellence have taken over our institutions of learning and Government is just meekly looking on when the standards are falling, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I am afraid we have to wind up the debate. I think the point is taken; the Minister is going to respond tomorrow -(Interjection)- honestly, tomorrow he will respond.

MR ANANG-ODUR: Mr Speaker, when I went to Oxford University in 1978 and I said I was from Makerere University, I was an academic prince. I do not know whether the same can happen now. I propose to the Minister that Government should take measures to bring the administration of Makerere under Government supervision and they should ensure that excellence is what is pursued. As he has said correctly, what is happening? 

In fact I am told that those courses, which are more important and very expensive, they will not give them to you if you pass so well and Government has to give you a sponsorship. You might be the best student but if you are going on Government sponsorship, they may decide to give you a lesser course because they would rather get money and students from outside for that course, which is good and expensive. What is this business, Mr Speaker? It is true. I know it for a fact. So, let us get rid of this problem so that we can progress.  Thank you, very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much honourable member for that contribution. I have taken note of you. Yes I did. Hon. Namusoke Kiyingi, you are already here. Therefore, we are winding this debate up tomorrow. I want to make an agreement with you that in order for you to make your contribution, which should be brief, we start at 2 O’clock prompt. I request the Leader of Government Business present here to advise members of the Frontbench to be here at 2.00 p.m. to make responses to a number of points that have been raised. After tomorrow we shall not have any debate on the Budget. We will wait until sometime after the committees have finalized their reports and then we continue with the Committee of Supply. 

But I think before they go for the committees, some of the points raised should be answered. Therefore, I am appealing that you advise the ministers to be here at 2.00 p.m. We shall start at 2 O’clock and those of you who are here I have given you your placement. I know whom I will call first and, therefore, I appeal to you to be here on time because when I call you and you are not here then you would have forfeited your opportunity. With this we have come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.08 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 29 July 2004 at 2.00 p.m.)


