Wednesday, 27 July 1994

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliamentary House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Vice-Chairman, Mr Ekemu, in the Chair.)

The Council was called to Order.

(Debate continued.)

MR ADRAMA: Mr Chairman, we have been for about three days on duty. Is it in order for us to be here on duty as representatives without being facilitated to communicate to our constituents?  It has been important when we are here to have links with our constituents.  We have been kept out of our links with our constituents for along time because we cannot be facilitated to communicate on telephone. Is it in order Mr Chairman?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member, I think this is a matter you could take up first with your relevant committee and then I am sure it can be handled.  It does not have to be on the Floor of the House.

THE MINISTER FOR EDUCATION (Mr Amanya Mushega): Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I will be a brief background to my answer.  When the NRM came to take over power, one of the primary objectives was of the recognition that education was a primer for development and that the teacher his central in the process of advancing in education.  

Therefore, my predecessor hon. Mayanja Nkangi convened the meeting of the headmasters in 1987 in Kyambogo, and discussed with them to give their views with the possibility of what the Government would do and to use the words of that day, to ameliorate the conditions of the teacher.  At that time the teachers proposed that their biggest problem was the high cost of education especially at secondary education - the PTA.  So, they proposed that if some their children could get free education, then the conditions of the teacher will be greatly ameliorated. The Government went ahead I think in 1988/89 Budget and promised - for two children for every teacher at the secondary level.  

Two problems arose.  First, what was to be paid was it the statutory fees or the total cost of education which includes PTA and even I recall that there was the project for Shs2.5 billion were set aside for this exercise.  So, the conclusion was that the Government would only pay the statutory fees.  So, even most of the teachers refused to fill the forms because this was too little.  

The second problem was, which children - the children I look after or the biological children.  The answer from the Ministry of Education was that the Government would look after the biological children. And as you know with the majority of the Ugandan societies even children who are not yet married sometimes have the responsibilities on looking after children.  

So, in short, that exercise of ameliorating the conditions of the teacher via the payment of the two children failed.  Because there was the added problem that the majority of the teachers are young. So, some said we who do not have children, how do you benefit from this exercise. So, we went back to the headmasters in 1989, and asked them that this exercise has not worked out.  What other alternative do they propose? So, we went back to the headmasters in 1989, and asked them that this exercise has not worked out. What other alternative do they propose?  

As the hon. Member has asked fairly, their proposal was that the biggest cost of education at secondary education level according to them was food for students and staff, collection of firewood; especially in boarding schools; building and hiring transport for building materials; and education trips.  So, their proposal then was that if we could have a lorry heaven would fall on earth.  Food will be purchased from the source cheaply; for students and staff; firewood would be brought cheaply; the lorries would be hired, and building materials would be reduced and consequently the cost of education would go down.  

So, the cost that year Government ordered 300 lorries for the Education Sector.  In the mean time two things happened, one; the prices of coffee fell from around 3,000 dollars per tonne to under 1,000 dollars per tonne, while the lorries were on order.  So, the Tata Company for the coffee, which was budgeted to buy 300 lorries, ended up buying only 100 lorries. And these 100 arrived in the country and it was on the base of that my Colleague hon. Ntimba who made the statement on the Floor of this House.

Then there was a second problem when the 100 lorries arrived in the country.  That is inflation; because the lorries were tagged on the dollar could only now buy 80 lorries.  And I think hon. Ntimba distributed the list for the schools to benefit.  Every district benefited from this exercise.  The lorries were duly delivered to the schools - 80 of them.  The promises of the PTA charges going down - the cost of education going down - the lorries earning income - students traveling all over the country did not materialise. 

In actual fact, the Ministry was burdened with the problem of trying to verify which lorry was on the road and which lorry was off. The schools, which had lorries, purchased by the parents, and the schools, which had no lorries at all, hired all of them, and the education charges continued to escalate.  When we asked them some of them stated that there were certain imponderable we had not considered. In short this exercise also failed.  And the cost of education as you know have contained to rise and I must say a few of these schools use these lorries very well.  The majority of them the lorries turned into the properties of some teachers and PTA Chairman.  

I know of a school which - where the man in charge overturned the lorry another one had a relative and the lorry knocked an engine twice within the period of three months.  So, we also abandoned this exercise and we decided to take the bull by the horns. I brought this matter in Cabinet and I brought it up through the Sectoral Committee on Education and we decided to abandon the school lorry exercise.  So, what are the alternative arrangements according to the question newly put in the place.  

The purchasing of lorries for reasons I will give later, has been abandoned by the Ministry of Education and by Government, and I did explain this matter to this Parliament through the Sectoral Committee on Education.  

One; of development and treating the teacher as the central figure in the education system. Therefore, his welfare or her welfare and training is critical.  Alternative number one was to pay the teacher direct so that the teacher who has no children, the teacher with many children gets this money and decides what to do with it.  This has been done in the previous two budgets.  

As I mentioned last time, the lowest paid qualified teacher has move from Shs 4,000 in January, 1992 to over Shs 35,000in the last financial year and I think financial year, it will definitely be over Shs 4,000 for the least paid teacher in the primary education system and a professor in Makerere has moved from roughly Shs 70,000 now over Shs 400,000 per month.  It is not yet enough but it is in the right direction. So, direct payment of the teacher is one of the alternatives.  

Second one, the implementation of grants to schools.  For example, in the last budget year, we distributed chemicals to selected secondary schools worth 1.2 billion shillings. I shall be stating in my policy statement in the course of this debate; and another 750 million shillings is in the pipeline and the contract has already been awarded to purchase equipments and chemicals in order to boost the education in the secondary schools especially science education. We also purchased books for tertiary institutions and equipments for technical institutions especially Uganda Technical College. We think, through that, where parents used to contribute towards buying of chemicals, buying of books will be reduced.  

Three, we have been every year having a budget covering the provision of iron sheets and cement to support parental efforts in the building of key elements in the provision of secondary education; and that is laboratories, classrooms, libraries and staff houses.  Not all schools have benefited but they have been progressively benefiting and every year, we circulate the list of schools that have benefited from Vote and this year, we shall also be circulating the list of schools district by district which have benefited from the Vote in getting iron sheets and cement and those also which have benefited from the provision of chemicals and science equipments.  

And four, only recently did I announce on the floor of this House of setting up of a task force to inquire into ways and means of reducing the cost of education especially at secondary level because we think this dialogue with teachers was meaningful but it was not conclusive and would not like to not only involve Parliament but the entire population.  The lorries that are being purchased have turned out to be a burden to the parents.  A lorry now costs around 50 million shillings a piece.  

In our considered opinion, if I had 50 million shillings and gave it to a school and helped it to build a laboratory, help it to build a staff house, it will be a more meaningful use of these resources than buying a lorry which now turns to be a recurrent burden; recurrent expenditure burden to the parents.  

So, we would like now to build the capacity by using these resources which are or can be more fairly shared out by the institutions so that we can progressively reduce the burden on parents on the provision of education and also build the capacity - because if you buy a lorry now, you must look for fuel, you must service it, it can overturn, it can burn. But when you put up a staff house, short of earthquakes, it is likely to be there for many years to come.  We think that will be a more meaningful way of utilising resources.  

So, in short, our target has been to improve the quality of education in the country through the support of the teachers and the provision of scholastic materials and the systems that were suggested by our friends in the education system, although will intentioned, did not work out well.  And those worked out so far through the efforts of the Sectoral Committee and the support of the wider public seems to be generating greater capacity in the provision of quality education in that country.  And from now on, we have no intention whatsoever, of using public resources to buy lorries for a few schools to burden those parents and we prefer they use that capital development funds to create actual capacity building in the secondary school institutions.  Thank you.

MR WAMBI:  Mr Chairman, thank you very much.  This morning, Mr Chairman, I heard on Radio Uganda an announcement by a person called Mr Kamuli regarding students going for coaching during holidays. I want to take this opportunity and hear from the Minister for Education and Sports.  Now, some children so far have already gone back to schools and some parents have already paid money for coaching during holidays.  What steps are you going to take to help us parents, so that this money can be paid back or refunded to the parents?

MR AMANYA MUSHEGA: I thank the hon. Member for his supplementary question, which I think is a little bit parallel.  But as I have stated several times here before, the upbringing of a child and the provision of education for a child cannot really continue to be burden of government and, especially the Minister responsible for education.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member I think that is the second part of the question you are asking which have already been answered.  Maybe, hon. Minister if you wish you can still elaborate.  But try to be brief, please.

MR AMANYA MUSHEGA: They were for purposes of creating general consensus.  My hon. Friend the one of Tororo will definitely answer him.  One; we did not bur the importation of lorries, any way people like these strong words.  We stopped the importation of lorries as a vehicle for improving the welfare of teachers and provision of education in secondary schools.  For reasons, I have, I think ably given. And went for the alternative which we think is more effective in improving the standards of education and the welfare of the teachers generally.  Because when a teacher gets a salary it reaches every teacher.  But when the 80 lorries go to those schools only 80 benefit from out 507 schools that are government aided in the school system.  

Two; from advised economists found that it is cheaper to hire a lorry than to commit 50 million shillings to buy a lorry to wait for a day to transport people to Mweya Lodge, and Murchison Falls Park.  It is definitely cheaper in terms of capital expenditure.  And commit that 50 million shillings to create a broader impact in the provision of education in the country.  So, it is cheaper for the school system - and the capitation grants have gone up, the costs are going up inflation is being controlled, and definitely the teachers have not been benefiting largely from the lorries.  

On the contrary, these lorries have sometimes contributed to strikes in schools.  If not by students sometimes by teachers.  But it is not our purpose to bring all this here.  So, I was not likely to go back to the lorries unless if hon. Members can give us convincing reasons why the method we are approaching the provision of lorries us much better.  Thank you, Sir.

MR KERMU:  Point of clarification. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. About a month ago I brought a list of teachers from Nebbi Primary teachers whose salaries have not been paid since March last year.  I took that to the Minister and I have been expecting him to call and discuss it with him.  So, I would like the Minister to explain what he has so far done or what he intends to do with those people-teachers.

MR AMANYA MUSHEGA:  I thank the hon. Member.  It is true that he brought his list to me, and we have discussed in the corridors of the  - this Floor about his problem and I must confess that it was with his prior information that he wanted to ask a supplementary.  Maybe I will explain this problem generally using the Iganga case if - because that one I have done a case study.  When government payments for teachers was very low, the schools employed anybody they wanted because the PTA payments made sense while the government payments made no sense at that time.  In rural schools the teacher will be getting about 10,000 shillings from the PTA and roughly 4,000 shillings from the government.  So, he could do without it.  Now when we have hikes the payment of a teacher to close to 40,000 shillings now compared the 5 - 10,000 shillings a teacher gets from PTA. Upcountry, some steps have to be taken.  

Secondly, I revised the law passed in 1969, which was providing for the establishment of district teaching service committee; these are established throughout the whole country now.  These district teaching service committees, the people who should be licensed, to use a common term, people who are not trained but they deceive them to see whether the minimum standards to teach our primary school children. After these committees were established, they ceased these licensed teachers and found a good number of them wanting.  For example, we could allow a teacher who failed English completely to be the one now teaching English to our children in primary 7. But then some of these headteachers continued to operate as if it was before after the teacher has disqualified to be a licensed teacher, they go back in the primary schools and continue to teach.  

The second problem: for a number of years many teachers would sit exams in TTCS, but they would not get the results.  For even those who passed and those who failed all of them continued to teach.  Recently we have gone back and deceived these teachers using district teaching service committees and they have found that some of these teachers who claim to be qualified were actually unqualified. And in the recent exercise, you are supposed to provide documents to indicate that actually you are a qualified teacher.  

For example, in Iganga District, may I point out that my colleague has not yet come for the trip; but I have made it in his absence.  Of the 408 teachers up paid and a whole of those here 275 are untrained in other words they are not supposed to be teaching but they’re teaching illegally. (Interjections) Yes, illegally therefore, I may have to alert the Police.  Then 33 of them lack documents, you read a document, they will tell you lack of documentation.  Somebody brings in half documents and we say go and - where did you qualify? Jinja TTC. Which year? 1990, who was the Principal? I have forgotten. Go and bring your certificate. The teacher does not come back.  But the Headmaster continues to fill the form as if the teacher has everything in order. 

The third problem; the public service has come in, in spite of the law you passed here because it was not yet enforced, to remove from the pay role the over aged teachers.  But when the over aged teachers are removed from the pay role, they continue to go back to class to teach and if things are normal.  

So, we have the problem of the teachers; unqualified to teach anywhere, and who continue to teach as if nothing has happened.  Two; teachers who are not fully qualified whose documents are incomplete and instead of bringing the documents, they were going back to repeat the TTC course, they continue to teach quietly receiving the 10,000 shillings from the parents, but they are now anxious also to get the 35,000. 

And three; people who are over aged and have now been told to apply either for a contract or go for their pension.  These confuse - the big portion of these teachers who are not paid.  But when these teachers are presenting their cases, they do not explain these weaknesses within themselves.  And my appeal to hon. Members really is that, let us receive the complaint from the teachers but also let us find out what is the source of that complaint so that we do not turn out ultimately to be advocates of the people who may be kin to ruin our educational system, and damage the future of our children by having a person who has been found terribly wanting to teach but they have continued to teach.  I recall when these committees worked in Kamuli, hon. Kadaga came to see me almost 80 percent of the teaching force there was disqualified.  Because they were supposed to be in contact with our children.  So, let us allow also the professionals now who have been denied the opportunities for too long also to tell us the political leaders who are qualified to teach our children.  I thank you.

MOTION

MR MUDRIKAT MUKASA (Workers’ Representative): I rise to support the Motion.  However, I would have since I have not had an earlier opportunity to address this House formerly other than the point of order and information which with your permission to register mine the organization’s successfulness to His Excellency the President of Uganda, the Government of NRM, Members of this House for having legislated to permit the special groups to come to this House hence get involved in the law making process of this country.  Our colleagues who came first, the women have done quite a commendable job.  And the two groups, which have just joined will attempt to make the same performance.

Much as we are told that the mandate of this House is soon ending, we shall try our best. We have talked in the past, but we are not on record, and I want also to put this on record that the Government of NRM has made a commendable job particularly in establishing peace.  Stopping human rights abuses and creating infrastructure. Trade union concepts believe in trade union rights, but trade union rights can only be possible where there are no human rights abuses.  And, therefore, since there are no human right abuses in Uganda, we are sure of attaining our trade union rights.

Permit me again to extend my thanks and my Organization’s thanks for the statement made by His Excellency the President on May day cerebrations. When he said, and being the first President of Uganda to make such a courageous statement, that workers of Uganda are mature.  Several presidents have come and gone, but they never picked courage to make such statements.  All that we have done has not been recognised, but on May 1, 1984 it was indeed recognised.  Since I have not also had opportunity to welcome to congratulate you for having been elected to high office, I offer my congratulations.  In the same time I offer my congratulations to the Vice-Chairman of NRM for both of you the best manner you have conducted the business of this House. (Applause) 

I am aware that the business of this House has recently become difficult to manage.  Not only due to the size of the House but more significantly the laxity offered to this House.  Yesterday, I witnessed when you refused a Minister raising a point it was rare during the days when I was here.  To refuse a Minister making a point.  I also witnessed where the Bill presented by a Deputy Prime Minister returned.  This is a healthy development in this House.

I want finally to thank the Minister of Finance in general for having attempted to restore our economic growth.  We do recognise the journey we have traveled in the struggle of restoring Uganda’s economy; it is indeed rough. The labour does recognize that there have been tremendous achievements.  These are our sincere words and feelings.  I believe that much will be attained if all Members’ views given during this Budget debate are taken including some of the views I am going to give as here under.

Now, I want to look at the Minister’s speech on page 13. On page 13 with your permission it reads; that is the paragraph into marked 30.  It reads that, I am please, to report that the good progress which has been made in reducing staff numbers this year generated savings which permitted a further media increase of about 50 per cent.  Well, on this I would like to suggest to the Minister that, the language used was unfortunate.  I think next time he should avoid saying that he was grateful for the progress made as a result of reducing the work force.  Now, this amounts to saying that I have increased the foodstuff by having some debts.  Those who were consuming because this debt then you has a surplus.  This in my opinion, is not a foodstuff expansion, it simply means that those were eating that food are no longer eating it, so it was distributed amongst the survivors.

On the same page, the Minister said that he did expect towards the end of July, he did expect by July to have 145 reduced work force from adleaf not from adleaf in traditional government civil servants.  Now, my colleague the other time said that, you do attend better life for civil society by reducing job opportunities.  Now, I want to call the Minster’s attention to the following, and these are obtained from his office.  This is manpower and improved situation in Uganda.  

Now, out of the population declared we have 7,136,358 people employable in Uganda, that is a number deterred 7.1 declared those who are ready to work if they get jobs, they are ready, they are not sick, they are not old, they are not at school but they are there ready to work.  According to the same manpower survey 378,227 people were employed in formal sector informal sector, out of which 5.3 per cent was in government traditional civil service.  

Now, the informal sector employed 977,681 making a total of those who were employed by the period of the budget, 1,355,908 people.  Now, those are the people who actually managed to get employment.  Those people who were not employed although they were to be employed, were 6.7 millions in Uganda.  This means in simple terms that 6.7 million people did not get jobs; they were fed by 1.3 million people.  Yesterday, a Member raised a question that where did these people go.  The do not go anywhere they do not go to Kenya, they do not go to Tanzania, they remain here.  How do they live?  They live on yours and my salary.  When you earn  - even your allowance dear hon. Members, you find them lining up there, they have no jobs but they want to go to the hospitals. They are your cousins, they are your nephews, and they are your brothers.  You have to distribute the money, even the allowances you get, to those people. I think the hon. Minister would appreciate this point that those people who are not employed, share the amount those people employed earn. (Interruption)

MR TIVU: Point of information. Mr Chairman, I would like to give information to the hon. Members holding the Floor that Makerere on average admits 2,000 annually, but the public service after 3 years advertises jobs, and when you go to the public service to check on the list of applicants, over 4,000 people applied for the jobs.  And then you find that those people who have been working - I do not know how they got into the employment - they also apply for the same job.  

So, ultimately you will find that out of the 2 million, out of the 2,000 only 200 people are absorbed.  So, the rest except for the professional like the teachers and the doctors who go straight to the employment the rest are on the streets, which means that our man power planning is wrong. We are educating people to remain redundant or to go to look for green pastures and we are wasting our resources.  Thank you.

MR MUDIRIKATI MUKASA:  Thank you for the information.  Mr, Chairman, I want also not he same stage to draw the Minister’s attention to the statement that when, in fact, I do not know whether this has taken place because we are in June, July, that by the end of July there would be a deduction of 145 hence a proper living wage – now, this is an acceptable economic theory.  It is an acceptable, and because of my full knowledge that the Ministers of Finance are economists, I made my research and I want with your permission, to read the two theories, which are actually contradicting and then we decide which is a better theory.  

Now, the first theory is that of the classical Adams Knott, which argues that they believed that to bring economy out of depression there had to be new investments.  The investments show induced generated employment and new incomes and the economy expanded again.  They believed that to expand the economy trade unions had to accept wage cuts to induce investors.  That was a classical theory, which the Minister is following.  

Now, unfortunately the Keynesian Theory which is followed here by micro-economists read as follows: Kenneth, however, argued that this move would lower consumption, income and aggregate demand peoples ability to purchase goods and services.  That is purchasing power.  It will reduce the purchasing power. In other words, employment depended on how much of the product of the industries is demanded.  Effective demand is determined by income.  Lack of income leads to low effective demand, which in turn leads to unsold stock of goods and services which makes investors close down; hence leading to unemployment. To have development, therefore, Kenneth argues that more and more people should be put to work for them to have enough disposable income to purchase the products of investors. Now, these are the two contradicting theories, but since we are following the micro-economy, the tenth theory is the best because it says  -(Interruption)

MR TIVU MARK:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, may I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that in actual fact Cains in his general theory of wages and employment added and he wrote this book, his article in 1936 when it was in the middle of a general depression in Europe from 1933 to 1937 and he said; “It pays to pay men to dig holes in the Hyde Park and pay them tomorrow to cover them regardless of what they are doing in order for them to have more money in order for them to have higher purchasing power” and indeed that is what worked.

MR MUKASA:  Yes, Mr Chairman.  I have three points, and I have not talked for the last five years and I appeal for your softening the time keeping.

I want to congratulate the hon. Minister for having created jobs as he declared but I want to suggest that he should actually conduct a survey or a research whether these jobs are actually there and in which areas.  Are these supervisory, or supporting staff, or are they general labourers.  Where are they?  Because, there is a tendency of investors.  When they want to get a registration certificate they will declare to the Minister or to the Registrar that we have so much money in investment, we are going to employ so many people and when you take that report it may not necessarily be true.  I am proposing to the Minister to count check this information.

I want quickly to go to another theory issue.  That is retrenchment. When retrenchment came to this country, the Labour Movement accepted it.  We accepted it with out full knowledge that Uganda cannot operate in isolation and we had no guts to fight the wild economic forces.  Many countries accepted it and we had to accepted it.  What lacked is the involvement of civic society.  The involvement of the actual producers.  Now, we know - unfortunately this country, lack employment policies.  The only country in East Africa, which has no employment policy.  Kenya has, Tanzania has but we do not have. Now, in order to determine whom to dismiss and whom to retain we must be guided by a known policy.  

However, we are saying that we would have been involved in the exercise so that we understand it fully.  How it starts and where to go and that we can defend it and then we can also advise whom ever is involved because what we have seen Is that a person who would have gone -(Interjection)- what we have seen in practice, is so far as the implementation of SAAP is that a person who would have gone first is the person in charge of declaring others go first.  Now, it becomes a dilemma. 

Recently, two months ago, the government sent managers to New Zealand to study how to retrench people.  These managers went and came back and among these people who came back, with due respect, were Mr Sonko, General Manager of UTC and Mr Batuwa, General Manager of Peoples Transport.  They made it their daily prayer at every meal, retrenchment.  We warned them that it was not the solution to Uganda’s economy.  They refused and they pledged to offer a living wage.  At the end of the day, they found themselves retrenching themselves.  Unfortunately, these people created problems to the society.  

Last week, people who were retrenched in UTC have been living at that UTC Park until they were chased away by the Police.  When they were chased away by the Police, they went to the Minister who persuaded somebody responsible and gave - there were five people, who were going to Arua - (Interruption)

MR OBINA OKUMU:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, concerning UTC, it is not only UTC, even people from Peoples Transport Company; these people are suffering. I think there is no need of handling it as though people are not suffering. In fact, it is not only chasing them here, everywhere they have been chased. The people who are accommodating these people are chasing them in the houses. They cannot go in their home districts.  It is a great suffering, I do not know whether we are waiting until we get another news reporter that they are eating now lizards then the state will come.  It is terrible, Mr Chairman.

MR MUKASA: Mr Chairman, in winding up, these five people were going to Arua.  They were given Shs15, 000 each one to go to Arua and in fact that is when they had threatened to go on foot from Kampala to Arua. But the sad story is that these people are demanding Shs17 billion in UTC. The highest creditor in UTC is Shell, and so the Peoples Transport they have Shs443 million demanded from Peoples Transport and the highest creditor in the Peoples Transport is Shell with Shs 23 million.  We even suggested, with the support of this House, that if things are really bad let all the buses be given to the workers, sell them and get their money, Shs 1.7 billion.  Now, the highest creditor is Shell with Shs 23 million.  Now, why appoint a Receiver or whatever you call it who are also going to fidget about with the issue?  I appeal to this hon. House and to the Minister concerned that he should get -(Interruption)

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA:  Mr Chairman, thank you very much.  The problems that the hon. Member is talking about that have confronted the Peoples Transport and UTC are basically correct.  the companies have not been making money and as a result they had to be closed because they were continuing to get more and more indebted.  The government decided to make available Shs 80, 000 to each of the workers.  Most of the workers have already received this money to enable them to go home while the affairs of the companies are being properly and formally wound up by Coopers and Lybrand the companies that have been selected to wind up the affairs of these two companies.  

So, the Government is conscious and concerned about the plight of these workers but let me also point out that it is easy for the workers leaders to come and criticise the Government but I must point out that when a company goes down, the workers themselves have a role to play in the running down of that company.  Thank you.

MR MUKASA:  Mr Chairman, I am ending.  The Minister is right except he has forgotten to say that the hon. Prime Minister appointed and ordered the Auditor General to look into the affairs of UTC and they have made a report and the whole report is blaming the management, where they even sold buses, where they even given themselves allowances, unauthorised allowances and mishandled the affairs of UTC.  I wish the hon. Minister had stated that also.  Thank you and the hon. Prime Minister is here he can also bear me witness.

THE RT. PRIME MINISTER (Mr Cosmos Adyebo):  Mr Chairman, before we reached this sad position of liquidating the companies at issue the government tried to do all it could to bring back those companies to economic viability in that we even appointed hon. Members of this House as Member of the Board of those companies which have now failed.  While I do agree that I even went further to direct the Auditor General to come with technical findings I am also submitting here that the Members of the Board of those companies including some of my hon. colleagues here also let us down.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member you had finished.

DR BYARUHANGA (Kitagwenda County): Thank you, Mr Chairman. A question has often been raised here on whether our economy is growing or not.  We in Kitagwenda have no difficulties in answering that question.  We do not measure our progress by the usual GNP but we measure ours by the level of income in the homestead here. Because in the 60s Kitagwenda was very prosperous but then in the 70s and early 80s we appeared or all our economy went down very terribly.  In the middle of the 80s it was difficult even to find a bicycle in a whole parish.  The construction of mabaati houses and permanent houses are becoming very common in our villages and this has come about mainly through the people’s own efforts.  I know the government has assisted us in improving the marketing of the commodities that we produce but apart from that, we have not received any direct assistance from the government.  Whatever development we have in our areas we have mainly brought it about by ourselves. 

So, I am saying that the quality of life in Kitagwenda is improving because we have some money in our pockets, we produce coffee, we produce milk, we produce bananas, we produce cotton, maize, fish and so on but this income could be greatly improved upon if the government also gave us a hand.  

I have in mind about four areas where we need government’s assistance.  One; the area of agricultural extension.  Although we have a very good project in the books, this unified extension service; its impact has not been felt in Kitagwenda. We only have one Agricultural Officer for the whole county.  One Assistant Animal Husbandry Officer also for the entire county and just one Fisheries Assistant.  Those three men do not even have bicycles but they are supposed to do extension work throughout the county.  (Interjection)- well, they may have personal bicycles but they have not received bicycles from the government and definitely a bicycle is not enough, it is not a very efficient machinery and one should not be expected to cover a whole county if you are doing your business on a bicycle.

Another area where we need -(Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA: Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like the hon. Member on the Floor to clarify by giving some kind of clues as to how they managed to get the economy growing in their area and, perhaps, to tell us the number of bicycles, percentage-wise, because in Budadiri we also have some of those things but the general position of the economy of the people in Budadiri and Mbale is just pathetic, Mr Chairman.  Thank you.

DR BYARUHANGA:  Mr Chairman, the difference between Kitagwenda and Budadiri is that the Batagwenda are working and the Badadiri are not.  (Laughter and Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA: Point of order. Mr Chairman is it in order for the hon. Member on the Floor, the former DA of Mbale, and he knows Mbale very well, we grow premium coffee, Arabic.  Is it in order for him to impute that people in Budadiri are not working when he should know? 

THE CHAIRMAN: The hon. Member was just being comparative in his statement and he is in order. Go ahead, please.

DR BYARUHANGA:  The other area where we need quick government intervention is the area of the general health of the population. Some Members here have talked about malaria and even last year many of us talked about it but I can assure you that this malaria epidemic is probably the biggest health problem we have in this country at the moment. When you go to the villages you find that in very family you find two or three people in bed -(Interruption)

MR TURYASHEMERERWA:  Point of information. Thank you, Mr Chairman. The point the hon. Member is making is a pertinent one. Last week but one I was attacked by malaria, and I went to a clinic, and was diagnosed with a certain species called parasmodia parasparam I was given phasida as a treatment, after the treatment I went for a testing again they found that actually those parasites were still insisting they gave me another dosage of phasida.  After that treatment I went for blood testing they found out that I still had some parasmodia parasparam in my blood -(Laughter)- and I am trying to tell the Members the deadliness of malaria these days. I was then referred to a drug called methakelfin and I took that one, then I went back the malaria parasites were not thinly although still persisting they gave me another dosage it is now that I am trying to move.  

Now, imagine someone who is in the village, and who does not have those facilities as I have to be tested four times when the malaria parasites are still persisting.  I am, therefore, informing the House and perhaps the Minister who is responsible for health that malaria these days has become very resistant to most of the anti-malaria we are using malaraquine and chloroquine is no longer assisting most citizens.  So, a drug must be found.  

In the last budget of the Ministry of Local Government there was a vote for a certain programme and for certain machinery  -(Interruption)

MR NEKYON: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is the hon. Member in order to start contributing because of malaria instead of giving a way to the man who was contributing?

THE CHAIRMAN: Since the hon. Member was on malaria his contribution was in order.  Can you finish your information, please?

MR TURYASHEMERERWA:  Mr Chairman, I was saying that in Local Government there was a vote to bring an equipment to try to combat malaria.  If that equipment has come then my area Kibale County should be a priority as I have told the malaria is (Laughter) 

MR BUTIME: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the information I want to give is that I visited the County of Kibale and Kitagwenda, those two counties. The people there asked me to contact the Minister for Health on the persistence of malaria in that area.  When I came back I wrote to the Minister for Health and the Minister for Health dispatched a team in those areas to study and find out the cure of that particular problem, they did go, the Minister himself did go. I am sure, therefore, that steps in that Ministry are, therefore, being taken to find the best possible cure of malaria persistence in that area.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

DR OTENG:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, there is a drug from China called Astrate and recognised by WHO that it cures all forms of malaria.  The only constraint is that it costs a lot, within five days treatment but the cost is about Shs 8,000 per tablet.

DR BYARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, you can see how people are concerned about this malaria epidemic because we are losing very many men hours due to this disease  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Please, do not repeat yourself too much on malaria now hon. Member. Order, please.

DR BYARUHANGA:  Because of high cost of treatment our incomes are also eroded I wish to request the Ministry to come out with really a strong programme for fighting this problem which I know is not only local of Kitagwenda but it covers many parts of this country.

The third area where I would like Government to come in is the area of credit.  Because we would like to venture into new areas of Agricultural production, we have been advised by no less a person by His Excellency the President that we should go in for high price crops but you cannot into vanilla growing, go into flower growing, go into silk production unless you invest or you have some money to invest.  The hon. Minister for Agriculture talked of some credit facilities being offered to peasants by certain project.  

I wish to inform the House that there is no such a project in the district.  Now, that we have this money coming directly from the budget I wish our district of Kabarole was considered. The other area where I would require Government assistance is the area of education.  I have discussed this problem with the Minister for the Education but have so far not received much assistance from that Ministry. 

In our third world schools, we are not able to offer science education, now that means that we are not producing direct producers.  We have been told of programmes of facilitating these schools to put up laboratories and libraries and what have you, every year we see money in the budget for iron sheets and cement but we still at least all the schools in my county still await this allocation of these materials so that we can put up the laboratories and be able to at least expose our children to science subjects.  

Liberalisation of the economy is good and has already started bring bout some positive results. But, it would appear that when we are circling the economy in this House and even outside this House, we take it that the debate between whether private production is more efficient than public production is over.  

I wish to inform this House that in actual fact that even private production in Uganda is still very, very inefficient that is why we have a problem of hunger, all our agricultural production in this country is in private hands, but w have hunger we all heard hunger in half of the country. This indicates that our planners and our economists still have a lot to do, to come out with ideas and our economists still have a lot to do, to come out with ideas and projects that can make private production more efficient than it is now.  But if we think that by just handing over a public enterprise to the private sector we have finished the job I think we are making a very serious mistake.  

Some people have criticised the high expenditure on defence, and we have mainly had that expenditure on defence because the country had not been at peace.  Because, since 1986 we have continued to have internal strike in our country and most of this money we vote for the Army I am sure goes into fighting what we have commonly termed the rebellion in the North.  

But I wish also to submit that rebellion is in people’s minds, and therefore, to get lead of rebellion is in people’s mind, that is why I wish to call upon the leaders from these areas, the NRC Members from these areas really to do their best and convince the local population there to completely reject rebellion.  Because we are really very sure that since a guerilla cannot survive without people once there is no support in these areas then Government will soon be able to completely eradicate the rebels. (Interruption)

MR SIBO:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I am pleased to hear from the hon. Member holding the Floor that we should take an active part in combating this rebellion, in fact we have done so much even sacrificing blood and it is not enough and still very difficult to change these people’s mind.  So, we are begging if the Government and its structures can come to our rescue because the resources that we have are limited we cannot do more than we have done, so we need assistance.

MR SERWANGA LWANGA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman, the point I want to give that from my assessment on the thuggery which is going on in the North.  I can assure this House that the peasants of Gulu and Kitgum are not supporting this thuggery.  In fact these peasants have assisted the NRA to fight this thuggery, which is going on against the peasants.  

Last Friday, one hundred and eighteen rebels entered Uganda from Kakile Sudan, they were carrying weapons, ammunition, and bombs.  They entered Uganda through the district of Kitgum in the areas of Modyope and they started killing people our forces came into rescue.  Since Friday our forces are involved and are engaged in battles with these rebels.  The population is also assisting.  It would be wrong actually to accuse the peasants of Kitgum and Gulu that they are support rebellion -(Applause)- I thank you, Mr Chairman.

BRIG. MOSES ALI:  Point of information.  Now this is a technical information for my colleagues on the guerilla welfare that is if the population is to support the Government or the authority that is fighting the guerilla that concerned authority must be able to protect the civilians wherever they are so that they will say they have been here, they have gone here, they have gone there.  But if the population are at the mass of the guerilla is going to be very, very difficult out of fear for the population to do otherwise, because when the guerilla comes they are the authority now.  When the soldier comes they are the authority so these people are on the road junction.  

So, when we continue to blame the leaders actually we are accusing fingers at a wrong people. Because right now the leaders are here and we do not know what is happening in these areas, the whole thing I think it will solve this problem is that there must be a joint effort all of us together after ll the cost of the war is on all of us not on the areas alone.  We are complaining the defence expenditure is going high, who is paying it we are all paying.  So, it must be collective responsibility and the NRM must work hard and flash out these people so that we come to an end.  

I am not accusing my colleagues but I am sure there is expensive ignorance on this issue of guerilla warfare.  There is a collective responsibility and it is not a question of leaders of Gulu; leaders of where tomorrow if it is in Kabale what do you do? You will fight them and we are going to pay the tax. So, this technical information I said, I think to help my colleagues from now on wards let us consider this problem a national problem not a local problem of this and that. Thank you.

DR BYARUHANGA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman; I wish to thank the Members for the information -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: And your time is up hon. Member.

DR BYARUHANGA:  I was not trying to blame anybody but I know the people who are at the scene can do better than me, not that I have not also been trying as some Members from that areas, no, that I have - since I worked there as a D.A. I have tried to maintain contacts and tried to offer advise here and there on how to solve this problem which is really a - on this country.  However, I wish also to say that I have heard complaints from many leaders from those areas that Government kept them out in it’s plans or in it’s attempt to solve the problems in that area.  So, I would also wish to take this opportunity to request the Government to involve all these leaders local and national in solving the problem in those two districts.

Finally, I wish to comment on the allocation of non-Government organisations.  I know that these are voluntary organisations and are free to go anywhere they wish, but I wish that Government at least, all the office that handled them talked to them and convinced them that Uganda does not begin and stop in a radius of 20 miles around Kampala.  Because I know very many NGOs here and they have brought in a lot financial resources, if only they could be urged also to come deep into the rural areas to - and also contribute to our development then probably we may get some economic advertisements through that effort but as we talk now most NGOs had concentrated in Kampala all around the main regional towns of this country.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR SIBO:  Mr Chairman, we have definitely deprived the lack of food policy in this House.  Greatly, Mr Chairman, the Ministers of Agriculture and Industry; and the Minister of Labour and Social Services; gave statements to this House, and those statements in my opinion left a lot to be desired.  We have been told over and over again by the Minister of Agriculture that, she is not responsible for production of food.  So that she is responsible only for production of food; but that she is not responsible for distribution of food, and that she is not able to restrain exports in order to satisfy our food requirements.  The Minister of Trade and Industry on the other hand, says he has liberalised the trade to allow anybody to sell what he has; to whomsoever he wants, at whatever price, the market demands.  In those circumstances, we need ministers. (Interruption)

MR OBWANGOR: Point of information. I would like Mr Chairman, to inform my hon. colleague, who has been in government, at the time when I was a Minister for Regional Administration and so on.  I mean to say that he knows, that in the distribution of goods in the country; there is an inner Statute book - a law known as distribution of goods Act 104; which the government has failed to utilise.  Because it employs in this distribute organisation, there are many people and they do not want to inform and utilise the law, Chapter 104, for the benefit of the nation.

MR DRANI DRADRIGA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the Member holding the Floor that there is a linkage between productions and marking or distribution.  But it becomes extremely difficult to make a hard - the first rule to separate the two.  So, I do not understand the rationale behind two Ministers shying from a collective responsibility.

MR SIBO: I thank the hon. Members for their information, Mr Chairman, I would like to continue, and stress the importance that these ministers are entirely responsible for food production, storage and distribution.  And it is for that reason that we demand - I repeat, we demand a good print policy, on food production.  This policy should spell out the food quantities that are require for production, for purposes of consumption, food that will be required to be stored for purposes of use during the rainy day, and rain that would form the minimum, then subsequently beyond that, that food can be distributed for sell.  (Interruption)

MRS SEKITOLEKO: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I am glad he is demanding this policy.  So, I am very hopeful that, when my policy statement comes, he will read it in detail, because it is there.  But having said that, I want to inform you as legislators, about to the looming problem we have as Uganda.  All information available indicates that for the next two years, there will be famine in this region, from here down to South Africa.  So, unless we do something, this famine is not going to go away; however, much we produce, even if we produce enough to feed Uganda.  The whole region is hungry.

MR SSENDAULA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that, the responsibility of our Ministry is to trade in the commodities that are made available to us.  Now, as far as we are concerned, the farmers when they produce food - when farmers produce coffee, cotton, maize and so on, our responsibility is to find a market.  I think it is a responsibility of this legislature to demand from the Ministry of Finance, to budget for funds to be made available to our ministry, which funds we can pass on to Produce Marketing board to purchase and store in silos to provide for rainy days.  But we cannot afford to stop farmers from selling when they are produced.  Because they cannot produce any more, unless they sell what they produce.  

So, we need to have that coordination and that coordination has to be demanded by the legislature from the Ministry of Finance, as a matter of policy.  That when there is no money made available to us, to buy and store, we cannot let Produce Marketing Board to go to banks and borrow, buy and store, when they have to repay the interest to the banks.  Thank you very much.

MR KAJUBI:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, as the Deputy Minister for Trade and Commerce has informed us that, it is not their duty to preserve food in the silos, I think it is high time, government considered putting silos in the hands of the farmers.  Thank you very much.

MR SIBO:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I thank very much, Members who have given me the information; I realise that I have stepped on sore toes somewhere; but I think the point should be taken very seriously.

Secondly, I would like to thank the Minister for Agriculture for Statement of policy that is coming.  On this matter, I would like to take the opportunity, that Ministerial Statements of Policy should be in our hands by now, and we should have read them, and started discussing them. We are now finishing the Debate or a General Debate, without ministerial policies, and it is I think a shame. 

What I was referring to really is that, it is of no use for Ministers to come here and accuse one another in uncoordinated movements. Because we hold them all collectively responsible.  I would like to call your attention to the public external debt, which is found on page 10, of this expenditure - estimates of expenditure. This is in respect of expenditure that is incurred from the consolidated fund.  In here the public debt we notice, that has been reduced from 230 billion, to 110 billion this year.  

Now, this is a welcome proposition. However, one would like to know whether this is because we have reduced our debt of 2.6 billion dollars to something reasonable, that we can now pay less than we were paying last year, or whether the Minister has been able to reschedule in such a way that the time to be taken paying the debt would be much longer - twice as long to enable us perhaps to curry the burden.

In this respect, I would like to request the Minister to look at some of the debts or some of the projects on which we have debts, which are piling up interests, but are not performing presumably because of certain conditionalities or presumably because, we ourselves are not able to consume the debts.  We would like to see the minister perhaps take a step towards rescheduling these debts, and particularly referring to something like the Kuwait loan, for instance.  There are numbers of such other loans, these should be rescheduled or perhaps cancelled for the time being, until we are ready for them.

Now, with respect to the domestic debts, I am told that, they have been paid by 30th June this year.  I would like to commend the Minister for Finance on this matter. However, I am told has paid by promissory notes.  Now, these promissory notes will take time to mature, and therefore, the man who wants to be paid now is not able to collect that money.  It is true that he can discount the promissory note; unfortunately that promissory discount has got the recurrence with it, a rate of interest of 14 per cent. (Interruption)

MR OKODI:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that government has not effected payments of its debts.  Government owes the Nile Hotel nearly one billion shillings and no attempt has been made to pay it.  

MR SIBO: Well, maybe, that might be an exception to what I heard.  Nevertheless, I was commenting on the fact that, the promissory notes carry 14 per cent - discount rate.  I understand that you may not even be able to discount these promissory notes in any Commercial Bank; they are not willing to discount them.  Mr Chairman, I would request that, I am surprised that; the assistant Clerk should be ringing, because I am talking on his behalf, he should appreciate that, he will benefit from my talk. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Please, go ahead, your time is running up.

MR SIBO: Mr Chairman, these promissory notes as I say, take 14 per cent discount.  And if one is going to pay 14 shillings in every hundred, he has been expecting for a period of time, then I am afraid, this is very unfair.  Now, talking of interest rates, Mr Chairman, the minister has told us that, inflation has dropped to an average of 8 per cent throughout the year. One would have hoped that this drop, would have carried a corresponding drop in the interest rate.  Unfortunately as I speak now, the bank rate is 14 per cent.  But you would be very lucky to get that rate, any loan at that rate.  They go indeed as something like 25 per cent. (Interruption)

MR KANYOMOZI: Point of information. Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. member holding the Floor that, that this concern has been expressed over and over again.  We hear that the major problem is partly inefficiency in the banking system, that is one.  Two; that because of the burden UCB has at the moment, the interest rates came down.  Three; that there is also another problem, and that is the problem of security and, therefore, people are hedging by covering themselves with the new loans, in order to break easily.  

MR SIBO:  Thank you.  Now, Mr Chairman, that was in respect of loan rate.  But I would like to refer also to deposit rates.  Why they pay 25 per cent for the loan, you in fact get 6 per cent for the tiny deposit you put in the bank for a year.  You will get only 5 per cent in six months, and much less two per cent if it is a savings rate.  Now, does it make sense really for me to deposit my money and get 2 per cent, and when I go to borrow from the bank, I pay 25 per cent.  I would request the Minister to really look at this and make - be more reasonable to bring out a rational rate. (Interruption)

MRS MUGARURA: Point of information. Thank you, Mr Chairman. To add on to what hon. Kanyomozi has given; most of the loans which were acquired in the past were at a higher interest rates; say 48 up to 30. So it is very difficult - and they have not been performing properly.  So, it is very difficult if interest rates goes down with the affection rate, then the banks would have difficulty to recovering the very money they gave out to customers.  Thank you.

MR SIBO: I was referring to new loans, Mr Chairman.  Nevertheless, allow me now, to address myself to a point that is very important.  In fact I am reporting form the Sectoral Committee.  I want to call your attention to the Wage Bill in the Public Service.  In May this year, the Sectoral Committee on Public Service had a meeting with the Ministries of Finance and Public Service.  At this meeting, we agreed that, the normal annual increase of 40 per cent would be put up in the estimates, to increase the Wage Bill from 89 billion to 120 billion. There are also savings from the retrenchment, which were calculated to 30 billion.  And we also agree that this 30 billion should be applied towards the wage bill to make a total of 150 billion.  

In addition to this, there is also the monetisation of fringe benefits.  The monetisation was calculated to be about 60 billion; but that, the government would not be able to pay all the 60 billion, and that he would pay 50 per cent of that, making a total of 30 per cent; adding all total to 180 billion.  Now, the Minister has announced only 125 billion, although he has confirmed that this increase was in respect of 40 per cent; which is the annual increment, which we had agreed on three years back.  

Now, can the Minister tell us why he has diverted the retrenchment sayings to other purposes? And why he has denied the civil servants the housing allowance? In spite of the fact that he has divested himself of housing of the civil servants?

This House also approved an increase in the percentage proportion of the wage bill as against the recurrent expenditure. The Public Service Review and Reorganisation Commission, had recommended that we should get back to the old proportion percentage of 45 per cent, as it would then in 1960s and early 70s.  This was accepted by government.  Now, unfortunately, we are still at 28 per cent in 8 years, so that a commendable job.  Nevertheless, we are making a lot of noise here to improve the Civil Servants remuneration. Unfortunately, I get the impression that, some of those civil servants whom we are fighting for, are not getting the pinch. The pinch that many others are getting. I am particularly referring to officers in the Ministries of Public Service and Finance.  We contracted a loan of 40 million dollars to restructure our Civil Service.  We should have appointed a commission to carry out the job with specific terms of reference and given it a time schedule within which to complete the job.  Unfortunately, a committee without a time schedule was appointed, and this committee is being serviced by the normal establishment in the Ministry of Public Service. And for that, of course, the senior officers in the Public Service are getting additional pay in addition to their salary.  

You will have seen in the African Confidential of 20th June, a list of officers who are receiving this kind of remuneration -(Interjection)- no, Uganda Confidential, I beg your pardon. There are two experts from outside the Service, some expatriate who is receiving 11 million shillings per month without taxation.  Then a professor next to him, a professor from Makerere is getting 2.5 million shillings.  Now, in addition to these two, there are 20 other senior civil servants in that Ministry who are getting remuneration of Shs 500,000 to 2.5 million per month.  I do not grudge them this amount, but I think, you will agree with me that if a man is receiving that amount, he may not be terribly keen or if he is keen, he will not go out of his way to fight for the others and that is what I fear. 

I do not have figures for those in the Ministry for Finance and Economic Planning but I am told they are receiving even more because they are being paid from several projects.  So, I think really, I would urge the Minister to seriously consider this problem of the civil service remuneration.  It is a long problem but I do not accept certainly that the government cannot meet the bill.  It is a question of decision. You decide that you are going to pay 45 per cent of the current expenditure and I think that may mean of course trimming here and there but must be done if you want a good civil service.  I would like to call your attention to a subject that really sticks up very much in our necks; that is corruption.  

Early this year, we heard a report by the Public Accounts Committee that we lost 797 million shillings in one year in the Ministry of Education and Sports.  You also heard a report that we lost 61 million shillings in the Constitution Commission. I now hear that we are losing 600 million shillings again in the Ministry of Agriculture.  I also understand that there may be ghost projects.  That is really becoming too much.  In other words, it is becoming too much. The Public Accounts Committee has really done a lot of work.  It has recovered a lot of embezzled money but when it becomes millions, it becomes very difficult.  Indeed, those who are involved in some cases cannot be touched because with those hundreds of millions, they can buy their way anywhere.  We have heard of that Mr Chairman. (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Minister of State for Agriculture to keep quiet when an hon. Member is raising a serious question relating to the Ministry? Is it in order for -(Interjections)- wait, please, it in order for the Minister not to make a comment on the allegation the Member is making?

THE CHAIRMAN: The hon. Minister is sitting contemplatively.  I am sure he is thinking about that. (Laughter)

MR SIBO:  Thanks very much Mr Chairman.  I was saying that while the Public Accounts Committee can recover some funds, it becomes very difficult when hundreds of millions are involved.  Indeed, I can tell you an instance if you allow me.  Only last week, I happened to be in Muyenga and I was shown two twin houses, beautiful houses, first class finishing and I am told they belong to an ordinary revenue officer formerly a customs officer.  You know his salary; the Ministry of Finance knows his salary.  I do not know whether really that salary would justify that kind of construction of those houses!  

Now, we may not be able to prove but physical evidence is there.  I am aware that there are institutions put in place but some of these institutions are handicapped and I would request, particularly referring to the Inspector General of Government, the Public Accounts Committee and of course, the CID and so on, that they should revisit the rules that govern these institutions so that we can organize them to enable them to run their duties. (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of order.  Is it in order for the hon. Member to go on and on complaining about this subject of corruption without giving a chance or inviting the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to tell us what might have happened to his list of the corrupt ones? Is he in order Mr Chairman?  (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: The hon. Member was at liberty, which he did not exercise.  So he is in order.

MR ADYEBO:  Point of information. There are several issues which my Colleague hon. Sibo raised here in this House, this afternoon.  One, that whereas we have been talking about mismanagement, corruption, and soon, over the years, and whereas the Public Accounts Committee has consistently been compiling reports which reports have been tabled before this House but without much attention, and further, that whereas those reports we have been told that millions and millions of shillings had been embezzled within different government departments.  This matter and other matters have brought concern and following the assurances of His Excellency the President from time to time during his utterances or statements for that matter, I think it will only be fair to recommend that before this session is adjourned, at least those reports by PAC be discussed here.  

And when we are waiting for those to be tabled, I will also propose that since we have reopened question times, hon. colleagues should not shy from putting up questions if they so deem that some government officials in this House are to answer those queries under their portfolios.  I will recommend that you put questions to all of us so that we answer while we are waiting for the debates arising from matters raised in the different volumes of the Public Accounts Reports; because I cannot convince the population that we are doing well when we are not discussing these reports.  I have been trying very much to give these reports prominence and give priority for them to be discussed way back last year.  But as it came to be, there were certain events that overtook these reports.  But now that we have cleared them, I would say we give priority and I will consult the Chairman of this House so that these reports are discussed before this session.  This I can promise.  Thank you.  

Different personalities have been quoting me as having 100 names of corrupt people.  I think this arose from a statement, which I made during one of the closed sessions sometimes last year.  At that time, I was trying to explain how concerned I about the delay which was being experienced in our courts to the extent that there were so many cases which had not been attended to.  Hundreds of cases, which had not been attended to by our courts including serious cases, like embezzlement and so on and so forth.  So since that time, they have pinned me down as having the list of 100 corrupt officials of government.  In any case, I do not have that list of 100 corrupt officials.  I did one time bring you here a list of not less than 100 and they were not more.  (Laughter) 

I have submitted a list here of some of those people who have been embezzling money. You may imagine that a Minister like me has a higher propensity to steal but let me tell you, there are some small men and women in this country in small departments, who are stealing colossal sums of money.  That is why I brought to you here the list of 180 of the officers whom we discovered mismanaging finances and embezzling finances.  Hon. Sibo has just been explaining to you how surprised he was shown a house with hanging roofs being constructed by a small person but who is powerful in that the persons is the one collecting revenue.  

So, whereas we are being concerned, I am also telling you that we have been very much concerned. But the problem is, how far we can confirm the truth of the information.  Immediately we have it, we just do not keep quiet.  I had it, I brought it here and I brought the list to the Chairman who is here seated.  If you so desire for further list, and if they include some of you here, do not be surprised.  I will bring them.  (Laughter)

MR SIBO:  Mr Chairman, I thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for his kind of information.  But really what I am trying to express here is to urge on government we have spoken a lot in this House, we have written a lot about corruption in this House, but government has not really come forward.  I now urge government, please, please, do something.  

Finally, allow me to call your attention to the anger of the people of Kisoro.  They are very angry.  The greatest problem in Kisoro is lack of water. Each successive government has addressed itself to this problem but to do avail.  Pumps were installed but no water comes out of it.  Recently during the Rwanda civil war, refugees came in. The water appeared for them and water was flowing to maintain pipes. But the locals were not able to have access to it.  The refuges went home, the water disappeared.  Two or three weeks ago, the refugees came back, and the water has re-appeared.  Again the citizens have no access to this water.  Is it in order that foreigners should be lavishly treated in preference and at the expense, annoyance and misery of the citizens? (Interruption)

HON. MEMBERS:  Shame! Shame!

MR SIBO:  I am not against providing the necessary facilities for refugees Mr Chairman, but I would like to see the citizens being similarly treated.  I beg to support.

DR HIGIRO SEMAJEGE (Lwemiyaga County, Masaka): Thank you Mr Chairman.  First I will make very few comments since the time is gone but then the few comments should be taken seriously.  I would like first to thank the Ministry of Agriculture and Diary Corporation for having installed a cooler in Tusi and now the farmers are earning a little money.  I am very grateful and the people of Lwemiyaga sent me to thank the Ministry and the Corporation.  I am also I must express our gratitude to the Ministry of Education and Sports for the first time that a project has included Lwemiyaga, to assist building a training school and also to assist in some way in building some primary schools.  This has never happened and I am very grateful to the Minister for Education for having done that.  For the first time, and I am saying that although the project has not started, but at least we are in the project.  

Indeed, we are also very grateful that the Ministry of Health is considering building a health centre, small indeed but it will be built in Tusi and this again will be the first of its kind in that whole area.  I am glad the Minister is here.  But he has taken so long.  He promised it is now two years since he promised this will be built but our people, and live like we re in the wilderness. There is no facility whatsoever and I am glad that at least those promises, which are no paper now, and I understand soon the project will be implemented.  We have to show gratitude where it deserves.  But I am sorry that the Minister for Works, but the Minister for Local Government is here but the President always tells us and the country that since the government has opened up major trunk roads, that we should be able to utilise them for our economic growth.  But how?  Once there are no feeder roads, our project simply stays there and in fact it is negative response when you urge people to grow maize and this maize cannot be marketed because there is no way a vehicle can reach my people.  We do not have any open feeder roads at ll in Lwemiyaga and it is a very big area. Something needs to be done and I would urge the government to remember and know that Lwemiyaga is part of Uganda. In projects, you do not simply answer in that kind of way, and I think, I have told you how our gratitude  -(Interruption)

MR CHEBROT: Point of information.  Thank you Mr Chairman, Masaka is one of the very, very lucky districts to get a complete road unit, which was given to the Uganda Government by UNDP. Now, all it needs to do is together with its Works Committee of the district, to sit down and prioritise its roads.  The Ministry of Local Government does not have any central equipment, which it controls from the centre; all the equipment is at the district and Masaka is one of the lucky districts, which has got a road unit. So, this question should be put to the local authorities in Masaka itself why they have not done the roads in Lwemiyaga and hon. Member knows very well that they have that unit. Thank you very much.

DR HIGIRO SEMAJEGE:  When he says I know very well, I am not sure about that; because if I knew very well it would mean that at least something has been done in my area.  Another point, which I need to propose on development, we are talking about economic growth; that is true, statistically, there has been tremendous growth in Uganda, but development is still slow, we are not yet up as far as production is concerned.  The growth, which we have today, is externally generated; we need to improve our productivity in order for development to start and to do that there must be consensus as deliberate effort to reduce the imbalances.  One big imbalance between the cities and the rural areas. You will see here, I am talking about roads; in rural, areas there are no roads, but each time I see tarmac being resurfaced second, third time, when we do not even have a road to reach a place ordinary, then I do not feel well and yet these loans we are all going to pay for them.  

In fact, it is rural people who pay more and not these people in town around.  We are the ones who collectively pay more, but we are getting less and less. Many Members have shown it here, the Background to the Budget is showing it, and I think there should be a deliberate effort on the part of those who plan our economy to see that there is now a bigger share going outside.  Now how do we do that?  Mr Chairman, the way to do this -(Interruption)

MR DRANI DRADRIGA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the Member holding the Floor that growth per se is not useful at all, growth must be accompanied by - and it is measured by the extent to which a given nation has been able to effect significant changes in their life span. Therefore, there must be sustainable changes in the life of the people.  Secondly, development requires popular participation of the people and they must be internally mobilised, investment funds and other assets in order to be extremely meaningful and of course, the development must be taken to where it belongs, that is the rural areas.  Thank you, very much.

DR HIGIRO SEMAJEGE:  Mr Chairman, I was making suggestion as to how we could broadly start.  One, in our estimates, we should make deliberate on our Budget and other fiscal policies, give a percentage higher for rural areas, but when you look at the estimates today, it is the centres here which have more; there should be deliberate effort to give more to the rural areas, we are not doing that. I am saying that we must give to the rural areas a little more than we are giving to the centres; which is not the case.  

Secondly, Uganda has got entrepreneurs, that is local people who can renovate, but entrepreneurs anywhere in the world will never come up - will not be effective, because they are not capitalists an entrepreneur needs a capitalist; a capitalist means that one who has got the capital, the money to lend him so that his ideas can act.  Now, we are not assisting Ugandan entrepreneurs at all, we are not; and if we are not, economic growth and development which are going to talk about will be superficial, even we invite investors from outside, a few will come but the day they realise that they are just like a tree in a swamp, they will slowly go off from the scene.  

What we need now is to establish a fund or tell these banks to actually have a special lending to the Ugandan entrepreneurs for special - I mean you allow them to get some capital and control it, but with very reasonable rates and also on good terms.  Let me tell you, we shall not be the only ones if America as it is today, is doing that, how about we?  Germany is doing that, how about we? In America, the Americans who come to invest in Uganda will be given loans at literally no interest rates; just American wants to help the Americans to grow and do the business, how about we? If we do not generate - develop entrepreneurs locally, our development will be superficial; it will not take root, so we need to take it now; we need to find a way of lending money to our entrepreneurs at easy terms, we better do it.

Secondly, Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

BRIG. MOSES ALI:  Point of information. I want to inform the hon. speaker for on his subject that actually, contrary to what happens in America on in Germany or elsewhere, when we get grants here, normally of course, it goes through Bank of Uganda, then to Development Banks or Commercial Banks.  The Central Bank puts on interest to Commercial Banks who in turn, put their interest.  Now, you as a farmer or whoever you are, when you go to borrow this money now, you are going to get it at 40 per cent, then this country will not grow; because this is a grant money, what greed is this?  Why are people greedy, whom are they killing? They are killing the goose that lays the golden eggs.  The money is free from taxpayers over there. Now, you come and put interest; this country will not grow, and this is very important information.

DR HIGIRO SEMAJEGE:  Now, I want to mention another point, Mr Chairman.  The tract of entrepreneurs need to be looked into and I am glad the Prime Minister is here, this is something it should as a country; we simply have to do it, otherwise, it will not work.

I glad there is this initiative of Entandikwa; I am very pleased that Government thought about it and I hope it is going to work, but the best criteria should not have been on districts, it should not be districts. This is a stereo type thinking that districts - because they are different in economic development that the whole lot of areas is the same; we should use counties, because you will find that a county like Lwemiyaga, if you lift it and you put it beyond Kotido and it fits, you will go beyond anywhere and it will fit, because what are the criteria? These are areas, which do not have schools, absence of roads, absence of clinics, absence of all the facilities and absence of general government activities that raise the standard of living.  

Now, if you say because Lwemiyaga is in Masaka, just because it was once known to be highly developed, and you will in town, then you are not doing a good job and there are also many other counties which are similar to those which are very under developed all over Uganda, why do we not use the county as the unit of looking for least developed; because, once we do that then we shall even eliminate this old style of saying North, East versus Central and West, we shall now that we are literally on the same level and if this 6 billion, have been made 9 billion, but we are looking at those counties which genuinely are in the same developmental problems, nobody in question and I think the Government can easily reconsider and pick a number of counties which are in the same categories I am not opposing the selection in the other ones, but I am saying, that there are many counties - rather parts which are worse off and which therefore, should be considered for this programme - for the programme to be effective.

MR ADYEBO: Point of information. Mr Chairman, you see because of poverty, you know managing poverty is very difficult; this is why we have difficulties in managing the affairs of a poor nation like this.  However, this Entandikwa which my Brother hon. Dr Semajege is talking about is really drawing a lot of attention and rightly so.  We are still making consultations; even today I made consultations with the Minister for Finance himself. In fact, we would wish that this little money covers as much of Uganda as possible.  I would like to draw your attention that this money is not going to be free money; it is going to be a revolving fund.  In fact, I want to repeat, the Entandikwa is not going to be money for dishing out; it is going to be money to be lent to homesteads and it will be a revolving fund. 

Now, there are definitely many districts that qualify and Friends, let me tell you, there is a misconception a lot of it, in as far s the information concerning our areas in the country is concerned.  I was here yesterday and I wanted to explain myself but I was interrupted, last time when I went to Ntungamo, I could not believe, the level of poverty there is very high, I am telling you, I wanted to explain this but I was interrupted from time to time.  

Now, this little fund called entandikwa we are talking about is intended to be lent to homesteads for two purposes. One, to enable the homesteads to start getting incomes in their homes, because we believe that to talk of sustaining the incomes of the homesteads.  That is why we are saying in the implementation of the entandikwa in the Budget, we are going to select homesteads whom we are going to lend this money, they go into production; while they generate incomes for their homes, they will also be participating in the economic production of wealth; and as a result, we would like even to solicit for more finances rather than the 6 billion, but our intention is to cover as many homesteads in the country as possible, starting with the most depressed areas; like Ntungamo definitely. (Interruption)

MR RWAKAKOOKO:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I am very glad that the Prime Minister has recognised the problems in the countryside. The Committee on economy had earlier on identified these problems very clearly and in the same report in which we demanded that the districts be included in the national Budget, is the same report in which we said that the development funding be made available for each country.  (Applause) We had seen and many of us have experience, that many times leaders scramble for little resources at the expense of those areas which are not represented and we wanted to balance development by making sure that each constituency is treated the same irrespective of the level of leadership in the country.  Like on many other things, the Government is defaulting on that implementation of that recommendation.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MRS MPANGA:  Point of order. Is it in order to continue the Debate when we have now quorum?

ADJOURNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN:  We now adjourn to tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.

(The Council rose at 5.15 p.m. and adjourned till Thursday, 28 July 1994 at 2.30 p.m.)










