


Wednesday, 22 July 2020


Parliament met at 02.50 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I have just a small matter of communication to remind the joint committees of gender, labour and social development and that of finance that we really need the National Social Security Fund (NSSF) (Amendment) Bill. 

Given the time it has taken – and I have issued many ultimatums - the matter will come back to Order Paper next week. We might be obliged to proceed with it without the report if you are not ready. So, please conclude whatever you are doing and bring the NSSF law here. Just two matters of national concern. Let us start with hon. Migadde.

2.53
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding a landslide that occurred in Buvuma Islands recently. One of the hills gave way a week ago and the whole village was displaced. To be specific, 150 people are homeless yet the neighbouring land belongs to National Forestry Authority (NFA), which is a Government entity.

The prayers of these people are: Government should provide humanitarian assistance and two; there should be a relocation of these people to the neighbouring land, which is under NFA.

Thirdly, the ministry responsible should visit this specific area and do an assessment. This will help the displaced people to know which safe areas they can resettle in because they still have gardens there; the hills are still giving way.
	
Madam Speaker, among the humanitarian assistance that we are requesting for is food because the debris from this hill covered a number of gardens. If those are attended to, the Government would have answered the prayers of our people. The hill is in Bukiyindi village in Nairambi Sub-county, Buvuma District. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a serious issue. You may recall that our colleagues in Bundibugyo started by reporting landslides and eventually things really turned bad. I would like to ask the Minister for Water and Environment to examine the situation in Buvuma Islands with a view to assist the people understand what is happening, and be able to predict what to do but also the same minister should examine the possibility of relocating those citizens to a more convenient and safe place. They may consider NFA land but that is also their business; we need an update in about a fortnight time. Thank you. 

2.56
MR HASSAN KAPS FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Obongi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to raise a matter of urgent national importance regarding floods that have affected a number of things including the Obongi Ferry.

Two weeks ago, I reported to the House the threats we were facing from River Nile rising water levels due to increasing water levels for Lake Victoria and Lake Kyoga; these two lakes contribute to the water levels for River Nile. Because of this, the landing sites have been submerged and the ferry has been stopped. This has affected transport network. Bridges and culverts have been washed away by the floods and the Obongi-Arua Road has also been affected. 

Madam Speaker, we need urgent help from the Ministry of Works and Transport. The ministry should send technical people on the ground to work with the people of Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) who are there because they are looking on helplessly; we really need help from the ministry.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, there are villages from which people have been displaced. Houses have collapsed in the villages of Namusambya, Obongi Town East, Go-down and Alibabito, all along the line. The floods in the area have destroyed houses, latrines and food crops.

Therefore, we expect problems of food shortages, which may necessitate relief from the relief department of Government. We also have problems of health nature since the sanitary systems have been destroyed. We, therefore, request all these ministries to come and give relief and long-term assistance. Thank you, Madam Speaker. We need your help.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, as you know, the Obongi Ferry is an international route for many members of the public. Therefore, the Minister of Works and Transport should send a team there to examine the situation and see how it can be remedied. Accordingly, the Minister for Disaster Preparedness and Refugees should support the community that has been displaced with relief items and give us an update in a fortnight. 

2.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Ms Joy Kabatsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are going to send engineers; we will report back in two weeks with a report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Yes, hon. Masika.

2.59	
MR APOLLO MASIKA (NRM, Bubulo County East, Namisindwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to raise an issue of national importance concerning what the President talked about yesterday about the fish maws. I remember raising that same issue last year. You can wonder why the President has ordered troops to contain the fishing methods in our lakes.

I knew it long time ago because I was sent to study and benchmark abroad. I discovered that we have more gold in our lakes than anything else.

I recall I did mention on the Floor of Parliament that the fish maws that come from our fish are more expensive than gold because one tilapia can be floating with more than two kilogrammes of gold in its stomach in form of a maw.

I did research with the Chinese and went to Lake Victoria, Lake Kyoga - before I became a Member of Parliament. I was taken to South Korea, Hong-Kong and Taipei as an interpreter. So, they had to go through me for every secret they had to discuss.

We took those fish maws to South Korea and one kilogramme was at a tune of $45,000 to $50,000. You can calculate the amount of money in Uganda Shillings. 

I brought this issue on the Floor of Parliament and the Speaker asked the minister concerned about this. The minister came on the Floor and told Ugandans that one kilogramme was at US$ 480. This was wrong. Yesterday, I heard the President saying that one kilogramme is 30 million. This is wrong; the President has been misinformed. 

We better hoard our fish maws with our business people until we look for the right price because he mentioned that our fish maws, when collected, can be more than the oil, which the Arabs get from the ground. I told Parliament that our fish maws, when collected and harnessed very well, will be here forever. Petroleum will get finished but our fish maws will not.  

THE SPEAKER: What are your prayers?

MR MASIKA: I pray that the Government of Uganda hoards the fish maws until we look for the right price so that the people who are living near the lakes can use money from their sale to buy boats and build hospitals. We have money, we are like – There is a proverb, which says that a hen says that darkness is bad because it slept together with a cockroach but when light came, the cockroach left. I am crying about the fish maws because we have lost billions of US dollars. We would not be borrowing ambulances from outside; we would be buying ours. Thank you very much- (Interruption) 

MR MIGADDE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the concerns of my brother. However, fish from Lake Victoria or wherever belongs to the person who undertakes that activity. By my brother recommending that Government should hoard our fish maw, he gives an impression that the fish maw does not belong to the owners of the fish. (Interjection) – No, please! I know what I am talking about. 

Fish maw is not a natural resource where we hope that the Government should be the one responsible and hold it on behalf of the owners of the fish. Is the honourable member in order to insinuate that the fish maw in our fish belongs to the Government? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the position of hon. Masika is that fish maws are a valuable product in our country but which we have, up to now, not understood. He wants the Government to take more interest in it, give it value and ensure that those who fish the maws get a good price for it. That is what he wants. (Applause) Another fish man? Okay, hon. Ouma.


3.04
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Madam Speaker, you have really observed it correctly. There are many petitions that have come to you concerning the fish maws. Every now and then, our fishermen are being arrested. Those who arrest them remove the fish maws and we do not know where they take them. 

Therefore, it is right that as Government, especially Parliament, we find out what it is that is causing our fishermen’s fish maws to be taken from them so that we make a study and see how best they can get out of this. I support that we must help the fishermen so that they can sell to whoever they want but they should be told the price rather than arresting and telling them that fish maws are illegal.

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, thank you. Mine is a point of procedure. You may recall that I raised here a matter of national importance regarding the printing of ballot papers for the next general elections. I informed Parliament that one of the candidates at the presidential level had taken away that responsibility from the Electoral Commission and contracted a German company called Veridos to print the ballot papers.

Madam Speaker, I informed Parliament that while the Independent Electoral Commission had completed the bidding process and submitted papers to the Attorney-General for advice, that process was being stopped in favour of Veridos, a German company. You directed the Attorney-General and Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to come and explain. 

Today, we read stories in the newspapers that senior officials of the Electoral Commission have been interdicted by one of the candidates – actually, the sole candidate – because they cancelled this deal that a German company called Veridos should be the one to print the ballot papers.

Madam Speaker, I am a senior leader in a political party and we are subjecting ourselves to an electoral process whose first phase of nomination starts next week. I need to be guided, as a matter of procedure, whether this matter does not need to be answered and why the Attorney-General and the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs continue evading this question of a bidding process to select a competent company to print ballot papers and it is being stopped by one of the candidates who now wants a German company he has handpicked to print these ballot papers.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if the matter is outstanding, I will ask the Clerk to put it on the Order Paper so that the Attorney-General and/or the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs can come and explain it to this House.

Honourable members, yesterday there were two reports laid by the Committee on Local Government and I had indicated that we would get time to discuss them briefly. Now that we have some breathing space because of the adjustment of the curfew, I will put on them on the Order Paper tomorrow. Could you look at them so that we can debate them tomorrow? Another fish man? Okay, let us hear from him.

3.09
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): It is not necessarily on the fish, although I come from a fishing area. Of course it is a concern of the fishermen of Kasilo because when you go to buy fish, the fishermen will tell you, “We are selling to you the fish only.” They will not allow you to take the fish without having removed the maw from them, which has always caused a problem. However, that is not the main reason I am here. 

On the 18th of this month, social media was awash with news of attempted kidnap or assassination of a young man by the name of Rajiv Ruparelia. When you look at that video, you see how people came in a van and met this young man and his wife walking in the morning with dogs. They stopped and wanted to kidnap him. It took the dogs to save the life of this young man.

We have been waiting for the Minister of Internal Affairs to tell us who these people are who were moving with this numberless car. We have had very many kidnaps and assassinations. If you name people, they are very many and that is how they got killed. Can the Minister of Internal Affairs tell us who those people were? In the vicinity, they showed some people dressed in police uniform. 

Therefore, we request that the Minister of Internal Affairs comes and tells us who these people are who want to take people’s lives. These days we have cameras everywhere. That needs to be explained to Ugandans as we are very worried. It is not only Mr Rajiv. Hon. Ariko has had three people make an attempt against his life last week. Hon. Ariko needs some protection. Last week, they stormed his home and had a scuffle with the security people and they took off. We do not know whether we are safe or not, especially during this time when there is curfew. We, therefore, need protection.

THE SPEAKER: On the issue of hon. Ariko, I will handle it with the Inspector General of Police (IGP).

Concerning the attempted kidnap of Mr Rajiv Ruparelia, I request the Minister of Internal Affairs to investigate the issue and give us an update and an idea about the various kidnaps, which have been happening. If you could come back to us in a week’s time. Hon Amogin, did you have something to say?

3.11
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Earlier, I raised an issue of national importance to your office. I would like to now request whether I can raise it now.

THE SPEAKER: Which issue is that?

MS AMOGIN: Madam Speaker, as you are aware that the country is battling with Coronavirus - I happen to have been in Ngora and met different women groups who had benefited from Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme (UWEP), under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, where women are supposed to pay back a percentage to Government from the grant given to them.

Madam Speaker, most of these women run small businesses that have gone down due to the lockdown. Majority of them deal in produce and malwa brewing. However, they have not been able to pay this money as expected because of the inconvenience of the lockdown.

The women request that - despite the fact that banks have given leeway in terms of payment of loans, why wouldn’t the concerned ministry, do the same to the women under the Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme - a fund that was extended to them through the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development? Why can’t Government give these women, who are the beneficiaries of this fund a leeway of six months so that they can resume the payment of the money later? Otherwise, it is becoming complicated.

I would like to also pray that – [Hon. Franca Akello rose_]

THE SPEAKER: I thought you are raising issues.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I remember, a month ago, I shared the same matter with you, regarding the refund of money by the women entrepreneurship groups and youth groups.

Madam Speaker, you are aware that we have a similar programme by the Government across the country, such as the youth livelihood programmes and the UWEP. The women and young people are finding it difficult to refund this money within the expected period. In Agago District, we have quite a number; about 50 of the groups. 

I would like to therefore request hon. Amogin that it would be better for us to request for a year instead of six months. Otherwise, interest is usually charged by per year. If you exceed the first year, in the second year, you are expected to pay back interest by five per cent. If Government could give them a period of one year, I think it would be more appropriate. Thank you very much.

MS AMONGIN: Thank you very much, hon. Franca, for that information. 

Madam Speaker, as you realise, the -

THE SPEAKER: Please make your prayers.

MS AMONGIN: I would like to pray that the ministry responsible should look at the time frame so that these women can be given a loan repayment period of a certain period of time. Probably, six months but I think the line ministry would be in position to guide.

Secondly, there are districts, where women had already paid the monies. Madam Speaker, according to the guidelines from the gender ministry, the money that is paid is supposed to be remitted back to the districts. However, for the last two years, other groups are not benefiting because the money is not being remitted back to the districts. Those are the two prayers that I would like to make. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you may recall that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development came here and said that Government was going to give relief on some of the loan repayments. They also claimed that Bank of Uganda had written to the banking institutions in the country to go easy. However, when we told the minister to bring that instrument, he did not. In fact, he has not come back. I am not even sure whether it is there. If it is there, we must see it.

On the issue of the gender ministry, let me ask the Minister for Gender, Labour and Social Development to say something about these repayments.

3.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Florence Nakiwala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank my colleague for raising this very important point.

It is true that there is depression in many of the activities especially the small income holders, where vulnerable groups such as women and youth, were extended money to about 100,000 groups countrywide.

Madam Speaker, it is also true that according to the programme guidelines, No.35 is very clear about the contractual obligations that were made with each group. It was specified that not only in COVID-19 but as soon as the group realises or anticipates that it will not be able to meet the repayments, the programme is clear about the methodology. The probation officer and the districts are consequently informed and they submit a letter to the ministry for the waiver.

It is also true that everyone has a different payment time. For a whole year, there is no interest levied neither are they required to return the money within a period not less than three years. 

Madam Speaker, my honourable colleague will get the programme particularly for each group. Otherwise, they contracted and know what terms and conditions were governing each loan. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the issue of hon. Amongin is that, throughout the country, because of the lockdown, many of the people involved in small businesses were not working. Therefore, they could not sustain the payments. They are asking for solution across the board.

MS NAKIWALA: Madam Speaker, we shall submit a paper but it will be hard since it is already provided, that as soon as you know that you will not be able to pay, there is a form that you fill and take to the probation office. We have actually been waiving many of the women groups, who have not been able to pay even before, during and probably after COVID-19. We shall continue doing so. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us go to item No.3.
 
3.19
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity. 

Yesterday, the people of Busia listened attentively and appreciated the COVID-19 update from our beloved President. However, by the end of the President’s guidance, our people in Busia, Tororo, Katuna, Mutukula and Rwakaka were left very disappointed. In all the presidential speech or address, no word was mentioned about the border.

The reason I have come to raise this matter of national importance is because our people are dying due to lack of food. The tax drivers – I have a friend in Ngobi who died. Today, they buried another. The other day two people died. Madam Speaker, I request that we better have an alternative for the border districts that have been locked down for four months.

Before I give opportunity for information, I would like to thank the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development whom I will advise that all the women and youth groups in Busia border, who have not been working for four months, not to pay back  the money for UWEP and the youth livelihood. Let me take the information- (Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank my colleague, for giving me way. 

Madam Speaker, yesterday when we listened very attentively to His Excellency’s Speech, some of us who come from the border districts were left wondering. Right now, our districts are still locked and people do not know exactly what they are supposed to do. And His Excellency the President did not mention anything about lifting the lockdown in my district, Amuru, and all the 42 border districts.

Madam Speaker, the situations and conditions that we are in are quite serious. Therefore, my colleague is right, let special consideration be given to the border districts. And, let His Excellency and the minister tell us clearly, within two or three days, if possible, what we are supposed to do as border districts.

THE SPEAKER: I do not see any member of the national taskforce. Can I ask the Government Chief Whip being the most senior - you have heard the issue of the 42 border districts. The issue is that since December they are still under lockdown and it is worse.

3.23
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): The Office of the Prime Minister prepared a paper for phase two food distribution, which they are going to submit to Cabinet. Having listened to the cry from the border districts, we can advise that this time round Government can concentrate on the border districts which have been under quarantine for four months but –(Interjection)- yes I am just giving hope and I am making an undertaking to go and inform the Rt Hon. Prime Minister so that we can focus on the border districts, which are under lockdown because in other districts at least people can work and buy food for themselves. Therefore, we should shift and make sure that we help those which are still under lockdown.

THE SPEAKER: Can we expect an answer on Tuesday? I know there is Cabinet meeting on Monday.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Much obliged.

THE SPEAKER: Okay honourable members. Let us go to the National Coffee Bill.


BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NATIONAL COFFEE BILL, 2018

Clause 52
THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 52 do stand part of the Bill - Chairperson, did we put a new clause? Did we reach the new clause on page 17?

MS OKORI-MOE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We had not reached the new clause which the committee is proposing to insert.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, now handle that.

MS OKORI-MOE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The committee proposes that we insert a new provision immediately after clause 51 as follows: The headnote is “Coffee Research Trust Fund”. “(1)There is an established National Coffee Research Trust Fund. (2)Sources of monies for the Coffee Research Trust Fund established under sub clause (1) shall comprise of the following:
    a) 50 per cent of coffee cess collected; and
    b) Contribution from private sector and development partners.
(3)The Coffee Research Trust Fund shall be managed in accordance with the Public Finance Management Act.”

The justification is because of the importance of coffee research in the sector. This is to ensure that adequate funds are ring-fenced for coffee research. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, I do not know whether you have proposed clause (2) (b) should stand in view of No.3. Because this would now mean that the trust fund can only solicit for funding from donors.

MR NANDALA-MAFAABI:  Madam Chairperson, I do not see the reason for a trust fund. To begin with these are additional costs. Therefore, if you have created Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA), which is an authority to manage coffee and we have National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO) to deal with research, what is the purpose of a trust fund? 

This is another problem. You are creating another layer of expenditure. In short, a trust fund must be managed and must have staff and whatever. Therefore, I do not see any reason why we need a trust fund. If we wanted to create an account like the stabilization fund we had, you just decide to put it in Bank of Uganda and say that we have a fund account whereby a portion goes. However, the moment you say that there will be sources of money where contributions are from the private sector that means there will be a management of this fund. I would like to propose that this should be rejected.

MR SSEMPIJJA:  Madam Chairperson, the aim here was to show that coffee research is very important and supposed to be taken as such. However, if Parliament presumes that we can always budget for this, we concede.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, thank you. I also associate myself with the proposal that we do not need a fund. However, the proposal by the committee had something interesting which we may not lose. It is trying to allocate cess fund by proposing that part of the cess is used for coffee research and it is something that I proposed that although 50 per cent is high, I want to think that we can pick that and ensure that under this section, we specify that a percentage of the cess money is used for coffee research. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you proposing that we have a clause to do with the cess money applied to research?

MR KIBALYA: Madam Chairperson, hon. Patrick Nsamba introduced something that we hadn’t started on; we were still on the Coffee Fund.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, but the minister has said he does not need the Coffee Fund. Therefore, let us go to clause 52. There is no new insertion. I put the question that clause 52 – let the chairperson of the committee first move a proposal. 

MS OKORI-MOE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think we need some order here. I do not why hon. Nandala-Mafabi has chosen to come to this microphone. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The other microphone is not working.

MS OKORI-MOE: On clause 52 –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can the Clerk rectify the microphone on the Opposition’s side? 

MR CENTENARY: Madam Chairperson, since the minister has conceded that we do not need clause 51, I propose that we delete it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we have already voted on clause 51. This was a new clause. 

MR CENTENARY: Then let me propose that we create a new clause to address what the minister has already withdrawn. I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us find a home for it first. Chairperson of the committee, clause 52 –

MS OKORI-MOE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. In clause 52, the committee had proposed that we amend sub-clause (2) by substituting the word “selling” with the word “marketing.”  We have however reconsidered our position on that. We now request the House to maintain it the way it is in the Bill. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 52 do stand part of the Bill –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, thank you very much. The chairperson of the committee is very tough. She is pushing me down. 
Anyhow, I would like to say that I have no big problem with what the chairperson of the committee has proposed. However, I want to say that we must add something. Since we are going to have a coffee auction system, the authority should be in position to have data. So, I would like to move an additional sub-clause (3) to read thus: “…it should establish a database for coffee buyers and roasters.” 

The justification is that anybody who would need information on roasters or buyers will go to the data system of the authority. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, do you want clause 52 (3) to be on data? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, Madam Chairperson. The register is for roasters, farmers and the factory. If you have buyers – I do not mean buyers of Masaka or Mbale - maybe if you want me to restate it. It reads, “Establish a database for importers of coffee and international roasters for coffee.” 

The justification is that at any particular time in the coffee auction, the farmer must know who the importers and roasters are.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, in clause 34, which we approved already, we have a national register of other coffee value chain actors. I am assuming this is the database we are talking about. We do not need to create another database under clause 52; it is already provided for in clause 34. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 52 do stand part of the Bill – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, let me first explain clause 34 before we go forward. Clause 34 says that there will be a national register for other coffee value chain actors. What does it mean? If you look through here, there is nothing to do with importers. In the auction is where importers participate in the market. 

I want you to be fair, honourable chairperson. You see, what you are trying to run to – if you read clause 34, you realise it is about the registration of pulpers, coffee graders, exporters and et cetera. It is in the auction market where you find people who have come to buy coffee. These are importers. They are not the ones you are talking about in the local market. That is why I am saying they should have a database for the importers and international roasters.
This is very good and if you have not known this, you better visit the coffee auction market. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, what do you say about that proposal? 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Chairperson, hon. Nandala-Mafabi should be very clear. He says that under clause 34, we missed the words, “coffee importers.” Is that what you are saying, hon. Nandala-Mafabi? Be very clear. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Honourable minister, you may have not missed it; you may have done it intentionally. Anyhow, what I am trying to put up is the fact that the coffee auction system is basically where importers – it is like a stock exchange. In the stock exchange we do not talk about the local buyers. In there we tell the locals what the trading price is, who the importers are, and who the international roasters are. That is where it should be.

In clause 34, if you look at it, you are only maintaining a register for nationals who are roasters. You can have Bugisu as roasters or exporters but the importers like Volcafe and Olam International - that is what we are trying to ensure that is taken care of.  

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Chairperson, the spirit of the law is to encourage and promote coffee export, and not to import coffee. I do not know why our laws should be used to do other things, which are not in line with that spirit. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 52 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 52, agreed to
Clause 53
MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to insert a new part (x) to cater for miscellaneous provisions, which should also cater for clauses 53 to 57. The justification is that what was standing as miscellaneous under part (ix) was replaced with the headnote, “Coffee Research and Coffee Auction.” That is why we are introducing miscellaneous part (x). I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new part (x) be introduced, as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Part (x), introduced.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I have some amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: To the headnote? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Not to the headnote. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, when you look at clause 54 (d) - (Interjections) – are we still on clause 53? Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 53 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 53, agreed to.

Clause 54
MS OKORI-MOE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. In clause 54, the committee proposes that we amend the provision in sub-clause (1) as follows: In paragraph (a), by inserting the words, “coffee seeds garden” immediately after the words, “coffee nursery.” The justification is that it is consequential.

The committee also proposes that we substitute paragraph (b) with the following: “(b) sells or distributes substandard or diseased planting materials”. The justification is: to widen the scope of what is sold or distributed and to cater for diseased planting materials.

The committee also proposes that we delete paragraph (d). The justification is that the provision has already been catered for under the proposed clause 28 above. 

The committee also proposes that we insert a new paragraph immediately after paragraph (h) to read as follows:
“(i) carries or consents to use his or her vehicle, vessel or article in the carriage, transportation or distribution of substandard, diseased, molded or adulterated planting material or coffee with the knowledge that the coffee or planting material will be used in contravention of any of the provisions of this Act.”

The justification is: to provide for legal liability for carriers and transporters who knowingly aid and abet farmers or any other persons in the commission of offences against the Act.

In subclause (4), the committee proposes that we substitute the words, “this Act or Regulations made under this Act” with “citing a specific subsection in the provision.” The justification is: to refrain carriers and transporters who have knowledge that the planting material or coffee they are transporting contravenes the provisions of the Act from aiding the commission of any offence provided for under this Act.

In subclause (5), the committee proposes that we insert immediately after the word “coffee”, the words “vehicle, vessel.” The justification is: to cater for the disposal of vehicles and vessels forfeited under subclause (4).

In paragraph (a) of subclause (6), the committee proposes that we delete the words, “found being” appearing immediately after the word, “coffee.” The justification is that it is for clarity.

I beg to move.

The Chairperson: Honourable members, I do not know what the minister says about the new provision. If you hire me, should I check your bag to see whether the coffee is adulterated or not? I am a transporter and now you want to punish me.

Mr SSEMPIJJA: Madam Chairperson, you are right to ask, if somebody is hired, how is he going to inspect the coffee that he is going to carry? We have no problem with the rest but we should remove the vessels.

The Chairperson: I hope Members are alive to the fact that many Ugandans have lost their vehicles because of fish. I may be a transporter who is hired but when the fish is impounded, my lorries are taken to Nakasongola for two years.

Mr PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, there is another problem in subclause (6)(a). It states, “The Authority shall confiscate and destroy – (a) coffee found being spread to dry on the bare ground or around primary or secondary factory premises.”

We have a situation where our farmers pick coffee from their premises and go to factories for hulling. When they reach, they are told that the moisture content is too high and so they cannot process their coffee. If we keep this in the law, it is going to be very challenging as they are required to dry the coffee at the factory. Therefore, I propose that subclause (6)(a) be deleted.

Ms kabanda: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I also suggest that we delete clause 54(1)(d). 

The Chairperson: Honourable minister, what do you say about that proposal? Hasn’t it been deleted? I think they have deleted it.

Mr SSEMPIJJA: Madam Chairperson, if we stopped at the word, “coffee”, does it help the situation?

The Chairperson: They want that deleted and it has been deleted. 

Ms okori-moe: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The proposal by hon. Mary Kabanda is that we delete clause 54(1)(b). However, what is mostly affecting the coffee industry in Uganda are the substandard seedlings. If you may recall, previously, Uganda used to be better than Vietnam. However, now because of the concentration of the type of seedlings given to the farmers, Vietnam is the second largest producer in the world whereas we have been in the comfortable zone of being eighth. 

This is supposed to regulate the sector to ensure that –

The Chairperson: Chairperson, hon. Kabanda was talking about clause 54(1)(d), which you have already deleted.

Mr PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, in the committee report, it says they are substituting paragraph (b) as follows: “Sells or distributes substandard or diseased planting materials.” They just paraphrased but did not delete it.

The Chairperson: You people, do not try to confuse me. I am the Speaker. Hon. Kabanda was talking about subclause (1)(d), which the committee has already deleted. Do not touch anything else.

Ms okori-moe: Yes, it has been deleted, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, leave the others. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we have some amendments to move. I will start with the penalty on page 33, which says that anybody who commits an offence will be liable to a fine not exceeding forty-eight currency points. Forty-eight currency points is Shs 960,000. This is very dangerous. In short, you are promoting the wrong act. Somebody will say that they can afford to commit the offence since they will only pay Shs 960,000. 

In order to stop this crime, we should put this fine at 1,000 currency points. The justification is: to avoid the committing of wrong acts in the coffee sector. That is the deterrent. 

The next amendment is on – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: How much is 1,000 currency points? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is Shs 20 million. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Really, a small man from Budadiri under a tree -  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Let me explain, Madam Chairperson. It says, “…to a fine not exceeding…” It does not say that is the value. So, when you get a small farmer from Budadiri, you can give him a fine of one currency point or whatever is suitable. However, there are those big farmers. If coffee is Shs 6,500 a kilogramme and a farmer has 1,000 bags of 60 kilogrammes each, you can imagine the kind of money we are talking about. 

Madam Chairperson, this is to make sure that our coffee is properly maintained. I know that if somebody is convicted, he will be lucky if he pays one currency point but if the judge is very annoyed, he will pay the maximum of 1,000 currency points. We can maintain the number of years. This is because instead of someone going to prison, they would rather pay the fine. 

The second amendment is on the penalty for the secondary group, which is mentioned at the end of clause 54 (2). It says, “…not exceeding one hundred and twenty currency points…” Again, Madam Chairperson, this is about Shs 2.4 million; if you are talking about a person dealing in coffee worth Shs 1 billion, that is nothing. For this to be deterrent, we should put it at 2,000 currency points. The justification is: to stop that process. The same goes for subclause (3); it should also be amended. 

Subclause 6 is the most interesting one. If you talk about coffee found being spread on the bare ground, you have a point there because no one should put coffee on the bare ground. However, when you add, “around the primary or secondary factory premises”, I want to tell you why this happens, Madam Speaker. If a farmer does not have a store or he suspects that his coffee will be stolen, he can decide to go and dry his coffee in a place where there is security. 

Two, when you take your coffee to a primary or secondary society’s premises to sell it and then they discover that your coffee’s moisture content is high, they will advise you to go and dry it. Now, assuming you have come from the mountains in Budadiri and when you reach Mbale at Bugisu Cooperative Union (BCU) premises, somebody tells you to take back that coffee, that - (Interjection) – I am well informed on coffee, please. 

Madam Chairperson, on the issue of bare ground, there is a big point. Anybody found drying coffee on the bare ground should be penalized; we agree with that. We also agree with the issue of molded coffee. 

The provision on wet coffee with moisture is another problem. You have measured the coffee I have brought and the moisture content is high, why confiscate it? Allow me to dry my coffee so that the moisture content goes down. Otherwise, the people of UCDA will confiscate it, go and dry it and sell it. We should delete that paragraph.  

The other important issue they forgot, and I will ask the minister to listen to it, is the issue of adulterated coffee; that is the coffee they should confiscate. If you get me with adulterated coffee which has stones, you should confiscate it. Secondly, if you get coffee that is mixed, you should also confiscate it. You left out the most important issue and went for those which would disadvantage the farmers and coffee processors. 

Madam Chairperson, I would like to plead with you that what I have proposed be adopted. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What do you say to the proposals? 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Chairperson, we agree with the issue of 48 currency points to be raised to 1,000 currency points. This is because if today you visited all the grading factories, you will find stones and their colour is grey; they all have the same colour. This means that there is somebody trading in these stones, getting them from one place to another and selling them to transporters along the way, and they add the stones to the coffee. This is certainly causing our coffee to lose its quality. 

However, our problem is moisture content. There is a technical issue here because you are not supposed to dry bear beans or already processed beans. If you have to dry coffee, you either do wet processing and dry that coffee when it has a cover or the other kiboko coffee, which is still unshelled.  

I want to assure the honourable mover that the rest is okay, but what we are trying to cure here is to avoid the drying of bear coffee beans. When you pass by, you really feel that the sun is taking away the aroma, which is the most important thing in coffee. That is why we are maintaining that – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, why are you harassing the minister? You do not have to stand near him. 

MR SSEMPIJJA: When you do that, certainly the coffee quality goes down. Some of you, especially hon. Nandala-Mafabi, know that when you dry this coffee, from the beans that are being hulled or processed, you really feel the aroma going –(Interjections)– We are saying that we should maintain that one. The rest is okay. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I know what you are saying. Madam Chairperson, I understand what the minister is saying. Let me explain. In Bugisu, when the bean becomes ripe, you pulp it and get the other one with – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Which provision are you on? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: He has agreed with the rest and he is now talking about subclause (6). He has agreed that in paragraph (a), we should stop at, “the bare ground”. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is an area I am interested in. Minister, supposing I have a big coffee plantation but I have nowhere to dry the coffee beans, why don’t you want me to go near the factory to dry my coffee? 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Chairperson, you can - Are you talking about the secondary premises? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes. Why don’t you want me there? I just want to understand why I cannot dry coffee near the factory.

MR SSEMPIJJA: I think the issue was the people who take coffee to factory premises, hull it and then dry the beans.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, you know some of us are not coffee farmers. I am trying to understand the rationale.

MR KIBALYA: Madam Chairperson, let me make it clear for the minister because something is confusing him. He was saying that at times, they find packaged coffee with beans and stones. It is not necessarily those that dry coffee beans on bare ground that mix beans and stones in coffee. 

The stones are mixed coffee beans intentionally; it is not by mistake. That is why I do not agree with the issue of the currency points. We have packaged all the offenses in one provision; somebody who has mixed beans with stones is given the same punishment as someone who operates an unregistered coffee nursery. A processor who does not have a husk chamber or store cannot suffer the same punishment as somebody who is deliberately adulterating the coffee.

Lastly, Madam Chairperson, where I come from in Kamuli, my father grows coffee but we dry it on bare ground. However, if you sent any of your extension workers there, they will tell you that my father has the best coffee. Therefore, it does not mean that if I dry coffee on bare ground, it will get mixed with stones. There are people who do not have cemented areas. We cannot have them punished because - (Interruption)

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, we are making this Bill with the intention of picking up good practices. Hon. Kibalya is here taking us back to bare-ground drying of coffee as if he does not appreciate the purpose of this legislation. 

Madam Chairperson, is he in order to continue advocating for drying coffee on the bare ground when he knows that our intention in this clause is only to avoid a provision that will give UCDA powers to confiscate the coffee of the farmers? Is he in order?

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. Honourable members, I think this Bill is supposed to improve our coffee - the quality, taste and so on. Therefore, let us not encourage other rudimentary practices. However, I still want to know why the minister does not want me to go and dry my coffee near the secondary factory? 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Chairperson, I agree with you, because in this era, we are advocating for community storage, driers and these fall under secondary premises. We accept and we can stop at, “dries coffee on the bare ground.” Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, if the minister has agreed on that, then we want to deal with the next one. I also want to answer my brother, hon. Kibalya. Penalising somebody who is compromising the quality of coffee is very important because if you put your coffee on the ground, the chances that it will be mixed with mud are so high.

Madam Chairperson, since the minister has accepted, I would like to say that there are two types of wet coffee. There is one which is like the one from the mountains of the sun – arabica. You remove the first red part, wash and then dry it. After that, you again remove the husks to make it a green bean. 

I think when you say “wet coffee” here, it includes even the one which you are just drying and has only been washed. Therefore, what we need to do here is to say, “wet coffee green bean”. The justification is that any coffee that you process becomes green, and then you remove the last part for export. What we are trying to say is that we want to avoid a situation where somebody removes the coffee and makes it green before it has dried. Let it dry and then you can make it a green bean.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Please, propose the amendment so that we understand what you want.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay. Let us go to the amendments, Madam Chairperson. First, we have agreed on penalties. Secondly, in subclause (6) (a) we have stopped at “bare ground”. The third amendment is to say, in paragraph (c), “wet coffee green bean”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where is it?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Paragraph (c) says, “wet coffee with a moisture content exceeding 14 per cent being held or processed by anyone.” What it means is that you can only measure the moisture content when it is a green bean- (Interjections) - Yes, when you have removed-

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you want us to add the word, “bean” somewhere?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes. You see, what happens - I wish we came with coffee beans to demonstrate. 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Really, hon. Nandala-Mafabi should leave out reference to the colour because it depends also on where the coffee is grown. Sometimes, it is dark grey, sometimes it is dark brown; so, I think we can leave that out.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We can say, “wet coffee bean”; that is okay. Therefore, Madam Chairperson, I want to say that in (c), our amendment is to say, “wet coffee bean”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, we say, “wet coffee bean” and then the rest is okay – “Wet coffee bean with a moisture content…” Is that okay? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is okay.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you want to bring in something else?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, I would like to move an amendment to add (d) to read “adulterated coffee”. Madam Chairperson, if anybody is got with adulterated coffee, it should be confiscated.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourable members, I just want to draw your attention to 54 (2) (c) which should equally be amended to delete the words, “primary or secondary factory premises”. We could also address that one because it is about drying.

 MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, all those should be removed. It should stop at “bare ground”, and “wet coffee” should be changed to “wet coffee bean”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 54 be amended as proposed-

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, much as we revised the currency points, I had a feeling that we also needed, in the same vein, to revise the number of years. We are raising the currency points to 1,000 or 2,000 but I thought that you cannot just change the currency points without adjusting to some kind of equivalent years. If 48 currency points were equivalent to two years, is it okay for us to increase to 1,000 currency points but still have that equivalent to two years?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the sentence should depend on the gravity of the offense. Does this offense warrant seven or ten years in jail?

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, I feel the proposal of increasing the currency points by hon. Nandala-Mafabi will not be good for the coffee farmer. If you increase the currency points, it must also be followed with an increment in the years of imprisonment. This is captured under the Law Revision (Fines and other Financial Amounts in Criminal Matters) Act, 2008. It means each month is equivalent to two currency points. So, when you calculate the time for 2,000 currency points, it means an offender is going to stay in prison for over 10 years.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that is why I am saying, shouldn’t the punishment go with the gravity of the offence? Does operating without a licence warrant 10 years?

MR KIBALYA: Madam Chairperson, to be very sincere, to say that we are having somebody in prison for five, seven or ten years – according to the calculation by the chairperson – it will end up being 30 years. Can we have somebody in prison for 30 years, really? I think we need to be realistic and revise some of these things, in the interest of coffee farmers. These are not criminals that are killing people.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, what we are putting across is that there is money in the coffee business. The people who really mismanage the coffee sector are the middlemen who have money. Even if they are imprisoned for one month, it is okay, but we must deter them as far as the rates of payment are concerned. 

Therefore, we are saying that it should be “not more than”, which means if you get a poor farmer with five bags, you can fine him 10 currency points. However, if you get a man with a factory who has a stock worth Shs 10 billion and he is adulterating his coffee, you cannot say that he should pay a fine of 100 currency points. Such a person should pay a fine of 1,000 currency points, which is Shs 20 million. For the imprisonment, we pray that it stays at –(Interjection) 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like you to imagine an operator who does not have a huller; why would you send him away for four or five years?

MR KIBALYA: Madam Chairperson, that is where we have a challenge, and I implore hon. Nandala-Mafabi - The challenge is that hon. Nandala-Mafabi and Bugisu growers are already established. Unless he wants to just suffocate the others so that they do not grow, so that they remain at that level and the ones who want to come up are arrested and put in prison, but if we have to move in the same spirit and encourage others to grow – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the penalty is for a person who gets involved in the act of roasting and packing non-coffee material and claims it is coffee. Is that a coffee grower? That one is a thief! Therefore –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us go section by section. Under the first paragraph, you are talking about someone who operates an unregistered coffee nursery. That is what I am asking about; should we have an imprisonment term of 10 years for this person?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Chairperson, we can fine such a person between 1,000 to 500 currency points. We want to cure this bad practice. I supported hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s position because this is not done by the farmer. In fact, the middlemen are the ones causing all these problems for the farmer so that they can get low prices. Therefore, they should be punished. Our coffee is graded low because of these malpractices. 

MR BABA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to support the issue hon. Nandala-Mafabi has raised, that it is not the farmer who compromises the quality of our coffee. The example I would like to give is that in 2004, I brought a leading Japanese coffee exporter from Japan and went with him up to Bugisu Cooperative Union in Mbale. He toured the coffee farms and said that was the best quality coffee he had ever seen. 

We immediately came to BCU and he ordered for eight containers of coffee. What happened next? Only one container had clean coffee; the rest were full of stones, mud and beans and we lost that market in Japan because of that reckless manager in BCU in 2004. I could even be courageous and name the manager. He ruined that coffee market for Uganda in Japan because of that. Therefore, I agree with hon. Nandala-Mafabi that the punishment for such people should be high; it should not be compromised. (Applause)

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, we do not want people to make our coffee lose quality and so, we need to have deterrent measures. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi says it is not the farmers but the processors who do that. Nobody wants to go to prison. 

My proposal would be that we only legislate for imprisonment without the option of a fine because even if it is one year, no one will want to go to prison for that period. Let us not give anyone the option of paying money. If they get to know that they have to serve a prison term, such people will be very careful.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Does it mean you do not want to hear about the money?

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, I had agreed with hon. Nandala-Mafabi but looking at the provisions on offences, I realise that the first offence focuses on our small farmers, the second one focuses on processors and those big people. They have been graded in this Bill. 

Therefore, on the first offence, the fine of 1,000 currency points is very huge for farmers because it is for neglect of farms. When you look at the penalties, all these will go to the small farmers. On the first offence, even if we say, “not exceeding”, I think this is too high. Let that be applicable to offences 2, 3, 4 and 5. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, it seems the penalties for the farmers were mixed up with those of the processors. In paragraph (c), for example, it says, “harvests or is found in possession of immature cherries or strips a coffee tree”; that is in reference to a farmer. Do you want him to pay Shs 20 million or go to prison for 10 years? 

Minister, please, guide us. We want to move forward on this issue.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, from what I see, we have to be very careful. If a farmer starts stripping immature berries, that farmer wants to compromise the quality of our coffee. We have to deter the farmers from doing that, so that they wait for their berries to get ready before they harvest. Two –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can the minister guide us on how to move?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, before he comes in, I would like Members to listen to this: “(e) roasts or packages non-coffee materials as coffee”. This is not a farmer. Maybe, let us create one, farmers –

THE CHAIRPERSON: My difficulty is that the farmers’ offences are in the same area as the processers’ offences and the penalties are the same.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I think let us separate the farmers from the others, but there should be punitive actions against the farmers too.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Here we are dealing with wrongdoers; we are not dealing with good people. So, whether they are farmers or not, to me it is – What we can do to cure this is to reduce it or we can go with hon. Byandala’s suggestion and remove the fine options.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, do we remove the option of the fine and leave imprisonment only?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Yes, and we can put it at two years.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay?

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, that is not okay. I think the most important thing is for us to decide; if we want to lower the currency points, let us lower. The issue is about quality. The Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has taken time to look at this Bill and the whole essence of it is about getting good quality, which will help us to market our coffee. Let us not compromise what is very evident.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What do you propose?

MR AOGON: My proposal is that we maintain the 1,000 currency points. On the issue of separating the farmers and those in the value chain, I think we do not need to separate them. The judges already have the discretion to decide how much it should be. After all, we are saying “not exceeding”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, let us have the last word on this.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Since there is a law, which guides us on the fines - the law which was quoted by the committee chairperson - (Interjections) – Yes, there is a law -

THE CHAIRPERSON: There is a law on currency points.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Yes. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, let us get a middle line by saying – According to that law, it is two currency points for every month. Therefore, 12 months – (Interjections)- Madam Chairperson, I would like to beg honourable members to accept that we move from 48 currency points to 200 currency points – not exceeding - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you saying we adjust 48 currency points to 200 currency points and leave the two years? 

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 54 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 54, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 55, agreed to.

Clause 56
MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes that we amend the provision by substituting the word “every”, appearing at the beginning of paragraph (a), with the letter “a” and insert the word “any” immediately before the word “employee”.

The justification is that this is for clarity. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 56 be amended as proposed.

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Chairperson, on this clause, we in the ministry are asking for the indulgence of the House and the committee to agree with us that we stay what is in the Act. Otherwise, this would mean that we have only one director that is punished, yet our interest is that if it is a company, all the directors are liable.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, it is true that there is no company that can commit a crime. It is the people who work in the company that commit the crime. I am, therefore, of the view that the director who is involved or the employees shall have committed a crime. Otherwise, there is no way you can imprison a company but you can imprison the directors.

Madam Chairperson, the only thing I see in the Bill is the proposal which says that every director and employee shall also be taken to have committed an offence. I think this is okay because we are talking about collective responsibility. I actually do not see why the committee is diverting from it. Let every director or employee or anyone who is involved in the act take responsibility. It is up to the directors to ensure that their staff do the right thing.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, are you still –

MS OKORI-MOE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 56 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 56, agreed to.

Clause 57
MS OKORI-MOE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. In clause 57, the committee proposes to amend subclause (2) as follows:

    a) In paragraph (c), insert the word “profiling” immediately after the word “sorting”, and the word “certifying” immediately after the word “grading”.

The justification is that it is consequential.

    b) In paragraph (d), substitute the words “agronomic practices” with the word “procedure”.

The justification is that it is for clarity and to broaden the scope of the provision.

    c) In paragraph (i), insert the words “and exportation” after the word “importation” and delete the words “into Uganda” at the end of the sentence.

The justification is: to be all inclusive.

    d) In paragraph (w), delete the word “for” appearing at the beginning. The justification is that it is for clarity. 

I beg to move.

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Chairperson, once again I would like to thank the committee for the good job. However, in paragraph (d), where they want to substitute the words “agronomic practices” with the word “procedure”, we pray that they leave it as in the Bill. This is because a procedure is a protocol but practices are natural ways of doing things as laid down. I beg that we leave it as agronomic practices. Actually, we do not have agronomic procedure but agronomic practices in science.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, the amendment will only be to clause 57(2)(a). Is that okay? We leave paragraph (b) as it is. What about (c)?

MR BAGIIRE: We have no problem with the proposal in (c).

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 57 be amended under subclause (2)(a) and (c). 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 57, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 58
MS OKORI-MOE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. In clause 58, the committee proposes that we amend subclause (3) by substituting “Cap. 153” with “Cap. 325”.

The justification is: to correct an error in citation. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 58 be amended as proposed. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I have further amendments.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is it on clause 58?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes. Clause 58 (3) is talking about registration, licence, certification and permit. You are only allowing those who have registered like exporters and importers but forgetting the famers. I would like to therefore propose that clause 58 (3) (c) reads, “all existing farmers are deemed to have been registered as farmers who grow coffee”.

The justification is that they are already farmers. Madam Chairperson, you cannot give licences only to exporters and leave out the farmers.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where are you?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: This is clause 58 (3), which has subsections (a) and (b). I am proposing to insert subsections (c) and (d), which talk about the registration. I am trying to say that clause 58 (3) (c) reads, “all existing farmers who grow coffee” while clause 58 (3) (d) should read “all farmer organisations or cooperatives already handling coffee”.

The justification is that since they are already in the process, you cannot hold one party to remain and the other one to say it should start afresh.

THE CHAIRPERSON: This is like a transitional provision transiting from Uganda Coffee Development Act section 153 and they are saying that all those licenses which existed thereunder will now be taken to have commenced in this Act. Is there any problem?s

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is fine. Now, even the license they should have issued to the registered farmers- they had not issued them yet there are farmers who are already growing. If you say that you are going to start the process from already the existing farmers in the whole country, it is going to take a long time of about three to five years. And they are saying that no farmer will be dealing in coffee unless he is registered.

Therefore, Madam Chairperson, the coffee season is beginning this coming month and if this law is enacted and the President assents to it next week, it means those who will be having coffee according to this law, will not be registered members. What we are trying to say is that in the current, there must be a provision for the existing farmers or farmer organisations which deal in coffee.

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Chairperson, I beg to disagree with hon. Nandala on this particular matter. Of course, the existing farmers are not yet registered and there is no data about the farms and the farmers that is collected yet. It will take the Authority some bit of time to do the registration and get data. Therefore, we cannot embed it in the law at this point. Madam Chairperson, it is very dangerous.

Then on paragraph (d), we also disagree with him saying that all farmer organisations and coffee cooperatives already existing and handling coffee are deemed to have been registered. On this matter, the coffee farmers in this country that fall under cooperatives are about 23 per cent. Therefore, we object to this because they are not registered and there is no data which we have that has been collected about them. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we should not worry. What this provision is saying is that if there was a registration or license certificate or permit existing, it will be deemed to have commenced in the new Act. Therefore, there is no problem and the new ones will be registered as new.

Okay, I put the question that clause 58 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 58, as amended, agreed to
.
Clause 59 agreed to.

Schedule 1 agreed to.

Schedule 2 agreed to.

Clause 3
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we stood over some of the clauses. So, we are now going back. Clause 3 is the interpretation.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We stood over clause 3 because we had an issue on sub clause (7) where they were saying that some contracts will have and some will not have a seal. I have checked the Company Act and it says that the moment it is a seal, it is seal and it does not matter who we are contracting with.

Therefore, I was saying that clause 3(7) which was being that if it deals with a person who is not a corporate, there is no need of a seal and we are saying that for good governance, and also as per the Company Act, this sub clause (7) be deleted.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, if you want everything to be sealed, even the letters and memos will be sealed. There are things that require a seal and not everything should be sealed.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, if you read it very well, a contract- a letter does not need a seal but see here- a contract or instrument- these are instruments now- which if entered into or executed by a person not being a body corporate. Now, when it is a body corporate, there is a seal and when it is not a body corporate and it is an individual or a business name, there is no seal.

That is what we are saying that if there is a seal on every contract, it must be for any person, whether body corporate or an individual.  It is contract.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The seal belongs to the company.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, Madam Chairperson, the seal we are talking about is not a seal of the person who has come to do or enter a contract but we are talking of UCDA- let me put it like this, I am a coffee nursery operator and they want to enter an agreement with me to supply seedlings to some farmers. They are saying that if I am not company; there is no need of a seal. It is only a company where they will put a seal. 

This is very dangerous because if you open it, everybody who is entering a contract will make the Authority liable because every contract must be sealed. And the person who keeps the contract is the board secretary or the managing director of an institution. Therefore, no contract should be entered into without a seal because that will be the authority of the institution.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can the minister explain the rationale of this provision?

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. When you look at clause 3(3), which we passed, it says that “the seal of the Authority shall be determined by the board and shall be kept in custody by the managing director.” Also clause 3(4), “the seal shall, when affixed to any document, be authenticated by the signature of the chairperson and the managing director.”

Madam Chairperson, there are some small contracts, say for example, when they are procuring seedlings, the staff authorised by the accounting officer down there give local purchase orders. These are very small contracts. Does it mean that even down in Kasese, Mbale or Mayuge, the seal will be carried to be given when they are giving a local purchase order of Shs 800,000.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, you better read the statement very well. Let me read it for you honourable minister, I think you are reading between the lines. “A contract or an instrument, which if entered into or executed by a person not being a body corporate,..” it means even if I am coming to do a business of Shs 5 billion with UCDA, if I am not a body corporate, you will not put a seal.

However, if it a body corporate, even if it is coming to do for one shilling, it will have a seal. You read very well. I think these ministers who do not read - now would be required –(Interruption)

MR BAGIIRE: Is hon. Nandala in order to say that I do not read when I have been steering this Bill from the word “go” up to the end of it? It is my Bill. Is he in order?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the honourable minister is well informed and knowledgeable. Hon. Nandala, you are out of order.

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You tell us what the rationale of this provision is? 

MR BAGIIRE: Chairperson, let me read the whole sub-section (7) for all of us to understand. “A contract or an instrument, which is entered into or executed by a person not being a body corporate -” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is “which if entered” not “which entered”. 

MR BAGIIRE: “Which if entered into or executed by a person not being a body corporate would not be required to be under seal, may be entered into or executed without seal on behalf of the Authority by the managing director or any person authorised by the board.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What sort of instrument is this? 

MR BAGIIRE: The board and the Accounting Officer have –

THE CHAIRPERSON: I want an example of a contract on behalf of the corporation, which does not require a seal.

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Chairperson, it is stated even in sub clause (4) that “the seal shall, when affixed to any document, be authenticated by the signatures of the chairperson and the managing director.” So, if the Managing Director, for instance, who signs on behalf of the Authority most of the time because he is the chief technical person, gives authority or delegates an officer –

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable minister. What this one is saying is that a person can act on behalf of the Authority or the Managing Director or any other person authorised and enter into a contract without a seal. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, it is even saying, “not being a body corporate”. It says, “Entered into or executed by a person not being a body corporate.” That means it is not a registered company. This, therefore, means if the contract is entered into by a person who is an individual, a seal would not be required. So, even if you go for Shs 5 billion, so long as you are an individual, you do not need a seal. However, if you go with one shilling but you are a body corporate or company, a seal will be required. Why would you say others should have seals and others should not? 

BRIG. BYEKWASO: Madam Chairperson, I would like to propose that in the spirit of what the minister said that when you are very far away, you may not be able to come to the headquarters for this seal. However, I would like to propose that they put a threshold; say if a contract is not exceeding Shs 50 million, it may not require a seal. I think we should put in something to do with thresholds such that we know that at a certain amount, we may not need a seal but beyond that, you must have a seal. That is my proposal. 

MR ABALA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think my first issue was related to that proposal. Two, you know, having these things like this will promote corruption. At the same time, there will be some contracts that will be signed under the carpets. That means that procedures will not be followed. That is why if we leave this provision like this, we are likely going to have problems.

So, what we need to do is to revisit sub-clause 7 critically because we are likely to get into problems as a result of this provision. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let me ask; does the minister require this provision really? Do you really need it? 

MR KIBALYA: Madam Chairperson, I wanted to have the minister relate mine to the examples he is going to give. Normally, we ask for seedlings to distribute in our constituencies. They give us letters that authorise us to go to the nursery operators to be given seedlings. Those nursery operators go to the regional coordinators to get documents authorising them to give us seedlings.

Therefore, we wanted the minister to relate those two. Which of the two are they talking of? In case the nursery operator has to get a letter from the regional coordinator to allow him distribute seedlings, according to the letter that I got from the Managing Director, how do they relate to those two? 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to bring the attention of the august House to the companies’ law under which these contracts are executed. The Companies Act, section 50 (b) states that “a contract, which if made between private persons, would by law be valid although made orally and not reduced into writing may be made orally on behalf of the company by any person acting under its authority, express or implied”. So, Madam Chairperson, in UCDA –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can you give me that Act, please? 

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, I am wondering why we are going to run to a companies’ law, and yet we have laws to deal with contracts. Why are we running to companies laws? I want the minister to help us so that we are on the same page. The emphasis here is on contracts. So, why are we running to companies’ laws? Why are you dodging the other laws that apply to this clause specifically?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, why do you want someone to act on an oral contract on behalf of the corporation? Why do you want someone to act without a seal? What type of contract is that?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Chairperson, to me, the spirit was that the board chairperson is not a daily officer; and he is not always there. He is not an employee of the board. So, the Managing Director or any other person authorised by the board can certainly handle these contracts or instruments without the board’s chairperson.  When you put a seal there, then you require the board chairperson and the Managing Director, as provided in sub section (4), to authenticate this seal. It really becomes a bit – it was a kind of managerial issue.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Honourable minister, I seek some clarification.  If you read sub clause (7); let us go slowly. The sub clause says, “a contract or instrument, which if entered into or executed by a person not being a body corporate -” It means if a company is involved, whether small or big, this section does not apply to it. It applies to individuals. 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Yes, that is true. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: If you want to cure the one of the small ones – If I am an individual with a capital base of Shs 10 billion and there is a small company with a capital base of Shs 500,000 that deals in coffee – For the one with Shs 500,000, the board chairperson’s signature or seal must be applicable. I, with Shs 10 billion working capital with UCDA, however, do not need a seal. That is what it is saying. 

What you should have done, if you wanted to cure the small ones, is to leave this one. They can delegate that function. What we could say here is; “a contract or a sum, being executed at any particular time, can be entered into by the Managing Director or any other person authorised and be ratified at the next meeting when the chairperson of the board is available”. This can be done through normal actions. You do not need to put this one – if you put it here, it is very dangerous. 
MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Chairperson, let hon. Nandala read that amendment again. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not think it was an amendment. He was just reading the import of the section. Honourable minister, tell us; what are these instruments that an individual can sign on behalf of the body without a seal? That is what I want. Give me three examples. 

Mr ssempijja: Madam Chairperson, do these nursery operators have to come to Kampala to get a seal? They are inspected there by the regional coffee coordinator.

The Chairperson: Does that then come to the Authority or is it done in the field?

Mr ssempijja: Their papers are brought to the Authority by the regional coordinator –

Mr aogon: Madam Chairperson, yesterday, we had a challenge here. We were talking about the staff of the Authority to whom somebody proposed a provision to bar them from conducting business related to coffee. There was a heated argument.

If we allowed these seals to be in place across the board, it will go a long way in curing the fears that we have been harbouring.

Therefore, I do not see the reason for us failing to have a seal across the board. At the end of it, you will need to bring the documents that you are operating with either in Kasese or elsewhere, back to the Authority. 

Where is the problem? The seal is needed across the board even if you are trading for one shilling. That is my position.

Mr abala: Madam Chairperson, I see a complication involving the chairperson signing. I need to be helped. I do not know whether a Board chairperson is a technical person to handle these matters.

Secondly, my friend hon. Aogon has clearly stated that there is no reason for dodging the reality. The truth of the matter is that this is a contract. Whether it is an individual or not. There must be a seal. 
Why do we talk of a region yet, you must bring it to the centre? Why don’t you put a seal? These are stamps in simple terms. We must fix this properly. I need to be helped; why should we have a chairperson signing some of these things?

Mr ssempijja: Madam Chairperson, the honourable member has changed his stand and now, he agrees with us that the board chairperson is not a day-to-day officer. On a daily basis, the managing director and his staff use stamps and letter heads.

However, where the contract is between a UCDA and the company, that is where we require to use a seal. That is what we are saying. Hon. Nandala can restate his statement. May be, it will help.

Mr Nandala-Mafabi: We can say “A contract or an instrument, which can be entered into by the managing director or a person authorised by the board shall be ratified at the next board meeting.”

The justification is that in case the board chairperson is not available, those are the contracts, which should be ratified in the next meeting so that we allow leverage –

The Chairperson: Where are my legal officers? Where is the legal team of Parliament?

I have been asking what the rationale for this provision is but no one has given it. I would like my lawyers to help. Where are they?

Mr Nandala-Mafabi: It should be deleted.

The Chairperson: Honourable minister, I am not yet satisfied that you need this provision. I would like to propose that we delete it. 

If the agreements are made for the corporation, let them be by the managing director or the chairperson with a seal. I do not see why you need to have oral contracts for an Authority.

Mr Nandala-Mafabi: Exactly. Madam Chairperson, I would like to move an amendment that sub clause (7) be deleted.

Mr abala: Madam Chairperson, I second that we delete sub clause (7).

The Chairperson: We also delete sub clause (8) (b) because it deals with sub clause (7).

Mr ssempijja: Madam Chairperson, the re-wording of hon. Nandala-Mafabi was better than deleting it. (Laughter)

Ms alum: Madam Chairperson, I would like to support the honourable minister that we do not need to delete the entire sub clause (7). What hon. Nandala was proposing can help the intention of this sub clause.

Therefore, I do not know whether it would not be procedurally right to call hon. Nandala to come with that latest proposal so that we do not do away with the entire sub clause.

Mr Nandala-Mafabi: Madam Chairperson, let me explain. The reason we are saying that sub clause (7) - if you say “implied” some are sealed and others are not; you are opening a gap for mismanagement of the institution.

We are saying that every contract of UCDA must be authorised. If you look up here, there is already a provision that they can delegate those signatures. 

I can tell you that if you decided that in your management manuals, the managing director will enter into this contract of up to this magnitude but they will be ratified at the next board meeting, it can be in your operational manual. It does not go wrong here.

Therefore, sub section (7) should be deleted for the reason that this can be put in the operational manual. Honourable minister, you are safe.

Mr ssempijja: Okay.

Mr Nandala-Mafabi: Madam Chairperson, I would like to move that sub section (7) is deleted. This can be managed through operational manuals where the limits will be put. This can be finance or whatever name they will call it.

Also, sub clause (8) (b) should be deleted because it refers to sub clause (7), it will help.

The Chairperson: Honourable members, I put the question that sub clause (7) and (8) (b) be deleted.
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 14
The Chairperson: We had also stood over clause 14. It was about the composition of the board. We had come from 11 members to nine. Can the minister tell us what they have agreed? 

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Chairperson, we agreed to the proposal by the honourable colleague that the number be reduced to nine and the proposal that the managing director should not be a full board member. 
We shall have the following: 
    1. A chairperson; 
    2. A representative from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; 
    3. A representative from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries; 
    4. A representative from the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives; 
    5. A representative of the coffee farmers; 
    6. A representative of the coffee processors; 
    7. A representative of the coffee exporters; 
    8. A representative of the coffee roasters and; 
    9. A representative from NARO; 
    10. And then the managing director becomes an ex-officio. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the managing director reports to the board. Therefore, you do not need to put him that, “the board shall consist of…” 

The moment you say, “shall consist”, then, you are making him or her a board member. Therefore, he will always come to the board to report and he is the representative or he comes to bring the views of management. He will take what the board has directed him to go and implement. That is why you see here that even the board secretary, who records, is not a board member but he comes to take the minutes. 

MR KIBALYA: Madam Chairperson, we were in Kenya and they took us through – (Interjections) – I did not go with you, so, there is no way you would. We were in Kenya and if hon. Agnes Kunihira and hon. Herbert Ariko were here, they can testify. When we were taken through to understand, they even gave us their quality of coffee. They told us that the reason as to why they are performing well is because of the composition. The head of the related CDA here is part of the board the other side.

Madam Chairperson, unless there is another reason, somebody who will manage and control the quality and the operation of UCDA is the managing director. I need to know if we do not have other authorities where managing directors are board members. If not, then, we can copy from there. However, if we have any, for purposes of improving the quality and performance of UCDA, I suggest that the managing director becomes a full board member so that we can see the better performance. 

Otherwise, these others are coming to be board members but they do not have the clear performance of the coffee sector and what goes on in the operations – (Interruption)

MR WOBOYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson and colleague. I think we are also looking at the practice in some of the agencies we have here; in the country. For example, in Bank of Uganda, the Governor is a member of the board; he chairs the board. 

In my opinion, the managing director being a board member is good for advisory purposes. Most of these board members are not necessarily technical in what they are going to do; so, having a board managing director, who is a member, is good. It is healthy because he is going to tender advisory during deliberations, which is good and healthy for the institution. 

I submit. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to say that we passed clause 23 which says, “Functions of the managing director-” 

If you go to 23 (4), it reads: 
“In the performance of his or her functions, the managing director is answerable to the board.”
It is well passed. That is why we are amending the law on Bank of Uganda. The moment the person who is supposed to be supervised becomes part of the decision making, it becomes complicated. 

That is why we would like to bring a miscellaneous amendment that where managing directors are board members, we need to do that amendment before we go to the next Parliament. Why is that so? It is for governance issues. World over now, board members are board members. The managing directors or CEOs are called executive officers who report to the board. 

Madam Chairperson, what the managing director will be doing to the board will be taking information concerning what they have done as far as the coffee sector is concerned. 

For good governance, it would be very dangerous for a board to consist of a person who reports to it; and then he now comes and takes a decision on where he reports. I thank you. 

MS OPENDI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. We have been creating, amending or coming up with new Bills. We have other laws on authorities. The practice for good governance is that the executive director does not sit in as a board member; he can be there as an ex-officio member. 

Therefore, in drafting, if you say, “the board shall consist of…” and then you put him there as a member. I would rather that where we have the executive director, we can have a separate clause, where we shall state that, “the executive director shall be an ex-officio member of the board”; so that he is not part of board but he sits in as an ex-officio member. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Minister, if we remove the managing director, do we have our nine people - because we wanted nine members?

MR BAGIIRE: Yes, Madam Chairperson. We shall have the nine. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Without the managing director? 

MR BAGIIRE: Yes. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, then, we shall create another clause to remove the (k) and say, “the managing director shall be an ex-officio member of the board.” Is that okay? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: If we say ex-officio, it means he will debate and make decisions. It is only when they are going to vote that he does not report. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What do you want us to say? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We shall say, “The managing director will attend board meetings.” 

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, I think this is putting the managing director – the managing director has a constituency, which is the management. I think saying that he shall attend and not participate is getting into much – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, if you say, he shall attend, listen and say nothing and then think that he will come, report and leave, I think he has to stay there from the time the meeting starts up to the end. Isn’t it?

MS OPENDI: Madam Chairperson, good practice is – when board members are sitting, they sometimes need guidance and information from the executive director. 

Therefore, just as I had suggested, in all the other laws that we have, we have the executive director as an ex-officio member. Let us simply say that he will be an ex-officio member of the board, as I proposed. When the board does not need him in the meeting, they can always ask him to excuse himself. 


Otherwise, going to say that he will not sit in the meeting, I think we are also creating a big issue there. 

Therefore, I would like to request my brother, hon. Mafabi, to concede and we move on because if you look at all the other legislations, the executive director is an ex-officio member of the board and it is stated so.

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, I think hon. Sarah Opendi has made it very clear. I think we should understand the people to attend the meeting. They can be other members of the Authority. However, the managing director is supposed to be an ex-officio on the board. That means he will attend those meetings and present or debate but will not vote. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MS KATUSHABE: Madam Chairperson, I support the issue of the managing director to be a member of the board- (Interjections) - that is what I support. 

However, if we agree to leave him as an ex-officio, we can do so because the majority has said so but I support him being a member because you can tell him to excuse himself as the minister has said if he has conflict of interest somewhere. You can tell him to get out of the meeting and the board can then decide on an issue.

However, if you agree that he becomes an ex-officio, we cannot stop him from debating and informing the board on the issues concerning the sector.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, who is the secretary of this board?

MS KUNIHIRA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to support that the managing director is supposed to attend and even discuss issues. In most cases, they are the accounting officers. He can be there as an ex-officio but only misses on the issue of voting. 
A managing director is the person who presents all reports from all departments and is answerable to the board. Therefore, you cannot present something and then you are denied to debate about it. The only thing he cannot do is to vote. Therefore, I would support that he is an ex-officio but with all powers to discuss and debate during meetings.

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, if this illustration could help. In most cases, we find all the managing directors being the secretaries to the board. 

Madam Chairperson, if I am to use the example of the Parliamentary Commission, the Clerk is the secretary to the Parliamentary Commission. What is the formulation in our Parliamentary Commission Act such that we do it the way it was handled for that purpose? There is no way we can get the managing director out of the meeting and proceedings of the board. He is a very technical person. 

Therefore, let us find a way on how it was formulated so that we put it in this law. The Clerk is not a member of the Commission but a secretary and attends the Commission meetings. So let us look at that formulation if our technical people can help us. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But honorable members, we already have a secretary to the board under clause 24. Honourable minister, tell us what you want so that we can move. Where do you want to put your managing directors? We have the nine.

MS SSEMPIJJA: Madam Chairperson, we have already agreed on nine and the managing director being an ex-officio of the board.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 14 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause as amended-

MS KABANDA: Madam Chairperson, I have an amendment on clause 14 (3). I propose that we insert immediately after the word, “women,” “drawn from a recognised women coffee association.” The justification is to bring on board technical capacity, to articulate issues of women in the coffee value chain. I beg to propose.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we agreed on that one, that in the process of appointing the commissioners, they should be in consideration of sub clause 3. The justification he was telling us here- if you heard the minister, that whenever the ministry is sending people, it sends two names; a man and a woman. Therefore, the a third, will be taken care of.

The only amendment that I want to make for better drafting that if you have said that the board shall consist of; that is okay. Then you get the nine, then we put a new sub clause 3 and say; “the managing director shall be an ex-officio of the board” because it is not part of 2.

What I am saying is that a board shall consist of; then nine- (Interjections) - what I am trying to do is to give it a number. We are saying that two goes with a nine, then we insert sub clause 3. That the managing director shall be an ex-officio of the board. The justification is because we have agreed that the managing director is not a board member but an ex-officio.

MS OPENDI: Madam Chairperson, I think that was agreed. I just want to allay my sister’s fear. Normally, in constituting the board, just as it was mentioned, the ministers normally ask especially from those bodies like the coffee farmers, the processors, etcetera, they normally ask for two names. Therefore, your fear that you need some women who are engaged in the coffee or are technical will be taken care of. 

Normally, that is what happens. We cannot say that- Madam Chairperson, the current National Drug Authority law was talking about a herbalist. When you go that way, you may end up finding a problem because which association are you going to pick?

Therefore, let us leave it the way it is. The issue of gender will be taken care of.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you know, among the nine, you may find that one of the women is from trade, the other from finance, another from agriculture. Those are technical people. However, what hon. Kabanda is talking about are the people who actually grow the coffee – the real farmers on the ground. 

MS OPENDI: Madam Chairperson, can I, therefore, suggest that we say, “at least one-third of the members of the board shall be women, one of whom shall be from the coffee farmers or processors”. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: From farmers, roasters and processors?

MS OPENDI: Yes.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, you remember very well that when we initially had a debate on this Bill, there was a complaint from hon. Baba Diri that women are always left behind. When it comes to decision making, they are left behind; when it comes to the sharing of proceeds, they are left behind and when they are picking representations on the board, sometimes the ministers pick anybody and forget about our women in the villages. 

We want somebody who belongs to a women’s association and is knowledgeable. I would like to cite one example. We have the International Women Coffee Alliance – (Interjection) – and it is in Kampala here. These groups exist. 

Madam Chairperson, we would love to see that the women’s issues stand out strongly in this Bill. We cannot afford to move and leave the women behind. That is the issue. What hon. Kabanda has fronted holds a lot of water.

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, I just want to respond to what my colleague has said. He is talking about the International Women Coffee Alliance that is based in Kampala but hon. Kabanda was talking about women in the rural areas. I do not know the relationship between the rural areas and Kampala. 

Secondly – (Interruption)

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, hon. Abala. Madam Chairperson, the information I would like to give hon. Abala is that we are talking about representing women’s interest. Therefore, it does not matter; as long as you are a woman and you are on the board, you are expected to represent the interests of the women. That is why we are saying that at least a third of the members of the board should be women –(Interjection)- When you say, “coffee growers and what…” it defeats the purpose.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I gave you a scenario where all the three women come from the Government. We want the actual farmers to be represented. 

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, in (3) the point is to take care of the women’s interest. The interest of the coffee farmers has already been taken care of. We have a coffee farmers’ representative who could, by the way, be a woman – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, let us provide for it; there is no harm in providing for it. 

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, on that, I agree with you. What we must do is to put in the provision that there should be specifically a person representing women. It can be a processor or a farmer. 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to request the Members to accept the addition to that sub-section that “at least one-third of the members of the board shall be women, one of whom shall be from coffee processors or farmers.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think that is okay.

BRIG. KULAYIGYE: Madam Chairperson, we must appreciate that there is a class difference between the processor and the farmer and the person we are interested in protecting here is the farmer. It is my humble submission that we provide for a woman farmer on the board. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think you are right; there is already a processor and the processor is a man. Therefore, let us remove the processor from there and say, “at least one-third of the members of the board shall be women, one of whom shall be a coffee farmer”.

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Chairperson, if we say that one of them must be a farmer when we have only one farmer, it will be discriminatory against the male farmers.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 14 be amended as proposed, first, by identifying the nine members of the board, two, by creating the managing directors and ex-officio member, three, by adding the words “one of whom shall be a woman coffee farmer”.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 26
THE CHAIRPERSON: What was the issue on clause 26?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the issue on clause 26(2)(b) was that they must evaluate the land “…the land where the coffee is grown or is to be grown shall have been evaluated…” – I think we deleted it. We finished it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, I think what we had to decide was: are members of the family under the registration? Is it the man or family? Supposing the man is not there, is it the spouse? I think that is what we wanted to clarify.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is true. Madam Chairperson, in fact, on the registration of farmers, I need the minister to help me understand. For example, in Bugisu a man may have more than two pieces of land with coffee. I would like the minister to help me understand; one, if I have 10 coffee farms which I have set up for my children maybe for the future, do I need to have a name for each farm or will I register all of them under my name?  

Secondly, if I buy a farm from a farmer or I am given a farm, do I become the registered person or do you need me to also apply? That will answer the issue of inheritance because if I bequeath to my children, they should be able to be farmers or whatever. 

Lastly, a farm must be for a family. I would imagine what name they are going to register. You could say, the Nandala family owns this farm but if you tie it to an individual, then this woman, whom you want to be on the board, will not be a farmer because in Africa, it is mostly men who own land. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, I hope you have had time to resolve that issue. 

MR SSEMPIJJA: I think the gist of clause 26(2) (b) was really – (Interjection) – that was deleted. Do you want to insert something else?

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. Hon. Mary Kabanda had made a proposal that the spouse should be registered as part of the farm and someone asked, what about the children since they are all working on the farm? The question arose that for this farm –

MS KABANDA: Madam Chairperson, can I give him the proposal? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: You already made it last time. We want answers from the ministers. What do you say, honourable minister, about that proposal? In this family, who should be registered? Will it be the man only?

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, as the minister comes, we also thought about registering the farm instead of the individual. The minister can also give his opinion on that.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, give us your opinion. 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Chairperson, we have agreed that we register a family farm not – (Interjection) - headed by for example, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, if we are going to register a family farm – assuming, I have bought a family farm, what name shall be given to it? Shall I also be part of the previous family name? For example, assuming hon. Ssempijja came to Mbale and bought Nandala‘s family farm, would he carry on with that name or will he be able to change it to Ssempijja family farm or both? 

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Chairperson, the laws of this country give rights to spouses over land and property. Should we really go on including spouses in every clause? I thought the bigger law, which is embedded in the Constitution, is supreme. If you own a coffee farm and you want to sell it, there is no way you are going to sell it without the consent of the spouse. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, in reality, there are instances, where the husband has dispossessed his wife and given the land and farm to the son; that is a reality. It is not knowledge. 

MR EDWARD OTTO: Madam Chairperson, we can borrow from the law on equalisation of family property. In some situations, you might find that the man is contributing over and above and so, there could arise the question of constructive trust and unjust enrichment, where someone is doing so much and the other partner is not contributing a lot or they have just got married. 

In such situations, it can be dealt with like we do in the matrimonial properties. You can register a primary matrimonial home but for the rest of the properties that you acquire because of your hard work, the other person may just claim them as enrichments. Therefore, I wish to propose that in this case, we could provide for registration, where a family or primary coffee farm could be shared in a situation of separation or inheritance. However, what would amount to unjust enrichment, the other spouse should be able to do their business without the other partner, who has not contributed so much, taking away from him. Thank you. 

BRIG. KULAYIGYE: Madam Chairperson, whereas, I agree with hon. Maj. Rwamirama’s position that the law is already in existence, the practice has been such that spouses get dispossessed, particularly in the event of demise of the head of the family. When we say, Nandala family farm, every member of that family is protected by this law no matter whether Nandala is alive or dead. 

Secondly, in the event of separation or divorce, the children are protected from the adversaries of the two who are separating. Otherwise, the practice has been that in the process of separation, the children get dispossessed because of the wrangles between the father and mother. So, if it is registered as Nandala family farm, as long as I am a member of that family, I am a beneficiary and so, no one can dispose of it unless every family member has agreed. Thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, can we move on that? 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Chairperson, this Bill is not intended to handle property sharing; that is the truth. The coffee Bill cannot - if you register a family farm, you are handling everyone. Some families are actually headed by women and others, by both. So, the register will certainly have to show the husband, wife and children. We just need to define the family, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Kabanda, does this capture your proposal? 
MR KIBALYA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to add something. Assuming my daughter is in primary three and I planted coffee on her land so that by the time she joins senior one, money that comes from that coffee plantation will cater for her school fees. Does this, therefore, mean that I have to register that plantation in the names of Kibalya and family, instead of the names of Namuganza, my daughter? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: If it is hers, then she is a farmer. You register it in the names of Namuganza. Honourable members, we need to vote.  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to help my brother, hon. Kibalya on that. A child below the age of 18 cannot own property since he or she has no capacity to enter into a contract. That is why it must remain as a family and so, under the family farm, he or she shall be catered for. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Kabanda, just restate your proposal so that we vote and finish this. 

MS KABANDA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. My proposal is, “Where a person registered as a coffee farmer in sub-section (1) is married, the registration of that person as a coffee farmer shall extend to the family.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 26, be amended, as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 26, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 28
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I hope we have carried on from where we stopped; where we said delete clause 26(2)(b).

THE CHAIRPERSON: Which one?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We deleted this the other day.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We had deleted already but we only needed the minister to support us on this.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The draftsmen might forget and retain it. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: We had deleted that already. Now clause 28. Honourable members, on clause 28, as you remember we had a long argument on the process of appeal, access etc. Do we have a formulation? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the formulation I have - (Interjection) – Oh, I am told of a harmonised position. However, I am sure that the minister will agree with me. First of all, if we start from (1), “The Authority may, after being satisfied that a registered coffee farmer has failed to comply with the terms of a condition of registration, strike off the register, the name of the coffee farmer.” 

Madam Chairperson, suppose I have 10 farms and one is not complying according to UCDA, do you have to deregister me because of only one yet I have nine more? That is where I am coming from; where somebody deregisters you yet you have more farms. Something like that can happen. 

Secondly, somebody can deregister you because he has the authority to deregister you and abuses his or her office. Therefore, what I would like to state here is:
    1. “A coffee farmer aggrieved by the decision of the Authority made under sub-section (1) may appeal:
(i)To the Local Council 1 of that area. If he fails at Local Council 1, to Local Council 2. If you fail at Local Council 2, to Local Council 3. If he fails at Local Council 3, up to the district and then to the minister.”

The justification is that the Local Council 1 is the one that knows that farmer better where he is and maybe he has been deleted unfairly. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Last time I asked you about the bureaucracy. By the time you go from the LCI up to the Authority, you do not know how long it takes.  

MR KIBALYA: Madam Chairperson, in this line, we need to first of all address the person who has powers to deregister. If the Authority has deregistered me from my village in Bunandolo, even if I appeal to LCI, LCII, LCIII, they will not listen. Therefore, we need to first bring down the office that is responsible for deregistration and from there, we shall know the person I have to appeal to.  

That is why the other day we were suggesting that we have these powers at the district level where somebody in Buyende or Luuka can access the district chairperson, the agricultural officer or the extension worker. However, if we talk of the minister, hon. Ssempijja who I, as a Member of Parliament, can look for, for four months without seeing and you want somebody from my village to come and look for the minister, that will not work. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the problem is that the register is one and it is at the Authority unless you are going to create mini registries. I do not know what the minister says. 

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, before the minister comes, I remember when we were talking about the composition of the board, we deliberately deleted the representative of the Minister of Local Government. However, at this stage, I have heard my senior colleague, hon. Nandala-Mafabi say that you report to LCI, LCII and LCIII. I do not know the link there in relation to deregistration. I need to be helped. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, the Authority will keep the national register. Is there a possibility of district registers? I am trying to see how the farmer can reach the appeal process.  

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Chairperson, in practice, you will not have the UCDA Board handling these disputes at farm level. Certainly there will be somebody; an extension officer or regional coffee officer. Therefore, by the time it reaches the Authority, some of these levels have already been involved. What I would accept is that we do not want to burden farmers. We can start with LCIII and then the district and the – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, I would like to know how I can get onto the national register. Do I come to Kampala and be registered or the inspector registers me in Mbulamuti? 

MR SSEMPIJJA: They register you with - of course they have to extend to the LCI and LCII who are there when you are registering. They are part of the system. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do they keep a register in the sub-county different from this national one? 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Yes, certainly they keep a register at the sub-county. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can we give them power to register and deregister? 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Bring the wording.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can someone do the wording?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we would like to say that the powers for deregistration and registration should be at the sub-county. 

The justification is that it is the sub-county that knows who qualifies to be registered or deregistered. 

MS KATUSHABE: Madam Chairperson, we deleted clause 54(d). I propose that since we have put many offences like drying coffee on the ground, I propose that this be deleted. Clause 54 has all the offences and penalties. I propose that we delete 28. 

MR SSEMPIJJA: No, there must be - Madam Chairperson, we are following certain standards and certainly as a country, we need to have remedies to all these malpractices that we are talking about. Therefore, there is no problem. We are saying that the Authority is satisfied that you are no longer interested. However, you then come up to say, no, I was sick. Where do you start from? It is the process of appeal. (Interjection) – Yes, that is what we are saying. We give somebody an escape route. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can we say that a coffee farmer aggrieved by the decision of the inspector - would it be the inspector to deregister? Who would they go to at the LCIII? 

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank the minister for his proposal. However, an LCIII chairperson is not technical. As a committee, we think that this should be left to the district production officer who is technical. Otherwise when you give an LCIII chairperson, especially now when we do not have qualifications for an LCIII, I do not know what kind of decision an LCIII will take in addressing such a problem. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, can you formulate a proposal? 

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, although this is related to clause 57 – Just a minute – 

MR OTHIENO: Madam Chairperson, we are going to create a problem here. The reason we removed the local governments from the board is that they do not have much roles to play in this sector. Looking at the confusion and complications we now have, I propose these should be among the things the minister will prescribe through a regulation so that they have time to think over them, consult stakeholders and come with an agreeable position. The minister will then prescribe a process through which these appeals can be handled through a regulation. This will prevent us from getting into a mix-up. 

If you bring in the local governments, there is already a question about the powers of the Authority and the local governments. You are going to create conflict of interest here. The district will say the Authority cannot deregister or perform certain roles because they are the ones who have been allowed to perform them. These are politicians who have interests. The Authority is interested in ensuring standards whereas the districts are interested in ensuring that their people’s interests are also protected. 

Madam Chairperson, I am of the opinion, and I would like to persuade the House that we take this issue of appeal to the regulations so that the minister prescribes the process through which the appeal can be handled. I beg to move. 

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, given how we, the politicians, normally do things - LCI and LCIII are politicians - I am sure they will not go against their people. Secondly, we are bringing a framework, which, as hon. Nandala-Mafabi had stated earlier, should be a production office. The details there will be generated by the ministry as a regulation. 

In my opinion, we do not need to delete it from here because it is showing us what we ought to have - that will be homework for the ministry - such that we are able to produce something tangible at the end of the day. I do not agree that we should remove it. 

MS KATUSHABE: Madam Chairperson, this clause will discourage coffee farming. How? Most people will fear to grow coffee because they – (Interjections) – this will be a redundant clause because when you deregister a farmer, the farmer will continue growing and people will come and buy that coffee. This clause is so redundant and the penalties are provided in clause 54. 

I propose that the penalty provided for under clause 54 should be deleted because we have failed to get a way of helping our poor farmers. You cannot take me to the minister or the UCDA or the Managing Director – Some Members are proposing political leaders and yet political leaders may not – (Interruption) 

MR OTHIENO: Madam Chairperson, I am at pain. The reason Uganda’s coffee has been overtaken – the reason we are doing badly – Yesterday, hon. Abala informed this House that there are countries which used to do worse than us that have overtaken us, for example Vietnam and Ethiopia. The reason they have overtaken us is because they are doing what we are trying to do; they are registering farmers and regulating the sector. What they are doing has not discouraged farmers but instead, it has encouraged them to produce more. That is why they are doing better than us. 

Madam Chairperson, is my colleague in order to claim that by regulating the sector, we are going to discourage coffee production when in actual sense what the Bill is seeking to do is to improve the production of coffee and improve the sector to match with other countries? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like to draw your attention to the memorandum of the Bill. “The objective is to reform the law to provide for Uganda Coffee Development Authority to regulate, promote, and oversee the coffee sub-sector and to regulate on-farm and off-farm activities in the coffee value chain. Defects in the existing law - There is need to regulate the entire coffee value chain as it is done in other jurisdictions, most especially to include on-farm activities alongside off-farm ones…”, etc. 

So, honourable members, the Bill is aimed at improving the quality of our coffee. That should be the main agenda. 

Honourable members, if we are still stuck, I think we can stand over it again. The chairperson of the committee, the minister and the stakeholders should sit and formulate – 

MS KATUSHABE: Madam Chairperson, I am not against the whole Bill. I am against just one clause. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, that clause has to do with the quality of coffee. If your coffee is bad, why should you stay there? Can we give the minister time to – 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Chairperson, the issue is on how to appeal. By the way, last time, I was trying to inform the Members that the Authority – In this Bill, we have been talking about the Authority. The Authority is not one man; it is not a single person - (Interjection) - it has been defined in the law. 

Madam Chairperson, if somebody is aggrieved and he wants to appeal, where should she or he go? Some Members are saying that the minister is too far; we should have somebody nearer to the farmers. I would agree that this person appeals to the production coordinator and if he or she is not satisfied, then the appeal goes to the minister. That one makes it a bit – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like to ask the minister that we stand over this because it has an impact on clause 37, which we have also stood over so that you align all of them. We can complete it tomorrow. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)
 
(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE 

5.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The National Coffee Bill, 2018” and passed it with amendments. Clause 2 was passed, clause 3 was passed with amendments, clause 4 was passed, clause 5 was passed and clause 6 was passed – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, we are dealing with the ones we passed today. You had reported yesterday. Start with what we did today. 

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Speaker, clause 51 and clause 53 were passed, clause 54 was passed with amendments –

THE SPEAKER: I think a new clause was inserted between clause 51 and clause 52. 

MR BAGIIRE: A new clause was inserted – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, it was a Trust Fund, which we never inserted. 

THE SPEAKER: There was another one under it [HON. MEMBERS: “It was rejected.”] Okay, it was deleted so there is no new clause. 

MR BAGIIRE: Clause 52 was passed; clause 53 was passed and clause 54 was passed with amendment. Clause 55 and clause 56 were passed. 

Madam Speaker, I beg that we recommit clause 57. We passed it with amendment but I request that we recommit it. There is a clause we would like to add. 

We also passed clause 58 with amendments. We passed clause 59, Schedule 1, Schedule 2 and all the cross references. We also passed clause 3 with amendments, Clause 14 with amendments but I would like to also recommit it. We passed clause 28 with amendments – 

THE SPEAKER: That is where we got stuck and asked you to go and look at it and design the process of appeal. 

MR BAGIIRE: Clause 28 has been stood over. That was all. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Mr Henry Bagiire): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the Report of the committee of the Whole House be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to thank you. We have noted the other two provisions that you intend to recommit. 

6.03
MR NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Madam Speaker, I would like to put the House on notice that I am going to move a recommittal of clause 32 and clause 35. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have noted the intention to recommit clause 32 and clause 35 by the honourable member of the House. I appeal to the honourable minister and your team to sit and harmonise so that we can move. 

Honourable members, House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00p.m.

(The House rose at 6.05p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 23 July 2020 at 2.00p.m.)




