Thursday, 25 July 2002

Parliament met at 2.47 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I have received a letter from Makerere University Convocation. Maybe it is better that I read it.

“SPECIAL INVITATION: 

The Makerere University Convocation will hold its 12th General Meeting on Saturday, 27 July 2002, in the Lower Conference Hall, Senate House, Makerere University main campus, starting at 9.00a.m. 

Among other things, the meeting will elect new office bearers who will at the same time be representing the Convocation on the University Council and its committees.  

The purpose of writing this letter is to specially invite you to this very important occasion.”, especially those who are members to the Convocation. So, this is an invitation which has been extended to you.

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence to guide me on a matter concerning primary school teachers who are on strike in the whole district of Kabale. It seems the matter has also spilled over to Rukungiri and some other districts. I am hearing whispers that even Busia. So, I seek your indulgence, to allow the Minister of Education to clarify on this issue so that the minds of the parents are put to rest, and we see how the Government is handling this situation, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Would you mind if I completed my communication before this matter can be addressed? But I think the person concerned has heard, maybe at an appropriate time, he may come in.

Hon. Members, I want to thank you for what you did yesterday. We were able to complete the general debate and I certified that everybody who had wanted to contribute had contributed, and that is when I adjourned the House yesterday. But I want to remind you that in this session, we are mainly dealing with the budget process, which is regulated by the Budget Act and the Constitution.  

According to the Budget Act, which we must follow because we are the ones who enacted it, we have to complete the budget process by 31 August. The law says all the committees should have presented their reports to the House by 31 August, and I intend to facilitate the committees to do this so that they do not default. 

Because of this, today we are going to hear the concluding remarks from the Chairperson of the Budget Committee and the Minister – the owner of the motion - after which we shall adjourn the plenary so that committees are given sufficient time to concentrate on the estimates from morning to evening. This will enable us to comply with the time as stipulated in the Act. 

After we have done this, in order to finish the Budget, we intend to allocate at least a day to each of the Sessional Committees to bring issues of importance for debate in the plenary on policy matters falling under their ministries.  

So, currently the proposal will run as follows. We shall receive the reports, one by one starting on 13 August; I hope that will have been sufficient time for every committee to conclude scrutinising the estimates of their respective ministries. By 3 September, it is proposed that we shall pass the Appropriation Bill. This is the one, which ties whatever we will have allocated to various ministries into one and legalises the spending. This will be followed, say around 4 September, with the passage of the Finance Bill, which ties the taxation that we will have passed, and then including the supplementary Appropriation Bill. But maybe the Chairperson of the Committee may also want to add something.

THE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Ms Beatrice Kiraso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You have already brought it to the attention of Parliament that Sessional Committees are by the Budget Act, Section 9, expected to bring in their reports on the budget estimates that fall within their jurisdiction by the 31st day of August in each financial year. 

We started the general debate on the budget, I pointed out the very salient features of the policy statements where we expect Sessional Committees to specifically give us details.

Section 6(1) spells out the requirement for each minister to prepare and submit to Parliament a policy statement.  

Sub-section (2) of Section 6, as I had already pointed out, is what should be of interest to Parliament. If I may quote: “a policy statement made under sub-section (1), shall be in a form prescribed by the minister responsible for Finance and shall reflect specific data on value for money and the extent of the achievement of the objective targets on money received and spent.” So, if we do not go deep into seeing how much money was actually released and what it was used for, then we will have lost the oversight role.

The other item in the Budget Act is to do with the total indebtedness of the state. This Act requires the government to provide us with information on loans, grants and guarantees. I reported here when we begun this debate that that information was tabled to Parliament on the 13th June when the Budget was read.  What we have done is to make copies for the Sessional Committees so that in their reports they can put a component on the utilisation in their specific sectors.   

I would like to draw my colleagues’ attention to the information at the end of the Budget Speech.  I know we have been involved in a general debate, but the information to do with proper budgeting are the figures from table 1(a), but what we are going to pass is only the estimates of revenue and expenditure for this financial year.  So, I would like to interest Members in these tables at the end of the Budget Speech.  We should look at table 2 specifically because the other tables 1(a) and (b) are more on the medium term; but table 2 is on the summary of estimates of revenue for only this financial year.  Members are aware that in the past we have had revenues estimated and incorporated in the budget, but then the economy has also suffered from lower realisation of revenue, resulting into budget cuts in our various sectors.  

I think it would be important for Members to know that the Budget Committee had a meeting with Uganda Revenue Authority.  The Uganda Revenue Authority, together with us, did recognise that when policy changes and tax that has already been raised is incorporated in the budget, it affects their expectations; for example, waiving of taxes from raw materials. 

I thought I would inform this House that the Uganda Revenue Authority is finding a very big problem with an item called sugar in raw materials, because raw materials are expected to be used in producing final products.  So sugar can be used in factories for Coca-Cola, Pepsi Cola or even biscuits and others, but the problem is the waive of taxes on this item also benefits people who are importing this sugar which ends up on the market as a finished product. So it is causing them some problem. I do not know whether the hon. Minister would like to comment on this issue. 

If we proposed that that single item, sugar, which has been very controversial, is removed from the list of raw materials and then the factories or the industries, which are using sugar as a raw material are given some other concession, would it cause any problems?  Because, there have been frauds, embezzlement and tax evasion in very large sums of money as far as sugar is concerned.  But maybe since the Minister is going to come in at the end, he can talk about that.  

We also did commend the Uganda Revenue Authority for the increase in revenue in as far as passport fees is concerned.  Maybe – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, when we come to this item, I imagine you are going to formally make a contribution but my inviting you is to guide them on utilisation of the time of the two weeks that you are going to give them.  You will definitely come back because we have not come to this motion, but just talk about the other one of utilising the time.

MS KIRASO: I am sorry, Mr Speaker, I thought I was going now to make my final remarks.

THE SPEAKER: You will come in later.

MS KIRASO: Okay.  But I think I have already talked about the utilisation of the time.  The time that we have from the 13th, as the Speaker has announced, up to the time when the Budget is passed is approximately two weeks.  Maybe I can appeal to my colleagues to come in with their reports on policy statements on time and make them as precise and brief as possible so that we concentrate on observations, on policy issues, utilisation of resources, report on loans and grants and then recommendations.  We would also expect to have up to date information on the past recommendations that were made by the various Committees of Parliament.  I will not expect a lot of debate, Mr Speaker, due to the fact that we have had very long debates on general policy issues while debating the Budget Speech.  

It is in the interest of Parliament that this reform the Budget Act is bringing – I am sorry about the word, I can see some of my colleagues getting excited and adding on agenda. I am talking about the Budget reform not, the Reform Agenda – I hope it will help both Parliament and the Executive so that the budget is passed within the recorded time.  Really, I do not think we should have more to do than we did when the budget was read.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Now, hon. Banyenzaki, in respect of the matter that you raised, I think the Minister of Education will respond after we have dealt with the scheduled work. I will give her time to make a statement, and this will help her to prepare.  

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Given the programme you have just told us between now and September 3rd, does it mean that all other items must be put on hold; for instance, amendment of the Rules of Procedure and question time?  Shall we have any period at all in between?

THE SPEAKER: No, questions are going to be brought in; we have about 25 and they cannot all be answered, but we shall interrupt here and there to accommodate urgent business that may arise. I may not know the urgent business that may arise but if it does, we shall find a way of adjusting our programme.

MR AWORI: Including the amendment of the Rules of Procedure?

THE SPEAKER: I am not aware of the intention to amend the Rules of Procedure.  If you do then it is the Committee on Rules that will advise me on that because it is within their jurisdiction.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. There are two issues where I need guidance.  One, the nature of the programme which you have attempted to lay down is a little perplexing.  There are two Standing Committee Reports that we were expecting any time now; namely, the one on election violence and the other one on the UCBL.  Where do we position that?

Two, if I heard you very well at the beginning of this debate - I value the Budget Speech because it is the cornerstone of everything - I remember to have heard you say, Sir, that we would debate the budget for six days.  One of the days included in the 6 days has already been used up as a holiday.  May I know whether what you said is conclusive for us to lose hope, those of us who had wanted to make some contributions?

THE SPEAKER: Maybe you may answer this yourself. What could have happened? The House starts proceedings, I sit here, and nobody stands to contribute. I therefore adjourn the House until the next day for further debate! As I have told you, we were here; we sat and I asked, “Any contribution?” There was none. Therefore I could not say, “Because so and so is not here, I adjourn to the next day.” (Applause)

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE UGANDA TEA AUTHORITY DECREE (REPEAL) BILL, 2002

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE (FISHERIES) (Dr F. Byaruhanga): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the bill entitled “The Uganda Tea Authority Decree (Repeal) Bill, 2002” be read a first time. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: The bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of the House.

MOTION: "THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

(i) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR TEH FISCAL YEAR 2001/ 2002

(ii) TEH BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2002/ 2003 ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE."

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. First of all, let me use part of this time, as a Member of Parliament for Mukono South, to add my voice to those of my colleagues who represent the islands, to thank Government for having identified that company that is going to provide our people lifejackets at a lower cost because it will save their lives.

Now, as Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs, yesterday two issues were raised to the effect that one Member wanted to know why we have delayed in the election of the LC II. I want to inform the House that the LC II level is a co-ordination level, and it is not part of local government. So, it is not bound by the constitutional deadlines that we have for the President, Parliament, LC V, LC III and the recent elections of the youth and people with disabilities. 

The Electoral Commission has arranged that this week, which is tomorrow, they are going to handle Youth elections and People with Disabilities, the gaps within the councils of the districts. Next week, they will handle gaps in the municipalities for the youth and for people with disabilities. Then early August, they will handle filling positions in the LC I. We hope that around 40 petitions of LC I would have been disposed of. (Interjection) Yes, our democracy is really growing. (Laughter). There are petitions even at the level of LC I. At the end of August, they will handle LC II elections.  

The second issue was a complaint by my colleague from Lwemiyaga and Ntusi about a Grade II Magistrate. In the corridor, I discussed with the MP that this is a matter for the Registrar of Courts and I advised him that he could write other official complaints to the Registrar of Courts, but I would whisper to the Registrar awaiting a formal complaint from him.

On the issue of eviction of people from land, I also informed him that as far as I know from my records, you have established land tribunals and they are effective. But if this is a group of people who do not have money to hire a lawyer - I even advised him to go and access the services of the Uganda Legal Aid Counsel at Kanjokya.  They would actually assist them. But in future, he should mobilise his people to use the services and resist eviction using the Land Act.  

Finally, there was my colleague from Kwania, and for record purposes, I want to say that I was disappointed; but I think he was not aware that probably there is a petition in court and, the date for a hearing has been set for 31st of this month. So discussing a matter on the POA is not allowed in law. But I just wanted to put it on record that it was unfortunate that some issues on the Political Organisations Act were brought on the Floor, and yet the matter is before court. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MR MIKE SEBALU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like the Minister to update me, because she has talked about filling gaps in municipal councils. I would like to bring it to her attention that there is no gap to fill in some of the town councils, especially within the new districts because they do not have anything like a council. They have not elected their mayors and the councillors, and the point in question is Wakiso Town Council. 

The whole Town Council has not had any elections, and the people are confused as to what to do because already the service machinery is in place: They have got a Town Clerk but he cannot perform. They cannot have a Budget and all the services cannot be put to use because there is no council, right from the mayor to the councillors. It is purely redundant. So, I would like her to update me on that one because she talked of filling the gaps in town councils, but as far as the Wakiso one is concerned, there is no gap to fill because the whole thing is hollow; there is nothing.

MRS ROSEMARY SSENINDE: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am seeking clarification from the honourable minister. She has just said that the land tribunals are doing their work. I do not agree with her because in my constituency, people are suffering with the issue of land. It seems the people on the land tribunals do not seem to know what they are supposed to do. I think they were not given enough education on what they are supposed to do. So, I am not clear on that. I want her to throw more light on this. They are not even in existence, if I may be right.

MRS BERNADETTE BIGIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like the honourable minister to tell this House when the Women Councils are going to be elected.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was saddened by the remarks of the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs on matters related to land disputes. In fact, the Minister should have apologised to this House for having made the statement she made. As I speak now, the totality of the Land Act is not only in shambles, but it cannot take off. At Entebbe, the Natural Resources Committee is revising an amendment to ensure that the Land Act performs. Otherwise, there is total negativity of what you are talking about. (Laughter). Thank you very much.

MRS SILVIA SINABULYA NAMABIDDE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking clarification from the Minister of Justice. This morning I heard on radio that the Electoral Commission was calling upon districts where Youth Councils and PWD elections were not carried out. It was informing districts that there would be a by-election today. They went on to say that the Electoral Commission is not going to fund the transport and any other expenses which are going to be incurred during these Youth elections. 
I want to find out from the Minister, whom do they expect to fund these youth because they are travelling long distances from sub-counties to the district?  From the previous experience when these elections were being carried out, the youth candidates and the candidates for PWDs hired lorries and any other means of transport to transport their would-be voters.  When I look at this, it shows me that Government is not committed to the youth and the PWD elections because, how do you expect these young men and women to transport themselves to voting areas? And this is one reason why when these councilors are elected, they demand high allowances from the district councils and even take tenders because they incur a lot of expenses.  So, I am asking the Minister to inform this House how they expect the youth and the PWD to fund these elections. 

MRS VICTORIA SEBAGEREKA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I also want clarification in addition to what has been said on the Floor about the youth and people with disabilities’ elections.  In Kayunga District, there has not been an election of the youth male councilor, but there was a swearing in of a youth female councilor; but all the other stages have not been tackled.  The youth councilor who was there was disqualified on a question of age, but there were no elections.  I still feel that the youth and the people with disabilities and councils leave a lot to be desired.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, for some of these questions, honestly you would not expect the minister to give an answer just now. I see that some of the questions being asked would require the Minister to get time to go and inquire from the Electoral Commission.  So, when she fails actually to answer some of them, because some of them should have been in form of “questions”, I think you will understand.

MR JOHN ARUMADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  In one of my sub-counties called Ofaka seven villages did not elect their LC I chairpersons, and this is causing a lot of anxiety in the place. Can the Minister give me assurance that this will be done before the exercise of the local council elections is finally wrapped up? I thank you.

MRS SARAH NANSUBUGA NYOMBI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would wish to seek clarification from the honourable Minister about payments.  You said we are still having more elections to come, but those who participated in the previous elections have not been paid. At least that is the complaint I get from people of Ntejeru North. What do you have to say about the payments of those people who participated in this before you start new ones?  Thank you.

MRS MUKWAYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and colleagues.  First of all, I would wish to inform the House that the Electoral Commission is a public office and you do not need a visiting card or anything to interact with the commissioners at the Electoral Commission. It is a public office, so you can go there and –(Interjection)- yes, you give me a chance to respond. It is like the ministers’ office. Ministers should use an open door mechanism; you just come in, discuss your issue and go away. That is all! So, this is a public office, it is not a private office and when we are doing our elections, really the Electoral Commission is a public office. It is only when you come to use it that is when it becomes a private office. So that is point number one. So, in future, interact with these public officers and get information because they are there, and it is a full time Commission. So these people should give you information.

Secondly, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, all the gaps in the district, be it councilors or all levels, I was informing you that we shall be starting with the district, then we shall go to the town council, municipal council and that entire bracket, then go to the sub-counties, fill in all youth even in newly created ones. Let me hope that in the newly created Wakiso Town Council these people were voters and they are in our database, but if it was newly created and the aspiring people did not register, then there is no way we are going to administer a fresh register for them.  But I am assuring the Wakiso people that when we come to the sub-counties and town councils, gaps within that structure will be taken care of.  

I am surprised, Mr Speaker, because as a minister, I receive reports and I do not think that the Chief Justice would have told me a lie that land tribunals have been constituted.  So I take it, whether there is a chairperson and committee members or the committees are there minus operational funds. That is a different matter but the committees are there -(Interjection)- yes! In my constituency I have seen – let me know from colleagues where you do not have land tribunals, then I will take it up, but in my constituency I have land tribunals in place. They may have no money but they are there.  The Minister of Lands will come here to tell you why the land tribunals are not operating.  I was only addressing the land tribunal from a legal point of view, not from an operation point of view.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I think maybe there was an amendment, which was brought here because the original idea of tribunals could not be funded, and then they used the old system of village councils and so forth to play the role of land tribunals. I think they put in place district land tribunals, but one tribunal serving various districts.  So, they are there but I think we have forgotten that we amended the law. 

MRS MUKWAYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, because I was of that very view that we passed the amendment, and I think my colleagues were remembering. But thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  

I want also to inform the House that you remember very well when we were debating about financing elections for the women, the youth and people with disabilities, I was disappointed but I restrained myself when the hon. Patrick Mwondha insinuated that I had built fat - You remember that; it is in Hansard.  That I had built fat for my own use in the budget of the people with disabilities, the women councils and the youth councils, and yet he knows that people with disabilities had to be accommodated for two days with their helpers, with transport and so on.  

With that insinuation, Finance picked it, and they looked for the fat and they said that now it appears it is fat I think you can work with, so bear with us.  The money that we have been given  - you present yourself, whether you come on a horse or on a bicycle or walk, you present yourself to be elected, the officials and the ballot papers will be there. That is the money that I have.  

Then, Mr. Speaker and honourable members, women council elections will be held after you have passed the budget. We do not have the money now, but it is an item in the Electoral Commission’s budget. Currently we are attending to petitions. For any election that is annulled, we must arrange to have fresh elections within the next 60 days.  

It is disheartening when an honourable colleague like Mr Lukyamuzi, who is a seasoned politician -(Mr Lukyamuzi rose-)

THE SPEAKER: Before you proceed, honourable members, I should have introduced the women councillors from the troubled district of Kitgum, who are here. There is the deputy speaker, Miss Sarah Oballim, there is Natalie Lopolo Okot, there is Lucy Lakot for Kitgum Town Council, Mrs. Florence Atti for Lokung, Miss Aguci Dolokaci for Adibe, Florence Okot Achiro for Mucwini, Rose Oryem for Disabilities, Filder Achan for Labong, Margaret Achayo for Amida, Palma Ayero for Madi-Opei, Dollie Arach for the Youth, Jane Ochen and Rose Lakot. You are most welcome. Could you please proceed, hon. Minister?

MRS MUKWAYA: Mr. Speaker, I was saying that an amendment to an Act does not mean that an Act has been repealed. So, the amendments will come in but the Act will continue to be in force. What I am talking about, I know, and the Speaker has just said that we moved an amendment to the Land Act. More amendments are going to be brought by Government in order to facilitate the Minister of Lands in operationalising the Land Act.

Kayunga District will be catered for, and I have taken note of that. If Kayunga is not mentioned among the districts where we have gaps, I will draw the attention of the Chairman of the Electoral Commission to it. 

Mr. Speaker, we shall pay all the officers who worked for us. These are domestic arrears. That is normal business of Parliament. When you give me money for domestic arrears I will pay them, but I am only going to pay those who will facilitate me not to fail to beat a constitutional deadline.  Thank you very much.

MS KIRASO: Mr. Speaker, once again I would like to apologise for going into the main body of my winding up when you had only asked me to talk about the procedure. 

I was talking about revenue collection and the issue of sugar, and the fraud in the system. There is rampant fraud, which has characterised the Uganda Revenue Authority of late. Of course, I know that there is the Judicial Commission, but there are issues which in the meantime can be addressed or talked about by Parliament. This will not jeopardise the workings of the Judicial Commission of Inquiry.

I did also raise a constitutional matter at the beginning of this debate, citing Article 152 of the Constitution. I am not satisfied with the response from the minister because I would like to know what takes precedence. Is it the constitutional requirement or another law that may not be in line with the constitutional requirement?

Once again, the Uganda Revenue Authority is experiencing a problem of parallel structures in dealing with smuggling. During the 6th Parliament, there was a problem between the Anti-Smuggling Unit and the Kale-Kaihura group called Special Revenue Protection Service. So Parliament recommended that for harmonisation and better working relations, the two should find a way of establishing a proper reporting mechanism. Now the same issue has come up again. I am sure my colleagues have read about the intervention of State House in matters of investigation of revenue losses. 

There is still the Special Revenue Protection Service, there is the Anti-Smuggling Unit (ASU) then there is an investigation desk in the Uganda Revenue Authority. We want to know what the department of investigations in URA does. If they are still carrying on some investigations and then another body comes in and gets suspects, bundles them up and puts them in prison, what do we gain out of such an act? 

How does Uganda Revenue Authority recover the revenue that has been lost? How does it deal with culprits? Once you get these people, the witnesses, and you put them in Luzira, then the person who was going to benefit from the smuggled goods continues to benefit from the smuggled goods. I do not know whether the minister has gone - oh, he is still here. Anyway, I am sure the Committee on Finance will throw more light on the issue of tax administration and tax collection. 

I had already brought the attention of my colleagues to these figures which I think are very important. We should not lose focus of what we are expecting in terms of revenue and what we are expecting in terms of the money that will come from donors. This constitutes the national budget.

What is also important to Parliament is how the money under the Poverty Action Fund is expended. What programmes do appear under the Poverty Action Fund? These programmes are expected to take place in your constituencies. 

Do we have a mechanism of following them up? All the information is here. It shows what the money is expected to be used for. So I ask my colleagues to interest themselves in Table 4 and Table 6. 

Table 6 shows the summary of the Recurrent and Development Expenditure Budget by a ministry and department. Where does the bulk of our money go? I am sure this is what we will be discussing in the weeks to come.

Mr. Speaker, very briefly, there are some issues that came up during this general debate on the Budget Speech, some of which had already come up in the Budget Committee Report. The issue of macro economic stability vis-à-vis the micro concerns has come up over and over again. The question is, hon. Minister, for how long are citizens of this country going to wait for the spill over of the macro economic stability down to the micro level? I know it is an economic issue, I know it is a sacrifice, but how long is it going to take? And what are the impediments to it? 

On the issue of micro credit, I saw hon. Grace Akello very actively trying to tell us how much money they are putting into micro credit schemes. I would like to know if there has been an impact assessment of these little moneys given out. You give money to people expecting them to utilise it, get profit and pay back. Do you follow it up? 

If you are giving money to somebody who does not know where to get his or her next meal from, what do you expect? You say to them, “come and borrow this Shs 20,000, use it and within a week bring it back with profit.” I consider that a distortion.

Mr. Speaker, the policy on micro credit should be revisited, especially micro credit coming from Government. We have seen the misuse of the Entandikwa Scheme. I do not know what mechanisms are in place now to make any other system work better than the Entandikwa Scheme. Before we pass these monies, which are going to the Prime Minister’s Office to be given out at Parish level, let us look at this policy again. Let us have the right information on hand so that we do not continue making mistakes.  

Markets for agricultural products is another issue that came up. Even under a liberalised economy there are responsibilities which fall squarely on the shoulders of Government. Government should not run away from its responsibilities. Much as people want to do business and we want to promote the private sector, the private sector cannot put in place infrastructure. The private sector cannot construct roads, and the private sector cannot put up cold storage facilities at the airport. Government should take its responsibilities very seriously then the private sector can thrive. 

I was taken aback when my colleague, hon. Hood Katuramu, I am sorry to mention his name but I do not want to generalise because this was specifically from him. He said that, “accounting for funds in the Defence Budget may jeopardise security concerns.” I was taken aback because I was talking about something else. I was saying that these are public resources and there should be somebody somewhere who is scrutinising the utilisation of these resources. I did not say that the classified expenditure should be brought here for debate. I do not want to know how many MIGs have been bought for example. I do not even know them.

LT COL KATIRIMA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank the Chairperson of the Committee for allowing me to give her information. With me here is a Report of the Public Accounts Committee on the Report of the Auditor General for the Public Accounts of the Government of Uganda for the Financial Year ended 30 June 1998.

In this report, paragraphs 2.1 and 20.1 deal with classified expenditure. If you allow me, I would like to read this so that it clears the air about the accountability for the classified expenditure wherever Government has incurred it.

In paragraph 2.1 the Auditor General reported that: “The Office of the President was among the Government ministries that had classified expenditure to the tune of Shs 28 billion, not audited by his office. The Accounting Officer reported that Government and the Office of the Auditor General had already worked out modalities to allow for the actual auditing of classified expenditure to be undertaken by the Auditor General. 

The Committee noted that the Auditor General has set up a special team, to be vetted by the security agencies for the purposes of auditing classified expenditure.”  

In paragraph 1.2 the audit report mentioned the Ministry of Defence as one of the ministries/departments whose expenditure, totalling Shs 28 billion, was not audited by the office of the Auditor General, as it had become a practice. “The Accounting Office explained that during the year under review, his Ministry had shs 10 billion treated as Classified Expenditure.  The Committee noted as in paragraph 2.1 above.”  That is the paragraph I read out spelling out the modalities of accountability for classified expenditure. And the Members of Parliament ought to understand it in that light. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MS KIRASO: Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Katirima for having read for us what was contained in the 1998 report, but this is 2002, and what you have read, honourable Member, was an intention then.

THE SPEAKER: Well, honourable members, I can inform you that this question of classified expenditure has been a concern of Parliaments, not only this one but also previous ones. What hon. Katirima is saying is that indeed they have found a way of dealing with this expenditure. The Auditor General himself has made an input to this in that his office will be auditing this classified expenditure.

MS KIRASO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for that information. It is very good for us to know that all public resources will now be scrutinized, and that there will not be any jeopardy to the security of this country in the process.

The other issue that I did not agree with, and I think it was also from the same colleague, was about AGOA. I felt really sad when my colleague said that the Minister of Trade and Tourism could not competently handle this issue, because it is in its infancy. My question is, when we set up institutions, why do we not allow them to work? If you have given people responsibility, why do you not give them a chance to execute it? Why do you at the same time say, “this one they will not manage, so I will put it somewhere else?” I find that unacceptable.  

Yesterday when I challenged my colleague, I thought he would go all the way and explain himself. He said, “Ministers are incompetent, so the President does most of the work. So why should the President keep the ministers in those positions?” Mr. Speaker, I do not want to cause controversy, but when ministers are given jobs, it is because they are trusted and they are expected to do a good job. They should be given a chance, they should be allowed to perform, and they should be supported to do their job.

We as Parliament should also treat these people as our colleagues and give them the support where they need it. (Applause). We should not accept that these colleagues of ours be called saboteurs. We should not accept these colleagues of ours to be belittled. You cannot say, “Some of these people do not perform, so certain issues will be handled by a small desk in my office.”  Mr. Speaker, that one is wrong.

The issue of public administration has been talked about; I do not have to repeat it. And I believe that Government is committed as it has already indicated in many other statements, and this issue is going to be addressed. The technicalities of how it is going to be addressed, we will leave to Government.

We also did point out that all recommendations made during the last budget debate have been put in one document, which I know all of you have now received - the yellow book. It would be important for Parliament to know the extent to which some of those recommendations have been adopted. For those that have not been adopted, if there are convincing reasons, let us try to work in partnership with the Executive on them.

In conclusion, if the Minister of Finance has information here, he should tell us what is being done about value addition, especially to our agricultural exports. I would like to see deliberate Government interventions on this issue. We are being told to open up, liberalize and not subsidize, but we have realized that the same countries that tell US to do that, do the opposite. So what are our interventions to add value to what is produced?

Now that I still have the Floor, Mr. Speaker, let me talk about the women councils. We have got structures for women councils from the village up to the national level, but when you look at these people’s budget, it is very small. Even then, it is operated within the bigger ministry budget. When there are cuts, these councils are affected. 

Despite that, we say that we have empowered the women, which women have we empowered? (Interjection) Yes, maybe me but how about those who have been elected right from Women Council I to Women Council V? Why are they not given the little facilitation that they are entitled to? This is something that should be looked into very seriously. I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank the honourable Members who have most ably and enthusiastically participated in the debate of the motion on the Budget, that was presented before this House. I also want to thank the Chairperson and Members of the Budget Committee for a most able reaction to this motion. It was also a most articulate presentation of the report that arose from that committee.

I therefore wish to take this opportunity to respond in as brief but as satisfactory a manner as I possibly can, to those points that were raised by the honourable members in the course of the debate.

First, on behalf of the ministry and Government, I am grateful for the manner in which the Budget Act is being implemented. Government is satisfied with it, and we shall continue to work with Parliament to ensure that the Budget Act is complied with. 

Personally, I take this opportunity to thank the members who introduced this Act. I think it is only fair to thank them. And for those with whom wars were fought, I think we have been vindicated. I thank you.

The Chairperson of the Budget Committee raised a number of issues. Government has already pronounced itself on some of them, but it was important to have them raised here all the same, so that the record is set straight. The commitment of Government should be recorded before you. 

One of the issues raised by the committee is the size of public administration. We in Government had already informed this House that indeed, we are committed to ensuring that we reduce the costs of public administration. I wish to reiterate Government’s commitment to reducing the costs of public administration, promoting reform for greater accountability and efficiency in all public sector operations, and aiming for maximum effectiveness of our programmes. 

These are matters on which both the Executive and the Legislature fully agree. Mr Speaker, all I am asking for is that the Executive and the Legislature have to work together to reduce public administration and the cost thereto. Already, a committee has been set up to study where we can adjust, but you Members of Parliament must help us, because, you see, when a Member of Parliament comes here to ask for his constituency to become a new district, that is in effect increasing the cost of public administration.  Therefore, we have to be in mutual partnership to ensure that we do not increase the cost of public administration. 

The other point that the Chairperson of the Committee raised relates to AGOA.  Mr Speaker, both the Chairperson and a number of other Members have talked about AGOA in this House. Whereas some contribution on AGOA has been constructive, some contribution on AGOA left me wondering whether some honourable members actually appreciate that AGOA is for the good of this country? 

Mr Speaker, I will just spell out what AGOA is.  AGOA is a law; it is a law that was enacted in America, and under that law, certain poor countries, including Uganda, are allowed by way of affirmative action to go and sell their products in America.  In Uganda here, we have been saying that the one way in which we will be able to improve the quality of the lives of our people is if we can effectively market what our people produce. Other Members of Parliament have said that cotton in their areas is being grown but it is not being sold or bought profitably. Now, textile products are some of those things that we can go and sell in the markets in America. 

I would want to appeal to every Member of Parliament wherever he is to support a market that will absorb the products of their people. To me that is your primary mandate. Let us support somebody who has allowed us to sell into their market what we produce. Otherwise, there is no way Government can miraculously create absorption of people’s cotton unless there is a market in which to sell these products. Therefore, Mr Speaker - (Mr Migereko rose_)

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you very much, honourable Minister of State for Finance for giving way. I think the additional point I wanted to make is that under AGOA, countries such as Uganda are free to sell a wide range of products on the American market, quota free and tariff free.  I think that is very important information.  The quotas and tariffs were some of the limiting factors in the past in regard to being in a position to access the American market for the 1,800 products, which we are now free to sell on that market.  I thank you.

MRS BIGIRWA: Mr Speaker, I do appreciate the statements from the honourable Minister of State for Finance but I have listened attentively in this House to the submissions on AGOA. It is not as if the Members are not supportive, the Members are worried about the way AGOA is being handled, the Members are worried whether AGOA means Kumar and Kumar means AGOA? (Applause) Whenever somebody in Government is explaining about AGOA, they refer to the ‘AGOA Girls’ as if it is the girls that we are marketing. So, if it could be explained properly, maybe this House would be in a better position to make more constructive submissions.
 
THE SPEAKER: But honourable members, what harm does the existence of AGOA create?  There are those who want to utilise it and there are those who do not. Now, should somebody de-campaign it because he does not want to utilise it?

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that most able, yet rhetorical question. Someone is saying there is a market there, whoever wants to, go and sell there, but if you do not want, do not go there!  But in Uganda here, people have referred to the young ladies that have been brought to be trained in high quality tailoring, and in preparing apparel for sale as “nuns”, they say this is a “military convent”, derogatory things. Things of that kind undermine the substance of what is being done. 

I think the question every Member of Parliament would be asking now is, “Why is it that in my constituency no girl has been taken?”  Training is being offered to somebody who can go back to the village and still have a profession of tailoring. That girl who had no job and that girl who is going to become a mother and that girl who is going to have children, her ability is now being improved upon and she is being empowered. I think we should all salute the effort that is being put in.

Secondly, if there is some investor who has come to this country and has said, “Yes I have been trading in the American market, this Nytil Jinja fabric of yours cannot be taken in the American market. If you want to benefit from the American market I have the know-how and I have the contacts in the American market which can link Uganda or Uganda’s products into the American market, and I am prepared to work with you to initiate you as an economy into the American market” –(Mr Awori rose_) let me just finish this point – would it be in order for a citizen of Uganda or even an honourable Member to start putting in issue the intention of the investor, after all in this country, you are free to invest in anything you want to invest in? You can invest in apparel to be sold to America; you can invest in whatever you want to invest in. 

So, I think we should pay glowing tribute where it is deserved and this investor who is putting at our disposal his contacts, his relationship with the American market, his money to bring all these tailoring machines and the technology that goes with it should, in my own opinion and in the opinion of Government, be given a hero’s welcome. Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance. There are 100 – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But really, honourable members, how long are we going to spend on this AGOA?  Really, I think maybe the Government should set up a machinery of organising us some seminars so that we talk about this issue. But really, how long are we going to spend on AGOA as if it is the only subject of the budget?

MR AWORI:  Mr Speaker, I just wanted to support the Government on export promotion. (Laughter).  AGOA is one of the export promotion initiatives.  We have no quarrel whatsoever with export promotion. The problem is methodology. For instance, we know very well that the plant which has been given to Mr Kumar, that property belongs to the private sector. It was due for privatisation.  It had been advertised for sale.  Now, we do not know whether they have now pulled it out of the PERD Statute. Is it free for all or not all?  We support Mr Kumar; we are even offering facilities in Jinja.  Why can he not come to Jinja and Busia instead of interfering with the Ministry of Privatisation?  We support AGOA, AGOA came; we need it but the methodology– (Laughter).

MR MUSUMBA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker, I think it is necessary to organise a seminar or workshop on AGOA. Little did I know, for example, that the honourable members actually needed to be educated on the need for a market abroad!  So, I take the point. Government will organise and I hope the Members of Parliament will find time to come and attend.

Having said that Sir, the issue that is being raised by the honourable who was trained in Harvard, hon. Awori – (Laughter)- as far as I am concerned, the benefit that will be derived from this country putting its foot in the doorway in the American market justifies turning any asset that is lying idle and redundant into a productive asset. The building that is being talked about in Bugolobi has been advertised and was on the market for four years.  

I can tell you this because four years ago, I was still a member of DRIC and we marketed Coffee Marketing Board.  We marketed that building and nobody bought it.  It was there, it was idle, it needed activity to be made available to it before it could be profitable, and we have now found use for it, which is strategic. It is something that will help this country in the long run.  So, again I implore Members to support the effort of Government in this direction.

Again on AGOA, Madam Chairperson was saying, why is there an office in the President’s Office? Where should it be?  These are matters that we can sort out during the workshop –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Is this on the budget? I mean can we not finish this AGOA and we proceed on other subjects? (Laughter and Applause)

MR MUSUMBA:  Mr Speaker, thank you very much!  I was only trying to answer the questions as I put them down.

The next one again raised by the Chairperson was arrears on our international commitments. She was saying we go as a country, subscribe to some international bodies and then we do not pay and we just get embarrassed; we cannot vote, we cannot participate. So, she was saying, can we rationalise and pick those organisations that we can afford to pay and those that we think are very important and keep away from organisations that we cannot sustain or that we think can wait. We take that recommendation.  It will be referred to the appropriate body, both of Government and the Foreign Affairs Committee and we shall harmonise our position. We want to thank the Committee for that recommendation.  

There was an issue; again it was raised by hon. Awori. We were talking about accommodation or residence of the Vice-President, then the hon. Awori asked how about the accommodation for the Speaker? Article 82(8) of the Constitution should settle that problem, because it says that Speaker and Deputy Speaker who are Members of Parliament, their emoluments will be determined by this House. It was determined and we can only wait for opportunity to revisit it at an appropriate time.  

Hon. Kiraso, the Chairperson, was continuing that the Auditor General should carry out a value for money audit, especially with regard to classroom construction and all these decentralised activities where we have put money.  Of course the Auditor General by law must audit and auditing has been defined not just to be pennies and pounds or pence, but also value for money audit. That is something that the Auditor General will have to comply with.

The other point that arose out of the Committee report is that we should make more money available for NAADS so that NAADS can cover more areas and faster. Yes, it is a good thing to have NAADS everywhere. We are working to ensure that we harmonise further the activities of NAADS and the national vision or plan to ensure that agriculture and mobilisation of people for production are all harmonised. As for mobilisation of funds, this is a continuing effort.  We will look for money and if we can get it, we will add it to the NAADS programme.  

There was an issue that the funds for the National Planning Authority and the Capital Market’s Authority (CMA) are insufficient, and they should be increased. I can inform this House that yes, the Bank of Uganda is assisting the Capital Market’s Authority, but also, the National Planning Authority law does provide that the budget of the National Planning Authority will be presented to this House without alteration and the House will debate it and approve it. So, when the National Planning Authority board and the chief executive are in place, they will prepare their budget and it will be brought to this House at any point in the financial year. And this House has the power to approve that budget, which will become part of the amount of money that has been appropriated for that purpose. Again, this is a matter between this House and the National Planning Authority when it is operationalised.  

The other question that arose has been handled, and that is auditing of classified expenditure.  

The other issue that the chairperson raised, which she repeated today, is Article 152 of the Constitution. The chairperson seems to be suggesting that because the law says this House will make the tax rates, anything that has not come to this House prior, by way of tax rates, is irregular. No, I do not agree, because the Article says: (1) “No tax shall be imposed except under the authority of an Act of Parliament” 

We have an Act of Parliament, in fact which authorizes us to issue a provisional collection of taxes order before this House has approved the tax rates. So we are one hundred percent in compliance with the law and the Constitution.

The other point, Sir, came from hon. Hyuha. She said that there are instances where Ministry of Finance has said it will do a, b, c, d but it is neither reflected in the budget nor in the policy statement of that ministry or any other ministry. The examples given were regarding education and health, where some of the recommendations have not been included. This includes Lumumba Hall and so on.

On this one, I can say that the next stage, as you have ably guided this House, is going to be that each ministry, each sector is going to appear here before the relevant committee to discuss their policy statement.  I believe all these issues that have been raised but cannot be found in the policy statements will be discussed by those committees and they will be resolved within the committee. Failure to resolve those issues, then the matter will be brought before this House for final adjudication.

Another point was raised by hon. Nyombi Sarah. She said she was very displeased when she went to London and found that in an agricultural show, Ugandans did not have a stall, when in fact we are saying we are an agricultural country that is looking for markets aboard. So, how come we did not have a stall? She said that even a country like Ghana exhibited their potatoes, which are inferior to ours, and for us who have good potatoes, we did not exhibit at all. So, she wanted to know what the problem was.  I can only say –(Interruption)

MS KIRASO BIRUNGI: Actually, what hon. Sarah Nyombi said is that money had been released to pay for the stall. The stall had been paid for, it was there, but it was empty. There was nobody exhibiting anything, but it had been paid for.

MR MUSUMBA: Well, if the money was paid, then Finance and Government discharged its obligation. But the point I wanted to make is that this is a partnership. Exhibition is really a private affair; Government can put in place infrastructure but the people to exhibit are the individuals who have things to exhibit. 

The partnership between the private people and Government must continue so that we ensure that the drive for the export market continues. This is a matter that we shall further examine in Government, so that we know what the problem is. Where was the problem, why didn’t we take advantage as a country to put up that exhibition? 

Dr Esele from Bukedea said that implementation of PMA was too slow. I beg to disagree. PMA is not just improved seeds and irrigation or things like that; PMA is wider. PMA is a comprehensive programme to ensure that when you plant and grow as a farmer, there is a road that will take your product from the farm to the market; two, that there is a market, and three, that there is the infrastructure so that you access that market. And some of these markets are outside Uganda and some are within Uganda.  

The process the Government has been undertaking is to comprehensively address all the bottlenecks that will otherwise affect a farmer who has increased his yield from getting value from that yield. Hence the drive for investors to come here and add value or put up factories that will add value to our products; AGOA, the marketing of fresh products, the grading of roads - all these are efforts towards modernizing agriculture.  

You do not modernize agriculture simply by improved seeds; that is the last stage in the process of modernizing agriculture. So, we are on course, we are moving and we are not moving too slowly. It is not as you said that we are only in 19 districts, we are all over Uganda. 

Capt. Matovu did say that there are too many demands that Government is putting on people who want to start schools. He said that it is cumbersome as if the children being taught are children of foreigners and not children of Ugandans. 

I do not know of any barrier that has been put on the route of somebody who wants to build a school.  All I know is Government will tax you if, as a proprietor you make a profit. Until you make a profit, Government does not tax you if you are setting up a school. Therefore, I want to assure the public that Government supports efforts of private entrepreneurs to invest in education, in school institutions, in centres of excellence. In fact, right now we are calling upon investors to invest in centres of excellence, like we want people to teach or to train people in serving in hotels, hospitality industries, computer technology, computer repairs, etcetera. We would welcome investors in these areas. 

Hon. Mukama said that Government has given very little attention to cotton. I do not agree. We are exporting in excess of 100,000 bales of cotton - about 150 bales of raw cotton, and that has depressed the farm gate price. What Government wants to do now is to ensure that value addition efforts are put in place so that when cotton is produced, value is added to it and it begins bringing in more money so that the farm gate price that is received by the farmer is higher than now.

Let me tell you that for Government to ask people to grow cotton is the easier part; we will do that, we will ask you to grow cotton, we will go out and ask people to grow cotton. But before we do that, we must ensure that we have put in place mechanisms of adding value to that cotton and selling it, hence AGOA and Kumar and other investors like that.(Laughter).

Hon. Kaweesi Ndawula did raise a point that was later raised, in the course of today’s discussion. He asked why did we, in the budget speech, say that vehicles from Japan would be subject to inspection? There are four reasons, and I implore honourable members to support Government on this drive.

The first one is that the vehicles that have been coming here, because there is no age limit to what vehicle you can import here, some of them have been so bad and so mechanically dangerous.  The moment the number plates are put on, they smoke so heavily and they ruin our environment. But even more important is that they are a menace to the road users. As a consequence, the first thing you do as soon as you put on the number plate is to go and buy more spare parts.  

As a nation, the proportion of foreign exchange we are spending on importation of spare parts is higher than we would otherwise spend on account of the many run-down vehicles that we import in this country. So, we want to be sure that the car that is coming has had at least minimum or basic repairs carried out in that place. It must have a certificate of fitness.   

The Japanese Government did make allegations that some of their vehicles are being smuggled out of Japan and brought to the East African area.  They said motorcycles and vehicles are actually being stolen. 

Here we want to be in the clear, we do not want the reputation of Uganda to go out that this is a laundering country, that you steal something and you bring it here, because it damages our international reputation. It is like having a neighbour and each time something is stolen from somewhere, they take it to that neighbour of yours. You will know that next time something is stolen from you, it will actually go there.  Therefore, we do not want the national reputation to be affected. We have said Japan, for every vehicle that comes, let us be satisfied that you know about it.  

The third point is URA. We have got complaints from importers that URA is over valuing. They are saying that for me I bought this vehicle only at 1000 dollars, now URA is saying its value is 5000 dollars. This will be the highest level of arbitration between the taxpayer and URA, because it will come stating exactly what the value of this vehicle is, and how much money has been expended on this vehicle. 

So, in summary on this point, we did deliberately say that let the Japan agency, together with the vehicle that is coming into this country send certification. There has been an issue that isn’t it the Ugandans going to pay? I want to assure this House that we are in discussion with the Government of Japan, through JIKA and so on, about how this can be ameliorated, about how the Ugandan importer can be cushioned against extra or excessive charges on this account. 

The honourable Member from Bunyaruguru, who said that there are 52 crater lakes in Bunyaruguru, which should be stocked with fish, raised a point. I will take this matter up with the Minister of Agriculture and Fisheries and we will find a way of ensuring that these Bunyaruguru crater lakes have fish fries. 

Capt. Byaruhanga did ask what the Ministry has done to advise the President on excessive expenditure incurred on public administration.  He even gave names of certain people. I want to assure the honourable member, as indeed I stated at the beginning of my presentation, that the issue of public administration is an issue that is very close to our heart. It has been mentioned in the Budget, the President is concerned, the Cabinet is concerned and there is a study to rationalise, but it can only be done in partnership with Parliament.

Hon. Sylvia Sinabulya did say that people in rural areas are not accessing micro-finance. First of all, the money for micro-finance is there, it is not that it is not there. But we do not want to commit the mistake that was made with Entandikwa - have money and just give.  So, we have been working out the legal framework to ensure that when micro-finance or deposit micro-taking institutions are put in place, they are actually run effectively and efficiently.  

All we are doing is ensuring that under the Prime Minister’s Office, which is co-ordinating this effort, both the legal and the operational framework of ensuring that money goes down to the people is put in place in due course. And we also want to ensure that it is money, not Shs.20,000 to some person who has been poor, as someone did say, but money in real terms to help assist alleviate poverty.  

The honourable member from Jonam County did ask why we are we not adding forestry to those areas that are sources of foreign exchange to this country. He gave examples of several amounts of foreign money that is being earned by South Africa from the export of charcoal. He also said we should look at Gum Arabic, Macadamia nut trees etc. 

I want to assure this House that Gum-Arabic is an issue that none other than the President himself has taken an interest in, and he has asked people to ensure that we participate in the production and sale of Gum-Arabic on the international market.

Prof. Latigo did say that the focus of MTEEF is short-term and not development, hence there is an absence of a yardstick against which we are measuring our success.  I can only say that recently Parliament and Government did put in place the National Planning Authority, and we charged it duties including some of what has been raised here.  I just entreat this House to allow this newly created body to perform.  

Hon. Baba Diri did raise two interesting points, and I promise that we shall take them up. One of them is that the census should take careful note of those who deserve to be categorised as disabled because now there is known benefit for being disabled and there are people who should not be categorised as disabled but want to be categorised as disabled because they want to participate in elections.  Secondly, we should go ahead and sensitise the census group as to who qualifies or who should be identified as disabled.  

Hon. Angupale said Government should not put taxes on second hand clothes.  First of all, we put only 5 per cent, given the profit margin that these people have been getting out of these so called “used clothing” – I call them “so called” because what they have been doing is that they go and get good brand new clothes, but which have been cleared from the departmental stores because it is off season, they come and put them in a bale and on the side they put a few used bras and petticoats and so on, and they come here and have them cleared as used clothing.  The first thing they do is take out the beautiful off-season clothes and have them re-pressed and they are the ones hanging in the shops on Luwum Street and so on.  So, there has been a lot of money and there is still a lot of money in used clothing.  But that is not just the point.  The point is really more strategic than just used clothing.  

In this country, we introduced a small tax of 5 per cent on these used clothing to give notice to the whole world that we are prepared to protect any investor who wants to come and invest or who has invested in value addition to our cotton in this country. (Applause). In addition, we have given notice in no unclear terms that in this country, we will not tolerate as a national programme a situation where we condemn Ugandans to perpetually wearing used clothing. (Applause).  Therefore, everybody is on notice that the 5 per cent is a beginning. As we increasingly achieve higher capacity to process our local cotton, we shall increasingly raise the tax on used clothing.

Mr Speaker, the other point was raised by hon. Imumet. He says that census in Teso and Karamoja may be tricky due to instability.  Honourable Members, I want to say that it is my intention to arrange a meeting between the leaders of Teso, Karamoja, Kitgum - the North generally; the areas that are under some disturbance right now, to find ways of ensuring that even in those circumstances we still get information about our people there.  Because you see, the benefit of the census, Mr Speaker is  - I want to give you a simple example. 

If I was serving tea here and I asked people in the room outside this House, how many are you so that I provide tea for you?  If they are 50 and they tell me they are 20, I will provide tea for 20 people.  It is only when I get the actual number of people out there that I can be able to serve them.  Similarly, if we do not get the actual figures of how many people we have and their living conditions and so on and so forth, we will be impaired in our planning process.  We want to plan based on accurate information as we possibly can get.  

By the way, hon. Nsambu made some very good points, which I find we should be able to discuss in Government and come with some answers.  He said, why should a student of law who is privately sponsored pay Shs600,000 but a student who has been sponsored by Government, Government is paying for him Shs125,000 only?  That point was later raised by another Member.    This is a good point that we shall take up.  Law was just another example; even education and agriculture and others will be addressed.

Finally, Mr Speaker, I want to thank all the honourable Members. (Laughter and Applause)

THE SPEAKER:  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much.  I do not know whether the Minister of Education is in position to make a statement.  Let us listen to her and then you can come in later.

MR MIKE SEBALU:  I thought she could handle it –

THE SPEAKER:  Oh, is it related?

MR SEBALU:  Yes.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I would like also to bring it to the attention of the Minister that the letters written from her Ministry to some of the beneficiaries of UPE, including some of the private schools which were beneficiaries, there is an outcry there that the manner in which it was done disoriented them in terms of their budgeting, because all of a sudden communication came round that they cannot benefit from the same and yet some of them had made their projections and their budgeting basing on that.  So, I would like also the Minister to make a comment about that because there is that outcry there of those people who have been handling UPE pupils in private schools.  So, I wanted her to know that there is that problem out there, and a better way could be arranged to let them take it lightly.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Yes, this question of strikes in schools has also affected Bushenyi district.  The information I have heard this morning is that in Ruhinda and in Igara, the two counties, strikes are also taking place.  I do not know whether this problem cannot be addressed at the country level rather than look at it from the local level.

What I have also gathered is the difference in salary structure between a headmaster and an ordinary teacher, which may be part of the problem in these schools.  That difference is so big and yet the headmaster may not be so different from an ordinary teacher.  The experience he may have does not make him earn three times more than the ordinary teacher.  If you are going to appreciate the salaries, discrepancy should not be too big. 

When you talk about strikes in schools, one would want to compare private schools and government schools. We do not seem to have many strikes in private schools, but it is easy to have a strike in a government school; why?  I think some of these things need to be considered because we are dealing with the same children. Why should they behave differently under different management?  The problem may be in the management.

Lastly - this is from a personal experience - where you have a child in a secondary school and another in a primary school, and time comes for electing prefects, because now prefects are elected and parents are being asked to give money for bribes to the other children. Surely, if this thing is going to be allowed to grow in schools, we have a demon that is going to eat us all.  

I think it should be illegitimatized, and circulars from Ministry of Education should go to schools, parents, and associations to say this is a cancer that will kill us all. The people who have money may use it in campaign, but for children who have to go and ask parents to give them money, it is dangerous. And we are having a situation where a parent who refuses may have a strained relationship with a child because it may be interpreted that there is something missing between the two. 

So please, for heaven’s sake, I am hoping that time will come when we shall pass a law in this House to punish those cancer carriers; these money givers, these distortioners, because they get it from somewhere and then they give it to children and we create problems for ourselves.  So, I hope the Minister of Education will make sure that this disease is fought with the same venom as we are fighting against AIDS.

MRS MASIKO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I would also like the Minister to explain to us the big difference between the headmaster of a school of Grade IV and the headmaster of a school of level II and I.  I think it would be prudent for the Minister to explain why that level, which could be the cause of the strikes.  Apparently, at least in my district, all the teachers in primary schools are on strike. 

Also, of course another complaint that is apparently very clear and alarming is that, a nurse gets a salary between Shs.220,000 and Shs.250,000 while actually the teacher gets Shs.110,000, after the increment of Shs.4,000.  I think it will be a good thing for the Minister to help us understand this so that we are able to explain to the people in our constituencies.  Thank you.

MR ARUMADRI: I thank you, Mr Speaker.  During the month of April, strong winds ravaged through Arua district and blew away many, many schools.  The district authorities tabulated the costs and passed them to us as Members of Parliament from that district.  I have been trying to make very quiet approaches to the Ministry, but I am afraid am not making much headway.  This figure I thought could be included in the Budget. It is not a large figure; it is about Shs.376 million, which I think the country can afford.  Most of our pupils are now under trees. I would kindly request the Minister to make sure that allocation is done so that our children return to school.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR OGWEL LOOTE:  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I would like the Minister to clarify on the long period of non-payment of the facilitators. Every time I go to the constituency, these people ask for their payment. These funds are released quarterly but it goes beyond that period and this demoralises these facilitators, and yet they were very vigilant. They were providing education and they were so committed but now when this little money takes time, you really find them very discouraged.  The students are also complaining that their teachers are not paid and so they are not very effective in the delivery of lessons.  

Then the second point within the component of that basic education is training, because that was the agreement with the donor, that we take the training part of the structural material of production and the payment of the facilitators, and I think they have been patient. I would like to take the message, what news can I take to them?  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR SEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I see in the budget a lot of funds being sent as capitation grant and school facilitation grant. The schools that are being built are meant to last for 20 years – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: That seems a diversion from the question. The reason why the minister is here is because of the question raised by hon. Banyenzaki about strikes. But if you are talking about the budget for the ministry, I would advise that you go to the appropriate Committee of Social Services, which deals with this. I will be talking about what we should do with these committees, which are going into session, at the end. So unless it is an emergency - because we are talking about emergency, I would advise you to take it to the right committee.

MR SEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, it is about accountability of the funds that causes – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Exactly; that one is a policy matter which you should deal with in a sessional Committee.

REV. MBABAZI KABUSHENGA: Thank you very much Mr Speaker.  The district of Kanungu is one of the districts that are affected by the strikes. I was speaking with the Resident District Commissioner this morning, and I would like the minister to enlighten us on the issue of taxation. 

The teachers are saying that not only are their pays very low compared to those of the headmasters, but they are also taxed unfairly. Out of a salary of Shs100,000 they have to pay 80,000 or even 100,000 when people who earn much more are paying the same or even less.  

My second and final question is; why do we not think in terms of partnership with the private schools in the same way that we have thought about partnership in health institutions? My study is that in Kanungu district, for example, which came 5th in performance in primary leaving exams, 98 per cent of the Grade I passes were by private primary schools, whose teachers are paid for only nine or ten months of the year, and their facilities are in shambles. I believe there is something to learn from the way these schools are run. Why, therefore, doesn’t the Minister think of extending support to them so that they can have a stake in the people who are giving success to this nation?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, the first question on taxation can be competently answered by the Minister of Local Government or the Minister of Finance, but maybe she can answer the other one.

THE MINISTER OF STATE (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Mrs Namirembe Bitamazire): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the ten Members who have raised issues of concern on the education sector. Mr Speaker, as you rightly said, I think I will only competently handle the question, which is urgent and almost becoming a crisis in the country but I have taken note of the other questions, which I would like to beg that you give us time to give a well-researched answer on. Therefore, let me take this opportunity to brief the Members of Parliament as I have this morning briefed the public through the mass media in a press conference because of the increasing concern about the strikes in schools.

I would like to start by confirming that the Government is committed to addressing the issues raised by the teachers.  Government has always been committed to look into all issues concerning teacher’s salaries, teachers’ welfare and teacher’s working environment. So, with this strike, I want to dispel the fear that probably the Government is adamant about what the teachers are going through.

Give me an opportunity, Mr Speaker, also to express the Ministry of Education and Government appreciation of the work that has been done by the teachers in the classrooms and in the schools, especially since the launching of the Universal Primary Education about six years ago. As we all know, when the UPE was launched, the enrolment of pupils in the primary schools trebled. Right now, we are talking about 6.8 million children in schools, while five years ago we had 2.7 million children in primary schools. It has been a tremendous achievement in the area of improving access to primary education. 

Our gallant teachers have been working tirelessly to accommodate and teach those children. Many of you have been in schools to find teachers submerged by a 100 plus children; children looking anxious and eager to learn and with one teacher, or probably in some schools two teachers around.

Mr Speaker, we should not, as Ugandans and as Government, forget the work the teachers have done to spearhead and to man the massive programme up to where we are today. UPE is on target and as Ugandans we should feel proud of the achievements we have so far made in the programme of UPE.  The key players are our teachers; they have sustained the programme and I want to assure my colleagues that we are making progress.

Having said that, Government is already addressing the issues of teachers. What we have done so far on the ground is to start on a housing scheme. This past financial year, each district was supposed to take 15 per cent of their construction money to start on a teacher’s housing scheme, and only last week, while in Kamuli, I had the opportunity to see the teachers’ houses nearing completion. It is really a tremendous innovation and a move in the right direction.  

Mr Speaker, quite a number of other things have been done.  Like starting with the last financial year, teachers training to become primary teachers at Grade III level are joining colleges and more or less going through what we should call ‘universal primary teacher education’. Cost sharing was phased out as a policy of Government so that we can attract the bright young men and women without enough funds to come and join the teaching profession. That is a step in the right direction.

Even over the last ten years, the salaries of teachers have not been static. When I come with a written statement, we shall analyse the changes that have been made in the teachers’ salaries since the Movement Government took power. But what might have sparked off what today we can refer to as strikes is an implementation in the salary scales, which we understand have created a bigger gap between the head teachers and the classroom teachers. 

I would like to inform my colleagues that the Ministry of Education right now has no official report from the concerned or the districts where teachers have gone on strike. Therefore, I do not want to speak with authority on what other factors might have contributed to this. But through the questions raised just now, we can learn that probably there are other factors. 

What the Minister of Education has done today, after all these reports through the mass media - because we do not yet have official reports - is to set in place a task force to collect information on this matter immediately. It will also arrange for a dialogue and consultations with our colleagues in the Ministry of Public Service, because I would like to correct the mistake.  

In government bureaucracy and set-up, the Ministry of Public Service is responsible; they are the ones who are making payments and probably setting salary scales. But many people think the Ministry of Education pays teachers. Public servants in the government are all the responsibility of the Ministry of Public Service.  Therefore, Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Education and the Ministry of Public Service are going to work round the clock throughout the weekend, first of all, to collect information and facts about what is on the ground, and secondly, to address the issues as they are raised. 

In that sense, we are encouraging the local government structures concerned to give us memos or written notes or any information that can help us to identify the issues and to work out proper interventions by government. In the meantime, the Ministry of Education, and indeed government, is appealing to our gallant teachers to pick up their chalk and books again and continue with the work while we address the issues, which might have sparked off to strike.  

I would like to make a passionate appeal to all our teachers to go back to classrooms and help us handle our 6.8 million children while some steps are being taken to address these issues. This is because if they continue, probably the discussions might not come off quite as fast with the tension and chaos around. 

But I want to assure you that this issue will not pass without focused attention to what exactly are the factors and what are the appropriate interventions, which government and the Ministries of Education and Public Service can do.  

Mr Speaker, I just thought I would make a brief and quick reaction because it is the issue now. According to the mass media, about six districts have already shown signs of strikes, of varying in intensity from Rukungiri to Busia. But we are again appealing to all the teachers in other district to please continue. We shall come up with appropriate intervention and identify, screen and work out what exactly are the priorities in the factors, which will be presented to the ministry.  

Colleagues, I have taken note of all other related questions and I want to assure you that we shall come up with written statements and answers to those questions when time is available to us. I thank you. (Applause).

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Now, honourable Members, we come to the end. But as I said, the committees will be sitting from morning to evening. You may belong to one committee when there is an issue being handled by another committee where you are not a member. 

According to our rules, you are allowed to go to any committee where you have an issue to raise. You can raise your concerns; give your views on the matter so that when the committee makes a report, it takes extra account of the observations of other members other than those who are the ordinary members of the committee. I hope by this we shall be able, when the reports are submitted, to spend a little time on them because we shall have been a party to the reports the committee will have made. But we should ensure that we comply with this law and I thank you for what you have done so far; it is your own commitment. 

Attendance of the Committees is mandatory. Do not say, “Plenary is not there, we need not attend, therefore, I can go away.” If you are to go away, you will need to seek permission for not attending the committee meeting. Otherwise, you will be defaulting and it may be counted against you. It is not a threat, but I am just advising you so that you diligently handle the work of the committee, which is also the work of this House. 

With this, I thank you very much. The House is adjourned until Monday, when you go to your respective committees.  Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 5.06p.m. and adjourned until Monday, 29 July 2002.)

