Monday 31st July, 2000

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Ssekandi, in the Chair))

(The House was called to order)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY & FISHERIES (Dr. Kisamba-Mugerwa):  Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, I wish to make reference to a story  which appeared in the New Vision of Friday 28th, July, 2000 under the heading, “Ministers named in the Indian Pumps scam” and would wish to make clarifications on the Indian irrigation pumps donated to Uganda Government as follows.  

During his visit to India in 1992, His Excellency the President of Uganda had fruitful discussions with the Government of India.  When he was last in Uganda, the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister of India concluded a pledge to donate 100 units of irrigation pumps to the government of Uganda.  This was in line with the spirit of south to south co-operation among developing countries.  The allocation of the Indian pumps Mr. Speaker by my Ministry has been through a high transparent process including Cabinet approval.  The sequence of events involving the allocation process of the Indian pumps is summarised here as below:

On Monday 9th August, 1999 the pumps were handed over to Uganda by His Excellency the Indian High Commissioner to Uganda in a ceremony which was graced by His Excellency the Vice-President of Uganda who presided and commissioned the irrigation pumps.  During the same occasion, the demonstration on the utilisation of the Indian pumps was undertaken by the Ministry and NARO at Kawanda.  The occasion was attended among others by Members of Parliament on my invitation, farmers, representatives and the press and the general public.  

On 4th October, 1999, I submitted a Cabinet proposal for the distribution of the water pumps.  The criteria for allocation proposed and which was approved by Cabinet included the following:-
    1. Rainfall deficit areas especially those found along the cattle corridor be given priority.
    2. Availability of reliable and good quality water to sustain the discharge of 100 cubic meters per hour especially during the lowest ebb at the height of drought be taken into account.
    3. Expressed the need and demand driven considerations as indicated by the applicants.  
    4. Viability of enterprises in which the units are to be used whether for high value crops, livestock or fisheries and finally, ability to operationalise and maintain the pumps.

Besides above, the following proposals which were also approved by Cabinet constituted the methodology for distribution of the pumps.  It was decided that targeted groups of recipients and beneficiaries be identified, cleared by the multi-disciplinary team through preliminary feasibility studies that are specific.  The beneficiaries had to be willing to meet a nominal fee of 2 million for the operationalisation of the pumps in addition to the cost of establishment which would vary with either the recommended system of irrigation or pumping water for livestock.  

For surface irrigation system, the cost of establishment ranges between 1.9 million and 2.4 million per acre while splinca it is between 1.4 million and 1.9 million shillings per acre.  Livestock watering on the other hand would require a linear cost of piping whose value would range between 1.4 and 2.1 million shillings depending on the diameters of the gauge of the hydro density polythene pipes used.  

Following Cabinet approval of the proposed allocation criteria, my Ministry constituted a technical multi-disciplinary committee which comprised representatives not only from my Ministry but also from NARO and the department of water development in the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment to advise its top policy management on allocation of the pumps.  My Ministry in striving to ensure transparency and national coverage in the allocation of the pumps, carried out advertisements in the newspapers both on national and local information on the availability of these pumps and requested for prospective applicants to apply for the pumps.  

The advertisements were made as follows:  In The New Vision, it appeared on Tuesday 28th, December 1999, in Rupiny, it appeared on 29th December, 1999 to 4th January, 2000.  Bukedde December 28th  1999, Orumuri 29th December, 1999 to 2nd January, 2000, Etop on 30th December, 1999 to 5th January, 2000.  The response was spontaneous particularly in the districts of Rukungiri and Hoima with over 45 and 35 applicants respectively.  Altogether the Ministry received 160 applications from farmers.   In order to verify the authenticity of the applicants, my Ministry despatched four technical missions to various parts of the country to carry out rapid field assessment.  The top policy management meeting in my Ministry held on 22nd May, 2000 approved the application list.  

On January 3rd, the Ministry submitted to Cabinet for information the rapid appraisal assessment and allocation report for the pumps.  The list of the successful applicants are as in appendix 1 on my statement.  If needs require, I will have to read it later.  The Ministry on July 3rd 2000 submitted to Cabinet for information and  issued letters to successful applications on 14th July, 2000.  Successful applicants for the Indian pumps have not been selected on the basis of their positions but rather on the score rating derived from the criteria which the Ministry submitted and was approved by Cabinet.  

All successful applicants are farmers and all those who applied for pumps did so as individual farmers.  There were however exceptional cases where others applied for other groups of farmers and also where pumps were allocated to institutions such as district local governments like Kamuli, Mbale, Nakasongola, Nebbi and the institution like NARO (National Research Organisation), women’s groups and others.  But in all cases, the focus is for production through mitigation of the effects of drought in the country.  The allocation Mr. Speaker of the pumps also took into account national considerations especially country wide coverage with more focus on the cattle corridor.   

In total, 37 districts out of 45 benefited from the pumps taking a total of 95 pumps.  Five pumps have been allocated to National Agricultural Research Organisation for research and demonstration purposes.  It is not true that pumps are worth 20 million shillings each and have been sold to Members of Parliament and Ministers at parity of 2 million shillings each.  

According to the Indian High Commissioner, the cost of each pump is approximately 7 million shillings. The pumps in effect have been given free to farmers except that beneficiaries have to meet a nominal fee of 2 million for operationalisation of the pumps in addition to cost establishments which would vary with the recommended system of irrigation or pumping water for livestock.  The two million shillings is meant to cater for missing parts as the pumps did not come complete with all parts.  The Ministry is conscious of the fact that beneficiaries who are basically farmers may not be able to easily raise the two million shillings for the operationalisation of the pumps and that is why it has given three months’ period within which the beneficiaries have to pay.  If a beneficiary fails to pay within the three months, then the pump can be allocated to another applicant on the waiting list.  

Mr. Speaker, and hon. Members, under the strategy for transforming the agricultural sector in the country as contained in the PMA, one critical area of focusing by my Ministry is developing irrigation capacity and small holder water harvesting system in an effort to mitigate the impact of drought which is increasingly becoming a common feature of the climate of the country.  This initiative is to be strengthened by FAO supported special programme for food security whose overall objective is to improve food security through demonstrating economically sustainable methodologies for increasing agricultural productivity, hence overall production.  This is to be achieved through water and irrigation development in combination with crop intensification and diversification and continuous analysis of the constraints which have hitherto hindered increased crop and animal production amongst small holders.  

The establishment and operationalisation of the 100 high volume and high pressure irrigation pumps from India is part of the strategy I have alluded to above.  

I thank the hon. Members for listening to me, but before I conclude I wish to go through this list, because the Members do have the copy.  For instance, in Adjumani District, three pumps were given;  two pumps went to Moses Ali, and one pump went to Mr. C. Okia.  

In Apac, three pumps were given;  Angella, Geofry, J.J. Amama and hon. Jovia Akaki, each received one.  In Hoima, Mr. D. Kiiza, Mr. J. Mukidi and Kirego, Mr. S. Kasajja, Byaruhanga, Mr. S. Kirema of HODFA and hon. Kajura, each received one and Hoima received six.  In Gulu three were allocated, Col. J.F. Oketa, Fukapower – I think this is an organisation – and A. Dangachwa, each one received one.  

In Bushenyi three were given, hon. B. Bigirwa, Mr. V. Lubingo, Msrs. R. Besigye, each received one.  In Iganga, one was given to hon. W. Abdala Tiff; in Kabaale two were given, Nzerirwa and Mr. Tibihika each received one.  In Kabarole three were given, hon. Byaruhanga, Mahioro Rice Growers and Mr. P. Begumya, each received one.  In Kamuli three were allocated, district team got one, hon. G. Kayizzi got one, Mr. D. Matovu got one;  in Katakwi three were given to Benardette Odo, Ben Omodia and G. Osege each receiving one.  

In Kiboga only one was allocated to Damiano Ssembatya.  In Kitgum one was allocated to Mssrs Lilian Omonyo Ogaba;  I think this is the wife of the Minister.  In Kotido three were received, Peter Lokiri, Ngerkya John B, and William Lodyoke. In Kumi two, hon. F. Egunyu and Mr. P. Olemukan. In Lira, Mr. Oresenyia Oleke, Mr. Okodi Machopio Levi and Mr. Ongom Charles, each received one.  In Luwero, four were received; Wachato subcounty headquarters, Kapeeka sub-county headquarters; hon. S. Bumba and Dr. Ronald E.N. Bata.  In Masaka  three were received;  hon. Miyingo;  hon. G. Ssendawula and Ndeebe Horticultural Famers.  

In Masindi four were received; Christopher Geria, Mssrs Ociba Benard, A.S. Okello and Mr. H. Okino, each one received on. In Mbale one was received by Bunambutye Sub-county;  In Mbarara two were received, K. Silingi and Mr. W. Makuru;  in Moroto four, Mr. Jimmy Lomukor;  Pian Farmers and Millers;  hon. Peter Lokeris and Mr. Akia Terese. In Moyo, two were received, Mr. Ruadra M.  and Rev. Vura E. Maria.  Finally, Mpigi District four were received, Tonda Kakuba Mugizi and Bakojja each received one.  In Mubende three, Ssebuliba, Banasula, Kasirye, each received one.  In Mukono four, Mr. A. Blick received two, and Mr. G. Sigpra received one, and Mr. J.P. Kiwanuka received one.  

In Nakasongola four were received, Mr. Kizito received two, Mr. Y. Byarufu received one and LC V headquarters received one.  In Nebbi – this is where I need to explain, in Nebbi all four of them were allocated to hon. Ali Gabe, but hon. Ali Gabe had applied for nine for different women groups in his constituency, and we have been there to see the source of water and what they are doing.  I had earlier allocated five and in the end we settled on four.  This is where it is seen as if it has gone to one person, but on behalf of  other people for whom hon. Member applied.  

In Ntungamo only one received and this is E. Rwakakooko;  in Pallisa only one, district administration;  in Rakai only one, hon. E. Pinto;  in Rukungiri three, Byabakama, Tugwesi and Birikwate.  In Ssembabule one, Bumbakali Nsubuga.  In Soroti four, Ebau Emogo, Paul J. Opio, Babigimba Investment and Mr. Y. Obuku, each received one, and in Tororo one was allocated to Busitems Cultural College and NAROW received five.  In total a hundred were received.  Quite a number of people who had applied did not receive, others are the applications we found that they did not have water or they were not actually going to afford even the shs.2 million for operationising them.  

So, I wish to clarify that I have exercised the possible transparency and expediency in ensuring that these pumps are allocated and utilised.  The problem with the government property of this nature, it could be there for years and years and it is not utilised.  What is important, Mr. Speaker, and hon. Members is to ensure that we take these in the field and serve the purpose for which they were donated to us.  I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much, but before we proceed, I  would like to welcome hon. Amanya Mushega, Minister of Public Service back to us, and I want to thank all those who facilitated the speedy recovery.  You are most welcome.  Now, hon. Members, this is a ministerial statement and you know the rules.  So, it is a question of clarification that can be done in this, if you think there is something which Minister has not properly expressed you can put some questions for clarifications.  

MAJ. KAZOORA:   Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, in the middle of a very serious drought last year, members of the Parliamentary Food Forum visited my constituency, and among the farms they visited was a farm of a renown Ugandan farmer, a Munyankole farmer who established – who introduced dairy farming in Ankole known as Mzee Yonasani Rwakanuuma.  Now, they found a lot of cows dying, and the gentleman lost over one thousand exotic cows.  Yes, because he had over ten thousand.  That farmer, Sir, is very known – I was discussing it with Rt. Hon. Prime Minister this afternoon, and he knows him;  the hon. Amanya Mushega, the hon. Kajara and a number of Members here.  

That man expressed a lot of disappointment over the way government was handling matters of farmers.  It is with sadness, Mr. Speaker, as I speak now Mzee Rwakanuuma died last Saturday and he is being buried tomorrow; and he has definitely died of frustuation and disappointment.  To a farmer who has known his cows, to see them dying like that without any assistance from this Government and I ever mentioned him here on this Floor sir.  Now, how many farmers are going to die in the manner of Mzee Rwakanuma simply because such facilities, as even the list had shown, are being given to serious politicians, Ministers, who are capable of looking after themselves on their own without assisting these Ugandans who are being frustrated and dying in this manner.  Mr. Speaker, I wish the Minister could tell us in detail what plan is there so that in future we do not get this kind of situation.  I thank you sir.

MR. MWANDHA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  As a matter of fact, I am the one who prompted hon. Nkuuhe to give the list of people who benefited from these pumps and I am happy that the Minister has actually made this Statement.  It was not very clear to me during the Minister's Statement as to how the beneficiaries got to know about this opportunity to get these pumps.  Secondly, it was not also clear to me why some small districts were receiving more pumps than other districts, even bigger districts.  So, these are two clarifications I wish to get from the Minister.  

DR. NYEKO: Mr. Speaker, I thank you and I thank the Minister for giving his clarification. I think we Members also need to be careful when it comes to issues of farming.  Farming is not the kind of profession which you can read and then you become a farmer overnight.  There are people who have Degrees in Agriculture but they are not farmers.  There are people who have money, they buy tractors but they do not use tractors for farming.  

I think when irrigation equipment like these have come in the country, it would not be fair on our part to think that the location should be just either regional or to people who are in rural areas.  So, in my view, I think issues like these should be left to people who are interested in using this equipment for the purpose it is designed for because you can go anywhere here in Kampala, you will find people with tractors but these tractors are not being used.  They are used for carrying either water, they are used for carrying firewood, they are used for carrying sand for building.  

I think if these people, who have been allocated this irrigation equipment will use it for the purpose of increasing production, for me I would have no problem.  It only becomes a problem if somebody buys this equipment at two million shillings and then he sells it to a serious farmer, who is going to use it, and sells it for something, say ten, fifteen or twenty million shillings.  This is where the problem comes and this is where I will not support such a person.  

As far as I am concerned, I am satisfied with the explanation from the Minister and I think we need to watch these people who have got this equipment very critically and see whether these equipment are going to change hands and how will it have changed hands.  Thank you.  

DR. MALLINGA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, when I heard the list of the districts read, I said to myself, 'here we go again, Pallisa one pump' and Pallisa we know is one of the areas which has been hit by drought.  We have rivers, which are constant in Pallisa, and the pump in Pallisa was not given to an individual 
-(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  But hon. Member, do you want to know how many people because - I think the question would be, 'how many people in Pallisa applied?' because it could be that it is only one person that applied.  Is that the - because instead of going in debates, I think our rule is just to ask questions for clarification, please.  Proceed.

DR. MALLINGA: I am really trying to get a clarification and, Mr. Speaker, you hit the nail on the head.  How many farmers from Pallisa applied?  Was Pallisa considered as a drought prone area and should have been assigned more than one pump?  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  Thank you Mr. Speaker -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think I will give three others then the Minister can answer and then we proceed.  Proceed please.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, the weatherman is being defeated in Uganda.  The weatherman is being defeated because we are not being told the rain pattern and drought has stricken most parts of this country. Padyere County, from where I came only yesterday evening, seven people have died because of hunger and because of drought.  Having noted that there is general problem of weather pattern, did the Minister who, under whose jurisdiction these pumps were allocated, take into account the disaster areas in terms of water problems in the process of allocating these pumps?  

I am happy that Nebbi district got four pumps and I hope my colleague who got the pumps will make good use of the pumps but is the Minister prepared to make a follow-up as to how these pumps are being used so that those who got the pumps may put them to good use.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  

MR. KAJURA: Hon. Okumu-Ringa referred to the question whether we do issue regular statements about the weather and the weather forecast.  They are on the radio and statements are issued on a regular basis.  Let me say that currently the weather is not - the indications are not very favorable.  The indications towards drought seem to be more on the increase.  You would have noted, Mr. Speaker, and hon. Members of Parliament that  drought is spreading from Ethiopia, to Somalia through Northern Kenya and to Uganda. I can see an hon. Member objecting but, in fact, I am supporting in a way what he said, hon. Mwandha.  In other words the trend for drought is likely to be on and we are likely to receive less rainfall than before and  wet seasons  will be shorter than normally I thank you.

MR. BUTELE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. These questions of the pumps the Minister has said the Cabinet approved and then he also said that there were advertise on Newspapers. I thought, Mr. Speaker, as we representatives of the people should also be having the courtesy to all MPs being involved in this so that we could go to our areas and consult who should receive this.  Now, putting the things in New Vision, there is no guarantee very few people read these newspapers. 

Two, they used to be what they called Government gazette, in the past MPs used to have free copies of that I do not know what has happened.  Mr. Speaker,  if 100 machines were there, supposing we have got 45 districts or 50 for that matter  at least each district should get at least two. You are talking about the Cabinet; I know there some districts here who do not even have people in the Cabinet, so how will they know if you do not inform the MPs?  

So to modernise agriculture, Mr. Speaker, the Minister should involve we the MPs who are representing the people.  Arua District which is a large District, I do not remember whether we applied or not and it is true that some Districts in West Nile got, like my constituency is just along the Nile just where irrigation is required.  I hope more pumps will come and this can be sorted out, Mr. Speaker.  Thank you.

MRS. NTABGOBA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to get clarification from the Minister whether nobody applied from Kisoro because the people of Kisoro District also grow some food, and indeed they would have benefited from this allocation. Thank you.

MR. KITYO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I want to give general information to this House.  These pumps are very huge pumps, in some districts they cannot even not be used, we have just been in a meeting on Karamoja and technicians have told us that we cannot used those pumps in Karamoja. For example; in Pallisa you have to put this pump on river Mpologoma if you are to use it in Pallisa  at all.  So, these are very huge pumps which needs districts with a lot of water because it pumps so many cubic metres of water in a very short time a river will be dry.  

Two, I think the Ministry did what they could do because they advertised and sat down with the technical committee to allocate the pumps.  If we want all of us to be involved in allocations of small things, I think these Parliament will get problems.  I thank you.

MR. ABURA  KENE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, this is a new technology being introduced in Uganda, the only thing which we used to see was Madhvani using it.  Now I am wondering whether the Minister has got a system of monitoring the performance of these pumps, which are being distributed so that that technology can be sold to other areas.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you see I am going to end here after the Member for Obongi and then the Minister will respond.

MISS KABASHARIRA: Point of procedure.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am getting worried on the way we are moving and on the way we are handling things of this country. The Minister has told us that he had 100  pumps to give away I think from India, we are here lamenting asking this and that and we know that this country needs water, needs irrigation.  The Minister did not tell us whether they have plans of getting more because I do not know whether that one was a donation and we have been informed that technically they need much water.  

This poverty; Members of Parliament we are here asking how did you give away this one, how did people get it?  Where are we going, Mr. Speaker, why do we not leave and go to more serious things because they are 100 pumps only anyway, and we have no money more why do we not leave and go to another thing. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: And that is why I have decided  that the Member for Obongi will be the last one, the Minister can answer those questions.

MR. ABURA KENE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I listened to the Minister’s statement, one of the things mentioned was how these pumps were distributed district by district. And most of the names of the people who got these pumps are people whom I know and many of them have their own farms outside their districts.  I do not know what  method the Minister is going to put in place to ensure that these people take these pumps to the districts they come from, because the serious farmers in those particular districts who have missed these pumps. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, first of all, the question has been put to the Minister as to the mechanism  he is going to use to ensure that the allocations remains where it was allocated.  So, I think let the Minister answer and then we move to another question.

MR. KANYIKE: Point of procedure.  Mr. Speaker, before the Minister answers, I rise on the point of procedure. Mr. Speaker, the Minister knows that this matter is under investigation by the Committee, the Committee has written to the Minister over this matter, this matter has not yet been fully discussed in the Committee after the policy behind the distribution of these pumps and now the Minister has come up with a Ministerial Statement. Does it mean that the Minister is not going to come  and give the full expression to the Committee and the matter is going to end here, I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I do not know, I do not think that his Ministerial Statement on this issue which we saw in the papers will purge your inquiry, I would think that now you have heard what he has said, you dig deeper in your inquiries.  So, I do not see any prejudice to your inquiries you can proceed with your inquiries, but he has made his statement and he is entitled to do so. Please wind up this matter.

DR. KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have only learnt that this subject is under investigation; but I know I am going to meet the Committee tomorrow not only on pumps but I am meeting them on my policy statement, but this is the issue which will come but I had come here because of what appeared in the Newspapers what hon. Nkuuhe had - in the statement had made here regarding these pumps; but we have done it transparently, they have been allocated, the letters were issued on 14th July for the recipients. 

For Members to say that I advertised in Newspapers and farmers do not read Newspapers, it is really forgetting that I personally invited Members of Parliament and offered transport for them from here to go to Kawanda on the day they were handed over so that I carry out the demonstration in a way to impress them.  

In fact, my worry was that I may fail to get these pumps sold because they are gigantic pumps, and if we were to put them at their value just to sell them, it would go almost to over 7 million because they came in such a manner that they are lacking some accessories in order to be operationalised.  So, these 2 million is actually to operationalise them so that we give a farmer a complete operational pump; but the farmer will incur the expenses of buying equipment and installing them wherever the farmer will have chosen. 

Secondly, we have gone to assist to get some assistance from FAO to train some mechanics who will handle them so that those people who have benefited will identify certain people who are going to operationalise them so that we give them an induction sort of seminar to operationalise them.

Thirdly, there was no way really we could allocate these per district, because there was an element of demand driven. That is why I invited you so that I impress on you by demonstrating, secondly, that one has to apply.  In fact, some of these applications were received immediately we left Kawanda, but still we insisted that we have to advertise and we advertised.  This is available in the Papers.

The opportunities are there for more pumps not through my Ministry.  I am trying to move the Ministry from delivering services of thy nature by allocating and I have handled this simply because it was a donation to the government and my line Ministry is responsible to do it.  What we are trying to do is to negotiate with private sector, those suppliers of such irrigation equipment to ensure that we go in the small scale irrigation system, where each one can afford to buy instead of the big schemes of irrigation like Mubuku Irrigation Scheme, like Olwenyi Rice Irrigation Scheme, like Doho - those schemes are nolonger popular because they displace the people and some of them are in swamps, but now we think we can have a system where we have small scale irrigation scheme as it was demonstrated for some of you who bothered to visit our show in Jinja last week.

Tractors and pumps.  What am I going to ensure that these are used unlike tractors to ferry sand and firewood. For the pumps, we have been to each site wherever they are going to be allocated.  We are offering our technical know-how guidance, but you see, if one decides and we have assessed that whoever has applied is going to use for agricultural purposes, in that way, I think we can ensure that they are used for agricultural purpose; but if one uses it for town supply of water, then having bought it, we shall not have much levelled because we do not have an agreement with whoever is going to buy; but what we are going to do is to assist that they are located in the right place.

I did not follow the disaster areas as hon. Okumu was trying to suggest, but I followed where there was demand and most important supply of water.  That is why your Colleague from Pakwarch managed to get four because of the supply of the river Nile.  There was plenty of water and farmers are there and he has affordability and they are going to be useful to farmers, we welcome whoever was applying to benefit as long as they are going to be used in the manner.

I am very sorry and condolences to the bereaved family of my  farmers who died, but actually I had visited his farm earlier and I knew he was a very prominent farmer, but if it is allocation of these pipes facilitated his death, it is actually a pity, it is very sad.  I wish I could avoid anywhere where it would facilitate anybody's even falling sick alone.

I think we are not making arrangements to get pumps of this nature, what we are encouraging is for importers to ensure that they are available in the country, and we have encouraged Bulton and other suppliers to carry out demonstration of their equipment; because for instance, those who are selling beers or sodas, when they have a new brand like Nguuvu, they are the one advertising, they are the one who advertise how alcoholic it is, and people purchase.  While those people in the supply of irrigation equipment do not do that.  So, I am encouraging them.  

Bulton has responded by donating one demonstration equipment at Kawanda where we are going to demonstrate but we would like even up-country.  That is why we are decentralising agriculture research and wherever these (ARDCs) agricultural research centres will be, there will be such demonstrations.

I would like to assure the House that we are concerned about the draught and the pattern of the weather is changing and we know very well that if we are to increase productivity through good seeds, but also there is no way these seeds will germinate unless there is moisture in the soil.  So, water supply in form of irrigation is very crucial; water harvesting, water conservation, we are emphasising many ways whereby we can conserve the little water we are carrying in this country; and we are trying to learn from different countries who have successful in irrigation so that we can go full blast into irrigation.  

We have to be cautious however, that irrigation can apply to high value crops or agricultural enterprises or where irrigation is going to increase output say for instance, if an area has not been producing that crop, now it can produce it and or it has been producing it once a season, now it can have it 2 or 3 times a month.  I am willing to work with whoever is willing to assist us in this area to ensure that irrigation takes root in this country. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON FORESTRY

THE SPEAKER:   The debate is open.

MR. BAGALANA  (Bunya South, Iganga):   Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I want to thank the Committee very much for such a very large report they gave us, not only large but qualitative.   Mr. Speaker, I will begin by thanking them for opening up the corruption which is in the Forest Department.  Mr. Speaker, they recommended that some of the employees who were interdicted and were related to embezzlement of funds, let tem be demoted.  I see that this is something so little for these people.  These people should be taken to courts of  law and be charged and taken to Luzira, because, if as a Parliament, we shall recommend that people who embezzle funds just be demoted, I think we shall be giving a wrong signal to this country, because very few people are benefiting out of the labour of the Movement.  We are seeing economic growth is going ahead, is rising, GDP is rising, figures of National income are high, but the standards of living are low.  The problem is that just a few – a clique of people are eating out of the Movement.  We want so many people to 'eat' out of the Movement.

This we say, because, we have very many people who are weak in the sections of our people.  These people, if we cannot speak for them, they cannot speak. It is us who see under this Committee and un veil corruption in the Forest Department.   This should be an eye opener to the Ugandans to see that Parliament can take action when they see some people being opened up as embezzlers.  

I also thank the Committee for the recommendation they gave concerning the companies that were operating in the forest reserves.  In my constituency,  there were about four companies that were allocated land to plant trees.  I am also of the opinion that these people, that let them be reinstated and be given a fresh permit to operate such that they plant trees, because when you pass in many of the forestry areas, you see bushes not trees.  If these people can economically use the land and cater for one environmental problem, I think one it is okay.  

One problem which also should be tackled is that these people should be given time, not just give them permits and tomorrow you  expect them to raise  an acreage of trees.  I think this  will be unfair.  

The other point I want to tackle is the point of Government consideration of population levels in areas in considering gazzetting areas as forests.  Mr. Speaker, my constituency is very much populated and as we speak now, because many of them had invested most of their monies in the areas the companies were given to plant food, clearing bushes, for the companies to plant trees.  There is a very high looming level of famine in my constituency and to this note, I would call up the Minister of Disaster Preparedness to come up to the aid of my people.  They are dying of famine.  They had invested in the forest reserve, they were evicted and now they have no food.  In my constituency, it is just lack to have a meal in a day.  They are only having one meal in a day.  

So, I think Government should come up to help Bunya South Constituency in as far as food is concerned.  I thank the Minister of Disaster Preparedness, he has noted it in his Note Book, I think the press should take this that our people may rejoice. 

 The other point which the Committee did not tackle, concerning forests in this country is what concerns demarcations.  You find the forest department is coming up with new demarcations every day concerning forest reserves.  In my constituency as I speak now, half the constituency has been taken up to be a forest reserve and I do not know whether we have a constituency next season of Parliament.  

Almost  the whole of my constituency is being phased out as a Forest Reserve, I think this one should be taken into account that demarcations do not change from time to time and as press people wish; like there are villages like Kikandwa, Rutaale, Bukuku, Bukalenzi, Nakigo, Bulubode, Bumwena and so many.  All these have been taken up as Forest Reserves and they have even established schools; about two primary schools – this is Mutagisa Primary School and Bukalenzi Primary School forcing over 2,000 pupils.   These schools have also been taken to the Forest Reserve.  I do not know what this country is looking at.  Where were they when these people were establishing these primary schools?  If they are there for forests, did they not see that these primary schools were being constructed?   They would have barred these people from constructing these schools from the time go.  So, Mr.  Speaker, I would call upon the Forest Department and the Ministry concerned to see that these people are helped, especially those who do not know where to take the children, where these schools are based.   

The issue of demarcation is very important.  In 1989, there was a demarcation which was made and we people in Bunya South, we believe in that demarcation, the boundary.   When you look in 1980, the UPC Government then, de-gazetted this forest and this is the caution I am giving the Committee, when they recommend that it is the Minister who should be responsible to de-gazette or to gazette a forest.   This is a very wrong premise to start on in this country, because in that time, it was the Minister in charge of forest who de-gazetted the South Busoga forest because of the population.   

When the NRM Government came up, they re-gazetted the forest.  So, even now, the NRM Government may see the problem of the people and they de-gazette the forest but then, the other Government which may come may re-gazette the forest.  So, I call upon this House to consider this matter and I think it should Parliament to de-gazette or re-gazette or gazette forests in this country.   This power should be vested in Parliament.  If it is constitutional, I call for a Constitutional amendment.   

I think with those few words, I would call upon the Minister in charge of Forestry to consider my constituency.  The Minister, I do not know, we people in Bunya South, we are supporting Movement with hardness, because you cannot support something when you have no where to eat from.  So, he should note and tell His Excellency, they are supporters of Movement but with hardness and if a short stone will come, in Lusoga, we have a proverb that when you push someone who is squatting, it is very easy to push him off the floor “mbu oba osindika asutaime”.   Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR. LUKYAMUZI  (Lubaga South, Kampala):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My comments on this reports have no bias whatsoever. I am going to be very concrete and lend me your ears.  Mr. Speaker, the report comes at a time when in forests in Africa and Uganda in particular are nearing depletion. So, it is therefore a Report, which the representatives of the people in this House must take very seriously.  

Just to visit the statistics, Uganda’s forest cover to date stands at 16.9 percent of the total uncover, and this includes wildlife reserves, forest reserves, national parks, woodlands and grasslands.  So, in similar manner Mr. Speaker, the quotations in terms of statistics, which I have introduced to you, are an indication that there is cause for alarm in regard to the future of the forests in this country.  Mr. Speaker, the terms of reference given to the Committee were very elaborate.  But I am going to concentrate on the aspect of advise Parliament is supposed to receive in regard to how sustainable the forest development phenomenon can be enhanced.  I also dwell on how the examination of encroachment and depletion of forests or forest resources in this country can be handled.  And lastly, I am very much concerned about the financial aspect of forests in this country.

According to the Report, I am a little bit worried because I expected the Committee to have completely advised the Uganda Government in regard to how the protection of forests can sustainably be enhanced.  There is too much focus on the Central Government in regard to the forest protection.  According to the Constitution Article 237, the impression I have got as a lover of forestation is that, we are focusing only on the Central Government in regard to the protection of the forests, but the Local Government equally have a constitutional duty to protect the forests.  

I would like to submit that with reference to what is happening countrywide, the Local Governments do not know that they have the powers and the constitutional powers to protect the forests.  We are focusing on the Central Government alone much as I am a critic of the Central Government; I want to be fair in this regard.  The respective Local Governments should raise up with reference to Article 237 sub-section 2(b) to protect their respective forest covers.  They have all the powers to do so, but according to what I have been seeing around, there has been a lot of reluctance to do so.  Mr. Speaker –(Interruption)

DR. KEZIMBIRA MUYINGO: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker and thank you hon. Lukyamuzi.  The Local Governments are aware of their role in the forest estate.  In fact the Local Authorities are stakeholders, are taking 40 percent of revenue collected out of these forests.  So there is no way they cannot be aware that this is a resource that partly belongs to them and the protection of that resource is also independent on them.  Earlier on you will remember that the Central Government had even turned the forests to the local governments, and because of a little mismanagement, the forests were withdrawn back.  And their attention was drawn to them that until you have really shown all the responsibilities for managing these forests they will be managed centrally, but you are stakeholders with 40 percent share, Central Government 60 percent share.  So Sir, they are aware of their responsibility.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  It is not a question of being aware that they are supposed to create some role, my impression is that they lack viable units to be able to tackle the matter substantially and hence they lack a federal phenomenon and I am serious in my submission over that.  Mr. Speaker, I have been visiting various places of Uganda and I have discovered that when the Agriculturists borrow money to improve cotton or simsim production, that endeavour is understandable because in the end they should be able to rear the resources from cotton.  

But the people who are near forests have requested me to put this message across, how does a taxpayer benefit from afforestation loans and grants where Government officers and Government departments are the day to day wrongdoers?  They want to see the results on the ground.  You borrow money from CIDA, you borrow money from USAID, in the end in regard to forests, how does a taxpayer I represent get the results?  We have been hearing of the Ministers involved, the Commissioners involved, District Commissioners involved, how does the taxpayer get the benefits? 

I would like to say Mr. Speaker that the taxpayers do not seem to be benefiting at all from the loans associated to afforestation.  One of the terms of reference included the examination of the reported encroachment and the depletion of forest resources countrywide.  I am surprised to note that State House is reported to have been involved in the promotion of such malpractices.  The Report sat on the good evidence submitted to it in regard to the State House involvement.  Why did it not say something much as it acted on the Kajura’s, it would have also acted on the State House?  Is that not a bias?  I am questioning it with maximum attention.

I would like to draw the attention of hon. Members that one of the most environmentally important sectors in this country is the forest sector.  I am surprised that among the daily reported arbitrators in this sector are the Government departments like the prisons, government departments like the Ministries and even the State House.  The ordinary Ugandan taxpayer is not very much implicated; he only buys charcoal, which is a finished product.  But when it comes to the physical interaction in terms of depletion of the forest resources, it is the big personalities involved.  Why was the Report silent about that?

I read about the interdictions, but I thought that a number of people who were fred were not supposed to have been fred.  I would like to still question the individuals mentioned in this Report, it is said someone must pay that amount of money, because you have evidence that he ate the money, then you say, he can be reinstated.  If there is evidence that he ate money, and it is taxpayer’s money, how do you end up recommending his reinstatement? So I was not happy with that kind of recommendation.

Now this report also has a shortfall and it is an eminent shortfall.  You have ably illustrated to us that there is encroachment on forests, especially in regard to charcoal burning.  Today we are lucky to be speaking at the time when the UEB has improved its power production.  Noting that it is mostly in the urban areas where massive charcoal utilization is reported and noting that it is in those urban areas where you have seemingly rich people capable of paying for power.  

I would have expected the Mwesigye report to openly have recommended that power which is drawn from hydro electricity the cheapest seemingly possible power world-wide should have immediately come down to be seen to benefit the people who pay daily taxes.  Many people today are not able to afford electricity because it is simply not affordable but why should it not be affordable when it is supposed to be the cheapest source of power.  

There was recommendation to the effect that the time has come for us to attract the rich people  to use electricity so that the local people in the urban areas can be persuaded to employ the technic of cooking which are environmentally friendly and this can be achieve through national-wide public advocacy and the advocacy is also lacking.  When the report talks  here it talks to us, the Members of Parliament should equally return the message to the masses through public advocacy.  I expected a recommendation in regard to public advocacy by way of using energy sustainable and friendly.

I would like to end by drawing your attention to page 5.  The report did not succeed in advising us on how the following sectors could be improved and yet I see them the as the fork point of the terms of reference. Namely, the sector of the National Bio Mass Study Project.  You have many farmers in Uganda spread country-wide, many of them do not know that they have sources of power of energy on their farms.  You never talked about a sustainable utilisation on bio-gas using the wide spread farms in Uganda.  There is the aspect of the peri-urban project then the tree seed project, strengthening of forest projects, the catchment of forest projects and the natural forest management and conservation project. (Interruption)   

MR. OTAGE:  Point of information. Thank you, Mr. Speaker and I would like to thank hon. Lukyamuzi for giving way.  I would like to inform hon. Lukyamuzi that this report is an interim report and towards the last paragraph we clearly stated that, we have not covered the six projects which includes the tree-shade, peri-urban and what have you and we asked that, after discussion of the interim report the committee be allowed to explore wide aspects of forestry.  That is the time when we will come with that recommendation. Thank you.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: It is good that you state that you have an intention of pursuing the matter to its right conclusion but I would to say that while the report releases the short-comings, it fails to provide a solution in view of the investigations it seems to have carried out.

Finally, I would like to say, in modern environmental political terms that the report should have said something about the environmental management policy.  A lot of misdeed is reported in the report in view of the testimonies which were made by the officers in the forestry sector but the report fails - I do not know for what reason - fails to tell us that one of the main sources of dismay in regard to the delivery services is associated to lack of a sustainable environmental management policy.  To day, the issue related to the protection of the environment is a political fashion. You do it or you do not do.  There are others with alternative political environment solutions. Thank you very much Mr. Speaker.

MR. OKUMU RINGA (Padyere County, Nebbi) Mr. Speaker, I rise to support this Motion and particularly to thank the chairperson of this Committee and the entire Membership of the Committee for a job well done and later on also to reiterate their recommendation that they be given extra time, more time, in order to complete this exercise.  

On page 3 where 1.4 refers to terms of reference. I will concentrate my submission mainly to terms of reference number three. Which reads; 'to examine the reported encroachment and depletion of the forest resources countrywide and advise Parliament on the plain restructuring of the forest department at district and national level.' Mr. Speaker, Nebbi District is endowed with a huge forest reserve which is man-made, it is called Lendu Forest.  It is of the big forest reserves from which light wood is produced and is very popular for furniture and very popular - and would have been more importantly used for match-box industries.  Unfortunately the match-box industry which was in Jinja apparently closed down would have used a good deal of the product of that forestry reserve.

Nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, my concern  here is drawn in the report of the Committee which is on page 9 going to page 11, where the Committee exhaustively looked at the government plan to establish the national forest authority.  The Philosophy behind establishment of this authority was to have an umbrella organisation under which all aspects of our forest resources would have been managed. 

Indeed the committee has noted with concern that government had set itself a deadline of having a legal framework to have this authority in place by July 2000.    But you know Mr. Speaker; today is 31st of July.  July has ended and this means this law is not even in a draft form.  It is not even may be conceptionalised, so the law is not there.  This is what I would like this House to note with a lot of concern.  

The Committee has also noted and rightly saw that the lack of initiative to have this law in place could be as a result of the professionals in the currently mismanaged Forestry Department within the Ministry not to have this authority in place.  This is an issue, which the Minister responsible for the sector may have to clarify to the House.  Otherwise Mr. Speaker, looking at the current level of depletion of our forest resources, when you move throughout this country, leave alone the actual forestry reserves even the naturally grown trees, clusters of trees which under normal circumstances will help to improve on our general weather condition.  To improve on our general rainfall pattern.  This is crossly destroyed. So we need a comprehensive policy on forestry in order to conserve the environment.  

When one visits Lendu forest, is the forest I know very well because it is within my district.  The rate of depletion is so high and the rate of afforestation is extremely low.   The legal framework would have helped the district local governments to ensure that afforestation is done aggressively.  While this to be done aggressively and how?  For example the 40 per cent are value or resource being retained at the district level.  There should be a definite policy of, a percentage of that 40 per cent; which must be used for afforestation and also to be supervised so that the money is not put within the resources of the district and used to support the low tax base of the district.  

For example my district, which is Nebbi, has a very low tax base.  The locally generated revenue is very low and definitely if there is low proper legal framework to protect resources being generated from the forest resources that kind of money could be used in other areas.  So I am commending the committee for having quoted this out and urging the Ministry to take note of this so that we are able to have afforestation and even to encourage the creation of more man-made forests.  

The other issue is regard to the need to develop alternative sources of energy in order to reduce on the dependency on wood-fuel.  This has been noted very well by the committee and indeed at the end of the report, the committee stated that they need more time so that they could explore the need to have these policies in place. The current level of dependency on wood-fuel is so great.  Whoever even up country where there is no electricity, the rate of destruction of wood to charcoal is so high and in town the greater percentage of our town dwellers indeed depend on wood-fuel.   

I do not know if the Ministry responsible for energy together with that responsible for forest department could look into a possibility of either creating or particularly looking at a census as to how many of these big people including us in parliament under by using charcoal or even more of charcoal than the electricity or gas not only for barbecue but for daily dependency on for us source of energy to run you know family needs.  I do not know how this can be enforced so that we leave the wood-fuel more to those who are not connected to the national greed or those who are not able to get connected to power being generated either through Thermos or through Hydro Power generation.  This may sound rather clear and rather segregative but it could be a very good study Mr. Speaker.  

So I would like to request the Committee when finally they are given mandate to look into this aspect not to discriminate but to advise so that more of us can encourage the use of sources of fuel which does not necessarily deplete our forest reserves.

Lastly Mr. Speaker, the Committee has come up with commendations regarding those who are alleged to have committed crimes of embezzlement.  Some either implicated wrongly; it makes very difficult Mr. Speaker when we do not have a clear policy on treating people who embezzle government funds.  I am raising this issue Mr. Speaker because if an individual who could have been prosecuted for having embezzled so much money is let free because a report has let the person free, it becomes very difficult now to prosecute somebody who has for example embezzled a sum so negligible as 150,000/=.  Of course Mr. Speaker you will say here you are prosecuting on matters of principle.  But the principle must really be weighed in relation to the actual or quantum.  So this is an issue of ethical matter, an issue of principle, which may have to be rationalised so that when you are prosecuting people for embezzlement we use a proper level of your stake.  

Otherwise I would like to thank the Committee for their report and to thank them for the recommendation and also to echo their recommendations that more time should be given to them so that they are able to complete the entire report particularly taken to account all the terms of reference given to them.  I thank you Mr. Speaker.

Dr. Nyeko (Kilak County, Gulu): I thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Select Committee for this very elaborate report.  I took a lot of interest on page 27, 28 and few other pages under the encroachment of forest reserves.  
The Committee noted, and I quote, “In the recent past, Government has carried out some evictions such as, in South Busoga and Luwunga Forest Reserves …..” and they continued.  On the 30th, the Committee visited South Busoga Forest Reserve and noted that the manner in which the evictions were carried out was dehumanising and destructive.  Here they said, a certain Lt. Sam Rwaboko, working with Forestry Department, deployed an Army Detach which gave the people only three hours to vacate the Forest, and they continued that the same said Sam Rwaboko, in the company of armed personnel launched an eviction exercise in which huts were burnt and some people were beaten.  Mr. Speaker, this was a very harsh action taken by a Lt. Sam Rwaboko.  

Then in the same page 28, the Committee also was disappointed.  They discovered that another case of encroachment visited in Butamila Forest Reserve in Jinja District.  From the records available, they said the Kakira Sugar Works have already encroached into the forest, and apparently instead of evicting these people, using this same Lieutenant, they gave permit for Kakira Sugar Works to continue destroying the forest and plant sugar canes.  So, you can see the double standard.  A few individuals were harshly removed while a big corporation, with a lot of money which can afford to buy land else where, instead is given permit to continue destroying the forest.  

The Report really says that although the technical people were against issuing out the permit, but they were under pressure from the Minister, and of course they have to respect the Minister and professionally issued the permit.  I think if this is true, then personally I am not happy with the Minister for doing this kind of thing.

MR. KAJURA: Point of information.  

THE SPEAKER: You may give the information, but I think you will be given a lot of time to make your statement.  But if you want to make the information you can make it.  But I would think you listen, then later you make a detailed statement.  But you can make the information if you think is good.

MR. KAJURA: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  If the hon. Member had read further on, he would have found that indeed the Committee cleared me of that accusation and established that the affidavit which had been sworn by Mr. Kigenyi was wrong, that by that time I was no longer under the Ministry of Natural Resources, that I was indeed in Trade and Industry.  I thank you.

DR. NYEKO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I continue on that note of some areas.  The encroachers in some areas were harshly removed while on page 30 the Committee discovered that an encroacher, one Ernest Bagarukayo, was illegally grazing on five square miles of land, some where in Kigweri, Ngoma Sub-county.  Instead of this Lieutenant or another Lieutenant to come and remove this fellow or so forcefully of giving him three hours, instead a certain Odoi from State House, wrote a letter, directing a Solicitor General to expeditiously de-gazette the area where this fellow was settling; and instructing the Solicitor General to find alternative blame for the Forestry Reserve.  This is not acceptable, Mr. Speaker.  It is simply not acceptable.  I wish the Committee could go ahead and find out from this Odoi who had instructed him to write a letter to the Solicitor General.  Because I would imagine, quite a number of people in State House, they can easily take letter heads and write letters.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has something to say.

MR. OTHIENO AKIIKA: Point of order.  I would kindly like to draw to Rule 17(b) of our Rules of Procedure.

THE SPEAKER: Say it.

MR. OTHIENO AKIIKA: Apparently there is no quorum in the House, the Rule talks about.

THE SPEAKER:  I think in future in should be helpful if somebody who thinks there is no quorum may, to avoid many, that when you stand and there is no quorum, you tell me why you think there is no quorum, and that will be easier for me to see there is no quorum.  Well I realise the number, but after him I was going to say this: I have received some complaints from Members that they were not aware that we shall start debate on the Report today.  I had an impression that you had informed last week that there would be a debate.  But apparently it seems it was not, or it was not understood that way.  

In view of this, instead of suspending the House for 15 minutes, I am going to adjourn so that whoever wants to contribute to this debate prepares himself or herself for continuing with the debate tomorrow.  The House is adjourned until tomorrow 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 4.00 p.m. and adjournment 1st August, 2000, at 2.00 p.m.)

