
Thursday, 30 July 2020

Parliament met at 3.28 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

 THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I apologise for the late start. We were handling serious consultations with the ministers who have business on the Order Paper today. However, I am sure that working together, we shall catch up with what we had planned to do.

Honourable members, I would like to announce that next week, we shall sit only on Tuesday and Wednesday. I had indicated to you at the start of the Session that we were likely to get interrupted by electoral activities. So, we will close on Wednesday, for a few days, to allow the parties that have got activities to go and conduct their activities. 

Thirdly, I would like to take this opportunity to wish our Muslim brethren a happy Eid Al-Adha, which is taking place tomorrow. I would like to quote from the Quran, Chapter 37:102, where Ibrahim said “O my son, indeed I have seen in a dream that I must sacrifice you, so what do you think?” The son replied, “Oh, my father, do as you are commanded. You will find me, if all wills steadfast.”

Eid Al-Adha is a time of sacrifice and commitment to Allah’s orders. It is a sign of respect to Allah’s orders and a sign of Allah’s love and mercy, that he replaced sacrificing of children with sacrificing of animals. On your behalf, I wish a blessed Eid Al-Adha to all our brothers and sisters and all the people of Uganda. God bless you with happiness, grace, warmth and peace in your homes.

Honourable members, there were a few matters of national importance. However, I note that both matters were addressed last week. There was the issue about the floods on the shores of Lake Kyoga and Lake Victoria. The Minister of Internal Affairs informed us that he had undertaken some action and would be reporting to this House. The matter concerning the Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme (UWEP) was also handled. It was raised by one of our Members. Therefore, these matters are both not eligible today. 

I invite the Clerk to take a tally of the Members present before we commence on other business. 

Honourable members, I also invite the Prime Minister to respond to item No. 7, on the evaluation of the COVID-19 guidelines? – He is not here. Are the ministers of health here? They are not here too. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, can you respond to the issue of the South Sudan traders. 

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ON THE STATUS OF THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PARLIAMENTARY RESOLUTION OF 3 MAY 2018 ON PAYMENT OF MONIES OWED TO UGANDA-SOUTH SUDAN TRADERS

3.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, on the matter of the Uganda-South Sudan traders, I would like to state that the process is still going on. We will be able to report in the course of next week. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Let us move on to item No.8. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the tax expenditure for the period July 2019 to June 2020, financial year 2019/2020, for the House to consider.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and report back. 

Is the Minister of Water and Environment in a position to answer questions under item No. 9 (h), on the issue of pollution in Kyankwanzi District?



THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Beatrice Anywar): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This item has been coming up on the Order Paper for some time and I sent copies of my response, which were uploaded on Members’ iPads. However, what I am supposed to read to the House is somewhere; if I could just have two minutes to get it. Otherwise, Members have the copies, which I submitted to your office, and I am ready to submit on all of them.

THE SPEAKER: Are you ready for all the four?

MS ANYWAR: Yes, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, proceed.

MS ANYWAR: Let me just get my copy; otherwise, all the responses are uploaded on the Members’ iPads. In five minutes, I will get it. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Minister of East African Community Affairs, could you respond on the issue of dairy products being prohibited from entering Kenya due to non-tariff barriers imposed by the Government of Kenya. 

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS ON THE IMPASSE FACING EXPORTERS OF UGANDAN DAIRY PRODUCTS TO KENYA DUE TO NON-TARIFF BARRIERS IMPOSED BY THE GOVERNMENT OF KENYA IN VIOLATION OF THE EAST AFRICAN COMMON MARKET PROTOCOL

3.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Mr Julius Maganda): Madam Speaker, we had consultations with the Kenyan ministers on this matter and we requested that they present it to Cabinet. Next Tuesday, we are going to have a video conference with the Ugandan team after which we will be able to come to Parliament and report in the course of next week. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We expect a report after your zoom meeting with your colleagues. After we return from next week’s business, we expect a report from you. 

Minister of State for Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, what is your response on the barring of Katerera vanilla farmers from transporting their produce to Kasese for sale? That is item No. 9 (I) (ii).

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES ON THE BARRING OF KATERERA VANILLA FARMERS FROM TRANSPORTING THEIR PRODUCE TO KASESE DISTRICT FOR SALE AND SUBSEQUENTLY PREDISPOSING THEM TO UNFAVORABLE PRICES BY UNSCRUPULOUS MIDDLEMEN

3.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Speaker, we are still making consultations and we will be able to provide a response next week. 

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the commandeering of boat engines from fishermen on Lake Victoria - that is item No. 9 (K) (ii).

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES ON THE COMMANDEERING OF BOAT ENGINES FROM FISHERMEN ON LAKE VICTORIA BY UNIDENTIFIED PEOPLE IN ARMY UNIFORM

3.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES) (Ms Hellen Adoa): Madam Speaker, after that complaint from hon. Ouma, I got in touch with the contacts he gave me. One of the contacts was for a marine soldier who admitted that they had confiscated the engines because the fishermen were not wearing lifejackets. After they bought lifejackets, they were given back their engines.

When I called the number that hon. Ouma gave me, for one of the fishermen, he said that the money that the marine soldiers took was not for lifejackets but for getting their engines back. Therefore, I called the marine soldiers again who told me that the money was for the lifejackets. I did not have much time to go there since I was on Lake Kyoga but that is what I got from the marine soldiers and the fishermen.

However, I learnt that the fishermen got back their engines. Whether they bought the jackets or not, or whether the money was for getting back their engines, I did not verify. The fact is that their engines were taken and later returned. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Do you have a supplementary question, hon. Ouma? 

3.41
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Madam Speaker, I thank the minister for the endeavour she made. 

What is now very clear is that it is very inhumane to take my engine and leave me on the lake for a Good Samaritan to come and pick me. Likewise, it is also not very clear whether the marines sell lifejackets and people go and pay them. 

I told the minister that it is very clear that the lifejackets were not given because the fishermen did not have them. It is you, honourable minister, who should go down and settle the issues and find out whether it is right for soldiers to take people’s engines and leave them floating in the islands. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I see that the Minister of State for Water and Environment has her documents now. 

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT ON THE STATUS OF POLLUTION AND DISPOSAL OF WASTE IN RIVER KAFU AND IN SUGAR PLANTATIONS BY PREMIER DISTILLERS LIMITED FACTORY, KYANKWANZI DISTRICT

3.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Beatrice Anywar): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My ministry was given an assignment to respond to the concern that was raised by hon. Pentagon Kamusiime. You directed me to go the place and see what is happening. Honourable members, this document was uploaded on your iPads. The report should have been presented a long time ago but let me take the opportunity to go through it now. 

On the matter as raised by hon. Pentagon Kamusiime, Member of Parliament for Butemba County, regarding the reckless disposal of waste in River Kafu and in sugarcane plantations by Premier Distillers Limited Factory that had left people and animals without a safe source of water for consumption, I would like to respond as follows: 

I led an inspection team on 27 February 2020 that comprised of officials from my ministry to Kyankwanzi District Local Government. We also had officials from the district local government, Environmental Protection Unit, and we also notified the area Member of Parliament. We were in the process of being accompanied by the company representatives for the inspection but they gave excuses. 

When we reached there, Madam Speaker, the treatment lagoons - the ones under construction - were observed and it was discovered as follows:
1. That the company has been generating both potentially risky solid waste and effluent waste that is beyond its capacity to manage. There are also visible temporary ponds scattered around the village, that have stayed open for over six months, filled with effluent from the facility. There was also a visible drop in the level of sludge, meaning that some of it had sunk into the ground and the surrounding environment. 

2. That the company was constructing a new effluent treatment lagoon without approval or following guidelines as categorised under schedule 5(22) of the National Environment Act No. 5 of 2019, for which an environment impact assessment is mandatory.

3. That there were no records of the effluent discharged and water testing as contained in the conditions of the environmental impact assessment approval certificate. They were not available for review. 

4. The findings confirmed continuous pollution of Kiryandongo wetlands, River Kafu and the surrounding small-scale farms, affecting the communities’ livelihoods. There was also visible withering of the surrounding food crops due to the impact of the waste, and we were informed that the farmers had been compensated, though there was no proof to that effect.

In view of the above findings, my ministry directed as follows:
    1. That the company seeks the necessary approvals for the construction of the new effluent treatment lagoon as categorized under schedule 5(22) of the National Environment Act No.5 of 2019.

    2. That the company drains all the effluent indiscriminately discharged into the temporary ponds for ultimate treatment at the Kiboga Waste Water Treatment Plant.

    3. That the company takes note that the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) was notified to ensure implementation of the directives above.

Madam Speaker, with the above, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should also take note and map all the areas affected by the waste and neutralize the high acidity land created before a multiplier effect could be caused by the upcoming rains at the time. This is because the surrounding land was already contaminated and the farmers would find it very difficult to cultivate on it. That was one of our recommendations, that colleagues from the ministry engage and take interest in this.

Madam Speaker, we were supposed to go back and follow up to ensure that all these were done. However, with the COVID-19 lockdown, the company had to lay off most off its workers. They are actually not operational because of the lockdown. When the situation normalizes, we look forward to going back and following up on this issue. The National Environment Management Authority is following it closely, so that we ensure that the company is following the right procedure. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Is there any supplementary question from hon. Pentagon Kamusiime. Go to the next response.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT ON THE ONGOING DISCONNECTION BY THE NATIONAL WATER AND SEWERAGE CORPORATION OF CLIENTS IN THE KAMPALA AREA WITH OUTSTANDING WATER BILLS CONTRARY TO AN EARLIER PARLIAMENTARY RESOLUTION URGING GOVERNMENT TO STAY SUCH DISCONNECTIONS, GIVEN THE VITALITY OF WATER IN COMBATING THE EXISTENTIAL THREAT OF COVID-19

3.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Beatrice Anywar): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This presentation is also a brief one. It has also been uploaded on your iPads. 

A concern was raised by hon. Moses Kasibante, Member of Parliament Rubaga North, Kampala, regarding the ongoing disconnection of clients in Kampala area with outstanding water bills, especially Rubaga on 30 June 2020, by the National Water and Sewerage Corporation. This, he said, was done contrary to an earlier parliamentary resolution urging Government to stay such disconnections, given the vitality of water in combating the existing threat of COVID-19.

Madam Speaker I would like to respond as follows: 
It is not true that my ministry together with National Water and Sewerage Corporation were disconnecting water at that time. What was happening is that we had a supply interruption or disruption and there was no water for some days, but it was being worked on. 

I crosschecked with the National Water and Sewerage Corporation technical team and they assured me that it was not a disconnection but it was a disruption in the supply of water. I would like, therefore, to assure the House that we are still abiding by what was resolved because we know that water is life. So, there is no disconnection that is going on. Clients are only being reminded to keep checking on their bills, but we are not disconnecting. I beg to submit.


3.53
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I remember some two to three weeks ago, hon. Latif Sebaggala presented a very important motion urging the Government to clear the bills for the population during this lockdown. As we speak, National Water and Sewerage Corporation is sending messages urging the population to clear all their bills as fast as possible, and even in some places they are disconnecting the water supply.

Madam Speaker, I would like to find out from the honourable minister if the motion raised by hon. Latif Sebaggala is not being honoured. The House deliberated on the matter and came up with resolutions. I pray that the ministry respects the resolutions and bails out the population by clearing the water bills for Ugandans, especially during this lockdown. Thank you.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank you, colleague, for raising the concern. I would like to confirm and reconfirm that National Water and Sewerage Corporation is not disconnecting water supply. What is happening is that the reminders are -(Interruption)

MR OYET: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Just about two weeks ago, there was massive disconnection in Gulu town and I was physically there; so many facilities were disconnected. 

When I returned from Gulu over the weekend, there was massive disconnection happening. Even this morning, as I was driving to Parliament, I found people from National Water and Sewerage Corporation disconnecting the water supply in the areas of Namugongo, Kyaliwajjala, Kira and Naalya. 

Is the honourable minister therefore in order to insinuate that National Water and Sewerage Corporation is not disconnecting the water supply?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are you aware that some areas in Kampala and its surroundings have been disconnected?

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, when this issue was raised, I confirmed with the technical team. If what the honourable colleague is saying happened this morning, I beg to be given two minutes and I crosscheck with my technical team and confirm that.

However, what I would like to say is that the reminders - because I also consume water – are just reminders, and that is what I know. About the disconnections, even up to this morning, as the colleagues are saying, I can crosscheck immediately and give Members assurance. That is want I would like to say.

Madam Speaker, if it goes on -

THE SPEAKER: Should we give you time to go and check?

MS ANYWAR: If you allow me, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Respond to the third issue and then you can go and check.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT ON THE BRUTAL EVICTIONS, EXTORTIONS AND DISPLACEMENT OF LOCAL COMMUNITIES IN SOME FOREST RESERVES IN GOMBA DISTRICT BY THE NATIONAL FORESTRY AUTHORITY


3.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Beatrice Anywar): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The third response I am giving to this House was an issue raised by hon. Rwakoojo Robinah, Member of Parliament for Gomba West County. This was on the brutal eviction, distortion and displacement of local communities in Kalombi and Kiyanja forest reserves. I thank the honourable member for raising this issue, which is very important. I would like to respond as follows:

Nsowe and Kalombi central forest reserves, which were gazetted in 1932 with an area of 5,097 hectares and 3,836 hectares respectively, are located in Maddu Subcounty in Gomba District. There is no eviction and displacement of communities taking place in these forests as of now. There is even no intended eviction of the encroachers occupying part of these central forest reserves in the short-run, especially during the COVID-19 lockdown.

From August 2017, a number of engagement meetings were held between National Forestry Authority (NFA), leaders of Gomba District and communities. Field visits were carried out to Nsowe and Kalombi central forest reserves to ascertain the level of forest degradation in the reserves. 

On the 20 September 2017, a meeting was held between National Forestry Authority, the district leadership and the communities. The purpose of the meeting was to consult the stakeholders involved in the management of the central forest reserves and come up with strategies or plans of action in restoring the integrity of Kalombi and Nsowe central forest reserves. This engagement continued throughout 2019. 

The need to free the reserves from encroachment and pave way for re-afforestation was agreed on by all the stakeholders. It was also agreed that National Forestry Authority conducts sensitisation meetings at the forest level. On 6 August 2019, a sensitisation meeting was conducted in Nsowe Central Forest Reserve. On 2 September, another sensitisation meeting was held in Kalombi Central Forest Reserve.

In the sensitisation meetings, the grazers requested that since they had lived in the forests for a long time, they should also be considered for an afforestation programme and where necessary, be provided with free seedlings so that they can plant. National Forestry Authority considered their request and agreed to allocate 25 acres (10 hectares) per household for tree planting, in addition to five per cent of the total central forest reserve area under collaborative forest management.

Currently, there are 120 households in Nsowe and 65 in Kalombi central forest reserves, making a total of 185 households. A total of 1,350 hectares, equivalent to 27 per cent of the entire Nsowe Central Forest Reserve, was therefore allocated to the community staying in the forest. Some of the community members have even written to NFA accepting the allocation of 25 acres and requesting for it to be formalised. Approximately, 65 per cent of the Nsowe Central Forest land was also allocated to commercial tree farmers. Some of these farmers have started land preparation for March/May 2020 planting season.

This has been the agreed position until recently, when the encroachers requested for a meeting between NFA, the area Members of Parliament and the district leaders. Subsequently, a meeting was held on 12 February 2020. In this meeting, the grazers changed their position and demanded to be given the entire central forest reserve. Their interest had also changed from tree planting to grazing, a position NFA rejected. 

The meeting, however, agreed that NFA should immediately re-open and mark the forest reserve boundaries. The exercise commenced on 18 February 2020. However, there are threats from a group mobilising through social media to delay the entire reorganisation of the community and re-afforestation programme in the two central forest reserves.

On Wednesday, 18 March 2020, some members of the community mobilised and went to Nsowe Central Forest Reserve, where the security deployed to stop the deforestation had camped for the last two weeks, and tried to attack them. The security responded by firing some bullets in the air and the intruders were dispersed, leaving behind 10 motorcycles, which were later handed over to Mpigi Police Station. 

Reports from the ground indicate that these people were mobilised by the Resident District Commissioner of Gomba, who for a long time was chairing the engagements between NFA and the community. 

The process of freeing the forest reserves from encroachment started way back in 2017. A lot of engagement and sensitisation meetings had already been held involving district leaders and the community. To date, no attempt has been made to evict any encroacher from the reserve. A win-win strategy of involving the encroachers in the afforestation programme was designed by NFA, discussed and agreed upon with local leaders and the community. This engagement continues to date.

On 23 March 2020, the honourable member of Parliament, Robinah Rwakoojo, even led a delegation of leaders to NFA to continue dialoguing to find a lasting solution. Another meeting was held in their office in Kampala attended by the honourable Brig. Gen. Flavia Byekwaso, the district chairperson, and the district speaker where it was agreed that another meeting will be held on the ground on 18 July 2020.

My prayer is that we support the exercise that had taken more than three years to plan, and we engage the stakeholders and peacefully execute the plan. 

Madam Speaker and colleagues, I also appeal to you to help in the effort to free other central forest reserves from wanton encroachment done with impunity. You recall that in August 2019, hon. Robinah Rwakoojo raised the issue of rampant tree cutting for charcoal businesses that had destroyed the forest cover in Gomba District in this august House. She should, therefore, help us to address the challenge of deforestation in the district by supporting what we had agreed on.

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

The Speaker: Hon. Robinah Rwakoojo, do you have any supplementary question? Okay, hon. Flavia Byekwaso, ask just one supplementary question.

4.06
BRIG. GEN. flavia byekwaso (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister. Unfortunately, I was not around when she started her submission. There are few things I heard and most of what she has presented are correct but things have changed a lot. 

The problem on the ground right now – She said that I met them and yes, I was there on another mission but that issue came up. Remember that at the beginning of this period, with the coming in of the COVID-19 pandemic and the regulations, it was said that people should not be evicted. However, what is going on currently is that people are being evicted and due to the COVID-19 Standard Operating Procedures, of course, they have nowhere to go to and they are wondering where to go. Even if they wanted to move now, they cannot do so because of the current COVID-19 regulations.  

Honourable minister, the other issue is - when I met them, I realised that the 25 acres that had been promised to them, were never given. What is on the ground is not so much of what was or what you have read. I was there about three weeks ago and I met with the National Forestry Authority (NFA) officials. The reason I went to the Executive Director of NFA was to sort out that issue of where these people should now go to, given the current situation. They are being chased but how do we proceed because the COVID-19 regulations are that no one should move and there should be no evictions? Seemingly, the people who licensed that forest reserve used the lockdown period to evict people.

The other question was on local content. There are no people from Gomba that were licenced to plant trees even when they applied. Honourable minister, I am not a politician and so, it is not that I am giving something biased. I was there – (Interjections) – yes, I was there. Sometimes, when you are looking for votes - but I am giving an independent opinion because I was there. 
Madam Speaker, I wanted to respond to that. I thank you, minister. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you have any rejoinder? We need to close this matter now.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable member for giving this information. I would like to say that we had agreed and made those arrangements with NFA. 

However, before we could hand over the 25 acres, which my sister is talking about, the demands changed course. I think that is what disrupted it. Otherwise, if we harmonised the position, that still stands and it is our desire to engage. 

To answer the question on local content, when there is a free opportunity like this to partner with us for tree planting, it is open. Unless, we again engage with the leadership and have a deliberate effort - not like allow them to compete - because if they competed with others when they applied and were not picked, that means they were sieved through the system that we used. 

If it is deliberately negotiated that we give 10 acres to the local people, then, we would say that we need to get the people going to plant those trees under our instructions and guidance in order to achieve what the forest is supposed to realise. 

However, if it is to give to the locals, without a clear agreement - you know people could start planting trees but end up claiming ownership of the place forever. We can still engage on that issue. Hon. Brig. Gen. Byekwaso, I am happy that you engaged the Executive Director to have a harmonised position. 

This is not only limited to this forest. I am struggling with people almost in the whole country and that is what I can respond, for now. 

Madam Speaker, I request that you give me about two minutes to come back to make a presentation on the other one. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, very much. Honourable members, there is an urgent matter that was brought yesterday from Namisindwa. I have seen one of the ministers of Health. There is a matter causing great public concern; the burial of the person who died of COVID-19 in Namisindwa. Are you in position to brief us on what you are going to do?  

4.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, allow me to bring that report next week. 

MR NSEREKO: Madam Speaker, the second death of the COVID-19 victim, which was announced, was in Kampala Central Division, in Kisenyi III Parish. 

Madam Speaker, I would like you to request the honourable minister to come out clearly and state before this august House what exactly happened. I am saying this because the family members that took care of the deceased who was buried at a cemetery in Kololo - whose name we do not want to disclose – clearly tested negative of COVID-19. Even at Platinum Hospital, where she had been hospitalised for two weeks and Mengo Hospital, nothing has taken place. They told me they have records and proof to that.  

Therefore, the family deserves its dignity. They have even spoken to the media that they were with their late mother and grandmother for over three months suffering from a certain ailment and that when she passed on, no single test was conducted on her but that they got shocked to hear media reports that she had died of COVID-19. They told me that they are the ones that washed her body and participated in the burial at Kololo Public Cemetery; that family deserves a decent answer. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let us go to item 3.  

MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION OF A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT FOR ALTERATION OF BOUNDARIES UNDER ARTICLE 179 (1) (a) OF THE CONSTITUTION AND DECLARATION OF CITIES UNDER SECTION 7 (2)(a) OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS ACT CAP 243

4.15
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Raphael Magyezi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable colleagues, this is a motion to amend the earlier motion of Parliament on the creation of cities. It is intended to bring forward the date of commencement of the three cities of Hoima, Lira and Soroti;

“WHEREAS Parliament of Uganda approved the declaration of 15 cities on 24 April 2020; 

RECALLING that the cities of Hoima, Lira and Soroti were to take effect on 1 July 2021; 

AWARE that the Electoral Commission is preparing for the 2021 general elections;

AND NOTING that the cities of Hoima, Lira and Soroti will not participate in the forthcoming general elections unless this date is adjusted, depriving the citizens from exercising their constitutional right to elect their leaders;

FURTHER AWARE that preparations for the taking of effect of these cities are underway and the ministry will be in position to launch them once approved by Parliament;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it approved and resolved by Parliament that the cities of Hoima, Lira and Soroti be operationalised with effect from 1 July 2020.” 

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you recall that this matter came up and it was actually passed. This is just a formality. I, therefore, put the question that the commencement date be brought forward as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.




MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT UNDER ARTICLE 179 (4) OF
THE CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA PROVIDING FOR CREATION OF NEW COUNTIES

4.15
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Raphael Magyezi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament under Article 179 (4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda providing for creation of new counties.

“WHEREAS Article 179 (4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides for the criteria for alteration of boundaries or creation of administrative units including new counties;

AND WHEREAS section 7 (7) of the Local Governments Act Cap. 243 empowers Parliament to approve alteration of boundaries or creation of new counties;

RECALLING that on Tuesday, 30 June 2020, I moved a motion on the Floor of Parliament for creation of 15 counties that had been approved by Cabinet, having received requests from the districts of those respective counties;

FURTHER RECALLING that the above motion was deferred to enable the Minister of Local Government to re-examine all the requests while also considering the 2015 report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government ---“

Madam Speaker, we have done our due duty and consultations as a ministry. I hereby present to you an addition 31 counties, which have been approved by Cabinet. I also beg to lay the certificate of financial implications for the counties.

I would, therefore, like to amend the motion, which I presented to this House on 30 June 2020 to include the request for creation of additional 31 counties from the following districts: Ngora, Amolatar, Karenga, Napak, Sembabule, Otuke, Ntungamo, Isingiro, Bukwo, Kaberamaido, Kween, Namisindwa, Soroti, Serere, Mbale, Yumbe, Kyegegwa, Mitooma, Bududa, Pallisa, Namutumba, Manafwa, Tororo, Apac, Kaabong, Rwampara, Kikuube, Namayingo, Bulambuli, Nwoya and Busia.

Madam Speaker, I would like to make sure that as we consider this motion, the country is fully aware of the composition of the new counties.
Therefore, permit me the time to present the composition of each of the 46 new counties, for clarity to ensure that there are no quarrels between the counties over their boundaries and their composition.

I will start with the 15, which I presented to you. We have had a few amendments correcting the names and so on. (Interjections)

I beg your attention. Buyanja East County carved out of Buyanja County -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, do not carry on other meetings.

MR MAGYEZI: Colleagues, I am sure that the country is attentive. They want to know the composition of their new counties.

1. The new Buyanja East County will compose of:
    i) Nyamarwa Sub-County
    ii) Matare Sub-County
    iii) Karama Sub-County
    iv) Kyebando Sub-County
    v) Kasimbi Sub-County

The remaining Buyanja County will consist of:
    i) Kibaale Town Council
    ii) Bwamiramira Sub-County
    iii) Bubango Sub-County
    iv) Kabasekende Sub-County
    v) Mugarama Sub-County
    vi) Nyamarunda Sub-County

2. Ngariam County out of Usuk County consisting of:
    i) Ngariam Sub-County
    ii) Akaboi Sub-County
    iii) Gerom Sub-County
    iv) Katakwi Sub-County
    v) Katakwi Town Council
    vi) Palam Sub-County
    vii) Okore Sub-County

The remaining Usuk County will compose of:
    i) Usuk Sub-County
    ii) Guyaguya Sub-County
    iii) Ongongoja Sub-County
    iv) Okulonyo Town Council
    v) Usuk Town Council

3. Agago West County carved out of Agago County consisting of:
    i) Lira Palwo Sub-County
    ii) Lira Palwo Town Council
    iii) Omot Sub-County
    iv) Arum Sub-County
    v) Lamiyo Sub-County
    vi) Agengo sub- county
    vii) Geregere sub- county
 
4. Agago County remains with:
    a) Patongo Sub-County
    b) Adilang Sub-County
    c) Laperebong Sub-County
    d) Lokole Sub-County
    e) Ajali Sub-County
    f) Patongo Town Council
    g) Adilang Town Council
    h) Agago Town Council
    i) Kotomor Sub-County

5. Bukanga North County carved out of Bukanga County consisting of:
    i) Ngarama Sub-County
    ii) ii) Kakamba Sub-County
    iii) Kashumba Sub-County
    iv) Rugaaga Sub-County
    v) Rushasha Sub-County

The remaining Bukanga County will be composed of:
    i) Endiinzi Town Council
    ii) Endiinzi Sub-County
    iii) Mbaare Sub-County
    iv) Bugango Town Council
    v) Rwanjogyera Sub-County

6. A new county called Bukimbiri County being carved out of Bufumbira County consisting of:
    i) Nyundo Sub-County
    ii) ii) Bukimbiri Sub-County
    iii) Kirundo Sub-County
    iv) Nyabwishenya Sub-County
    v) Rubuguri Town Council

The remaining Bufumbira County remains with:
    i) Murora Sub-County
    ii) Nyakabande Sub-County
    iii) Kanaba Sub-County
    iv) Busunza Sub-County
    v) Nyarubuye Sub-County

7. A new county called Nakaseke Central being carved out of Nakaseke North County consisting of:
    i) Wakyato Sub-County
    ii) ii) Butalangu Town Council
    iii) Kikamulo Sub-County
    iv) Kiwoko Town Council
    v) Kito Sub-County

The remaining Nakaseke North County will consist of:
    i) Ngoma Sub-County
    ii) Ngoma Town Council
    iii) Kinoni Sub-County
    iv) Kinyogoga Sub-County

8. Kiboga West County carved out of Kiboga East County, consisting of:
    i) Kiboga Sub-County
    ii) ii) Kiboga Town Council
    iii) Kapeke Sub-County
    iv) Nkandwa Sub-County
    v) Kayeera Sub-County
    vi) Kyekumbya Sub-County

The remaining Kiboga East County remains with:
    a) Ddwaniro Sub-County
    b) ii) Bukomero Town Council
    c) Bukomero Sub-County
    d) Kyomya Sub-County
    e) Nakasozi Sub-County
    f) Muwanga Sub-County
    g) Lwamata Sub-County
    h) Lwamata Town Council

9. Buhweju West County carved out of Buhweju County, consisting of:
    a) Bihanga Sub-County
    b) ii) Burere Sub-County
    c) Rubengye Sub-County
    d) Kyahenda Sub-County
    e) Engaju Sub-County
    f) Nyakashaka Town Council
    g) Nyakaziba Town Council
    h) Nyakishana Sub-County

The remaining Buhweju County will be:
    i) Rwengwe Sub-County
    ii) ii) Kashenyi-Kajani Town Council
    iii) iii)Bisya Sub-County
    iv) Karungu Sub-County
    v) Nsiika Town Council
    vi) Buhunga Sub-County

10. A new county named Palabek County, carved out of Lamwo County, consisting of:
    i) Palabek Town Council
    ii) ii) Palabek Kal Sub-County
    iii) Palabek Gem Sub-County
    iv) Palabek Ogili Sub-County
    v) Palabek Nyimur Sub-County
    vi) Palabek Abera Sub-County

The remaining Lamwo County will consist:
    a) Lokung East Sub-County
    b) ii) Lokung West Sub-County
    c) iii) Lamwo Town Council
    d) Padibe West Sub-County
    e) Padibe East Sub-County
    f) Padibe Town Council
    g) Katum Sub-County
    h) Aceba Sub-County
    i) Paloga Sub-County
    j) Madiopei Sub-County
    k) Madiopei Town Council
    l) Agoro Sub-County
    m) Potika Sub-County

11. Bugangaizi South County carved out of Bugangaizi West County, consisting of:
    a) Kyabasaija Sub-County
    b) ii) Bwanswa Sub-County
    c) iii) Kakumiro Town Council
    d) Kisengwe Sub-County
    e) Kasambya Sub-County
    f) Birembo Sub-County
    g) lgayaza Town Council

The remaining Bugangaizi West County will consist of:
    a) Kijangi Sub-County
    b) ii) Kitaihuka Sub-County
    c) iii) Nyarweyo Sub-County
    d) Kakindo Sub-County
    e) Kikoora Sub-County
    f) Nyarweyo Town Council
    g) Kakindo - Igomba Town Council
    h) Kikwaya Sub-County

12. Chekwi East County carved out of Chekwi County, consisting of:
    a) Moruita Sub-County
    b) ii) Lemushi Sub-County
    c) iii) Nakapiripiriti Town Council
    d) Tokora Sub-County

Chekwii County remains with:
    a) Namalu Sub-County
    b) ii) Loregae Sub-County
    c) iii) Loreng Sub-County
    d) Kawach Sub-County
    e) Kakomongole Sub-County

13. Buwekula South County out of Buwekula County, consisting of:
    a) Kitenga Sub-County
    b) ii) Kayebe Sub-County
    c) iii) Kalonga Sub-County

Buwekula County remains with:
    a) Madudu Sub-County
    b) ii) Butoloogo Sub-County
    c) iii) Kiruma Sub-County
    d) Kiyuni Sub-County

14. Kwania North County carved out of Kwania County, consisting of:
    a) Aduku Sub-County
    b) ii) Aduku Town Council
    c) iii) Abongomola Sub-County
    d) Akali Sub-County
    e) Inomo Sub-County
    f) Inomo Town Council

Kwania County will remains with:
    a) Chawente Sub-County
    b) ii) Atongtidi Sub-County
    c) iii) Nambieso Sub-County
    d) Ayabi Sub-County
    e) Ayabi Town Council

15. West Budama Central County out of West Budama County South, consisting of:
    a) Mulanda Sub-County
    b) ii) Mwello Sub-County
    c) iii) Pajwenda Town Council
    d) Siwa Sub-County
    e) Nabuyoga Sub-County
    f) Nabuyoga Town Council

West Budama County remains with:
    a) Rubongi Sub-County
    b) ii) Magola Sub-County
    c) iii) Iyolwa Sub-County
    d) Nyangole Sub-County
    e) Osia Sub-County
    f) Ojilai Sub-County
    g) Iyolwa Town-Council
    h) Kirewa Sub-County
    i) Paya Sub-County
    j) Nawire Sub-County
    k) Sop-sop Sub-County
    l) Soni Sub-County
    m) Sere Sub-County

16. Kagoma North County out of Kagoma County, consisting of:
    a) Buwenge Sub-County
    b) ii) Buyengo Sub-County
    c) iii) Buwenge Town Council

Kagoma County remains with:
    a) Butagaya Sub-County
    b) ii) Namagera Town Council

Madam Speaker, I now beg to present to you the 31 additional counties and their composition.

1. Kapir County out of Ngora County, consisting of:
    a) Mukura Sub-County
    b) ii) Mukura Town Council
    c) iii) Morukakise Sub-County
    d) Agirigiroi Sub-County
    e) Kapir Sub-County

Ngora County remains with:
    a) Odwarat Sub-County
    b) ii) Kobwin Sub-County
    c) iii) Ngora Sub-County
    d) Atoot Sub-County
    e) Opot Town Council


2. Kioga North County out of Kioga County, consisting of:
    a) Agikdak Sub-County
    b) ii) Aputi Sub-County
    c) iii) Opali Sub-County
    d) Akwon Sub-County
    e) Awelo Sub-County
    f) Etam Sub-County
    g) Etam Town Council
    h) Arwotcek Sub-County
    i) Abeja Sub-County

Kioga County remains with:
    a) Muntu Sub-County
    b) ii) Agwingiri Sub-County
    c) iii) Amolatar Town Council
    d) Nalubwoyo Sub-County
    e) Namasale Sub-County
    f) Namasale Town Council
    g) Acii Sub-County

3. Napore West County out of Dodoth West County, consisting of:
    a) Lokori Sub-County
    b) ii) Karenga Sub-County
    c) iii) Karenga Town Council
    d) Kidepo Town Council

Dodoth West County remains with:
    a) Kapedo Sub-County
    b) ii) Kapedo Town Council
    c) iii) Kawalakol Sub-County
    d) Sangar Sub-County

4. Bokora East County out of Bokora County, consisting of:
    a) Ngoleriet Sub-County
    b) ii) Lotome Sub-County
    c) iii) Lorengecora Sub-County
    d) Iriiri Sub-County
    e) Nabwal Sub-County
    f) v). Lorengecora Town Council
    g) Kangole Town Council

Bokora County remains with:
    a) Matany Sub-County
    b) ii) Matany Town Council
    c) iii) Lokopo Sub-County
    d) Lopeei Sub-County
    e) Poron Sub-County
    f) Apeitolim Sub-County
    g) Lokiteded Town Council


5. Mawogola West County out of Mawogola County, consisting of:
    a) Katwe Sub-County
    b) ii) Nakasenyi Sub-County
    c) iii) Lwebitakuli Sub-County

Mawogola County remains with:
    a) Matete Sub-County
    b) ii) Matete Town Council
    c) iii) Mitete Sub-County

6. Otuke East County out of Otuke County, consisting of:
    a) Ogwette Sub-County
    b) ii) Olilim Sub-County
    c) iii) Orum Sub-County
    d) Otuke Town Council
    e) Ogor Sub-County

Otuke County remains with:
    a) Adwari Sub-County
    b) ii) Adwari Town Council
    c) iii) Okwang Sub-County
    d) Badobi Sub-County
    e) Alango Sub-County

7. Ruhaama East County out of Ruhaama County, consisting of: 
    a) Kitwe Town Council
    b) ii) Nyakyera Sub-County 
    c) iii) Nyakyera Town Council
    d) Rwoho Town Council
    e) Rukoni East Sub-County
    f) Rukoni West Sub-County 
    g) Nyamukana Town Council
    h) Itojo Sub-County

Ruhaama County remains with: 
    a) Kafunjo-Mirama Town Council
    b) ii) Ntungamo Sub-County
    c) iii) Rweikiniro Sub-County
    d) Ruhaama Sub-County 
    e) Ruhaama East Sub-County 
    f) Nyarutuntu Sub-County

8. Isingiro West County out of Isingiro County consisting of:
    a) Ruborogota Sub-county
    b) Kabuyanda Sub-county
    c) Kabuyanda Town Council 
    d) Ruhiira Town Council.

The remaining Isingiro County will consist of:
    a) Kikagate Town Council
    b) Kamubeizi Sub-county
    c) Kamubeizi Town Council
    d) Nyakitunda   Sub-county
    e) Ntunguta   Sub-county
    f) Ruyanga Sub-county

9. Too County out of Kongasis County consisting of:
    a) Chesower Sub-county
    b) Tulel Sub-county
    c) Kamet Sub-county
    d) Lwongon Sub-county 
    e) Mutushet Sub-county
    f) Kabei Sub-county 
    g) Kortek Sub-county
    h) Riwo Sub-county
    i) Brim Sub-county

The remaining Kongasis County will consist of
    a) Bukwo Sub-county
    b) Bukwo Sub-county 
    c) Chepkwasta Sub-county
    d) Kapsarur Sub-county
    e) Amanang Sub-county
    f) Kapkoros Sub-county
    g) Kaptererwo Sub-county
    h) Suam Sub-county
    i) Senentet Sub-county

10. A new county called Ochero County out of Kaberamaido County. The new county will consist of -
    a) Kobulubulu Sub-county
    b) Okile Sub-county
    c) Ochero Sub-county
    d) Ochero Town-council 

Remaining Kaberamaido County will consist of the following:
    a) Alwa Sub-county 
    b) Oriamo Sub-county
    c) Kaberamaido Sub-county
    d) Kaberamaido Town-council
    e) Aperkira Sub-county

11. A new county called Soi County out of Kween County consisting of:
    a) Ngenge Sub-county
    b) Kiriki (Green River) Sub-county
    c) Sundet Sub-county
    d) Chepsukunya Town-council

The remaining Kwet County will consist of -
    a) Benet Sub-county
    b) Binyiny Sub-county
    c) Binyiny Town-council
    d) Kaproron Sub-county
    e) Kaproron Town-council
    f) Kapkwata Sub-county
    g) Kaseko Sub-county
    h) Kwanyiy Sub-county
    i) Kwosir Sub-county
    j) Kaptum Sub-county
    k) Kitawoi   Sub-county
    l) Moyok Sub-county
    m) Kaptoyoy Sub-county
    n) Tuikat Sub-county 

12. Namisindwa County out of Bubulo East County consisting of:
    a) Namisindwa Town-council
    b) Bupoto Sub-county
    c) Namabya Sub-county
    d) Bukhaweka Sub-county
    e) Bukhaweka Town-council
    f) Bukhabusi Town-council
    g) Buwatuwa Sub-county
    h) Bungati Sub-county 
    i) Bumumali Sub-county
    j) Tsehululu Sub-county
    k) Mukoto Sub-county
    l) Luuwa Town-council

The remaining Bubulo East County will consist of: 
    a) Namboko Sub-county
    b) Nabitsikhi Sub-county
    c) Namitsa Sub-county
    d) Bubutu Sub-county
    e) Bubutu Town-council
    f) Buwambwa Sub-county
    g) Magale Sub-county
    h) Magale Town-Council 
    i) Bumityero Sub-county
    j) Bumbo Sub-county
    k) Bumbo Town-Council 
    l) Mukhuyu Sub-county
    m) Bukokho Sub-county
    n) Bukiabi Sub-county
    o) Bumwoni Sub-county
    p) Lwakhakha Town-Council 

13. Gweri County out of Soroti County consisting of:
    a) Awaliwal Sub-county
    b) Gweri Sub-county
    c) Aukot Sub-county

The remaining Soroti County remains with:
    a) Asuret Sub-county
    b) Ocokican Sub-county
    c) Kamunda Sub-county
    d) Lalle Sub-county

14. Pingire County out of Kasilo County consisting of:
    a) Labor Sub-county
    b) Pingire Sub-county 
    c) Kidetok Town-council 

Kasilo County will remain with:
    a) Bugondo Sub-county
    b) Kadungulu Sub-county
    c) Kasilo Town-council 
    d) Kadungulu Town-Council

15. Bungokho Central County out Bungokho County consisting of
    a) Busoba Sub-county
    b) Nabumali Town-council
    c) Bungokho Sub-county
    d) Bumbobi Sub-county
    e) Busano Sub-county
    f) Nyondo Sub-county

The remaining Bungokho County will consist of -
    a) Bukiende Sub-county
    b) Lukhonje Sub-county
    c) Bumasikye Sub-county
    d) Bunambutye Sub-county 
    e) Busiu Sub-county
    f) Busiu Town-council 

16. Aringa East County out of Aringa County consisting of:
    a) Lori Sub-county
    b) Kochi Sub-county
    c) Romogi Sub-county
    d) Apo Sub-county
    e) Barakala Town-council 

Aringa County remains with -
    a) Kuru Sub-county
    b) Kuru Town-council 
    c) Kululu Sub-county
    d) Yumbe Town-council 

17. Kyaka Central County out of Kyaka North County and Kyaka South County consisting of:
    a) Kyegegwa Sub-county
    b) Kyegegwa Town-council 
    c) Kyatega Sub-county
    d) Kakabara Town-council 
    e) Nkenja Sub-county 

The remaining Kyaka North County remains with:
    a) Kakabara Sub-county
    b) Kasule Sub-county
    c) Hapuuyo Sub-county
    d) Hapuuyo Town-council 
    e) Kigambo Sub-county
    f) Nkaakwa Sub-county
    g) Migongwe Sub-county
    h) Bugogo Town-council

Kyaka South County will remain with:
    a) Mpara Sub-county
    b) Mpara Town-council
    c) Buyonza Sub-county
    d) Rwentuha Sub-county
    e) Migamba Sub-county
    f) Kazinga Town-council 

18. A new country called Ruhinda South County out of Ruhinda County consisting of:
    a) Kabira Sub-county
    b) Mayanga Sub-county 
    c) Rurehe Sub-county 
    d) Mutara Sub-county

THE SPEAKER: Order Members!

MR MAGYEZI: Ruhinda County will remains with -
    a) Mitooma Sub-county
    b) Mitooma Town-council 
    c) Katenga Sub-county 
    d) Kashenshero Sub-county 
    e) Kashenshero Town-council 

19. Bushigai County out of Manjiya County consisting of:
    a) Nabweya Sub-county
    b) Bukigai Sub-county
    c) Bushiribo Sub-county
    d) Bunatsami Sub-county
    e) Kikholo Town-council
    f) Bushigayi Town-council 

Manjiya County remains with -
    a) Bududa Sub-county
    b) Bududa Town-council 
    c) Bukibokolo Sub-county
    d) Bumasheti Sub-county
    e) Bushika Sub-county
    f) Nakatsi Sub-county
    g) Bunabutiti Sub-county
    h) Bukibino Sub-county
    i) Nangako Sub-county

20. Gogonyo County out of Agule County consisting of:
    a) Gogonyo Sub-county
    b) Obutet Sub-county
    c) Apopong Sub-county
    d) Kaukura Sub-county

Agule County remains with:
    a) Chelekura Sub-county
    b) Agule Sub-county
    c) Akisim Sub-county
    d) Kameke Sub-county

21. Busiki North County out of Busiki County consisting of:
    a) Magada Sub-county
    b) Kagulu Sub-county
    c) Kiwanyi Sub-county
    d) Mazuba Sub-county

Busiki County remains with -
    a) Bulange Sub-county
    b) Namutumba Sub-county
    c) Namutumba Town-council
    d) Nsinze Sub-county
    e) Kizuba Sub-county
    f) Nawaikona Sub-county
    g) Bugobi Sub-county

22. A new county called Butiru County out of Bubulo West County consisting of:
    a) Bunabwana Sub-county
    b) Bunyinza Town-council 
    c) Makenya Sub-county
    d) Maefe Sub-county
    e) Bukhadala Sub-county 
    f) Butiru Sub-county
    g) Butiru Town-council 
    h) Bukusu Sub-county
    i) Bukhofu Sub-county
    j) Sisuni Sub-county

Bubulo West County remains with:
    a) Bunabutsale Sub-county
    b) Buwangani Town-council 
    c) Kaato Sub-county 
    d) Wesswa Sub-county
    e) Buwagogo Sub-county
    f) Manafwa Town Council
    g) Bugobera Sub-county
    h) Khabutoola Sub-county
    i) Sibanga Sub-county
    j) Busukuya Sub-county
    k) Nalondo Sub-county
    l) Puta Sub-county.

23. Maruzi North County out of Maruzi County. It will consist of: 
    a) Apac Sub-county
    b) Chegere Sub-county
    c) Teboke Sub-county

The remaining Maruzi County will consist of: 
    a) Ibuje Sub-county 
    b) Ibuje Town Council 
    c) Apoi Sub-county 
    d) Akokoro Sub-county and 
    e) Akokoro Town Council. 

24. Dodoth North County out of Dodoth East County consisting of:
    a) Kalapata Sub-county 
    b) Kalapata Town Council 
    c) Lotim Sub-county 
    d) Kathile Sub-county
    e) Kathile Town Council
    f) Kathile Sub-county
    g) Kaabong East County 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please allow the minister to move the motion. 

MR MAGYEZI: The remaining Dodoth East County will consist of the following:
    a) Kaabong West Sub-county 
    b) Lolelia Sub-county
    c) Lolelia South Sub-county 
    d) Lobongia Sub-county 
    e) Kakamar Sub-county
    f) Sidok Sub-county
    g) Lodiko Sub-county 
    h) Loyoro Sub-county 
    i) Kaabong Town Council 

25. Rwampara East County curved out of Rwampara County. The new county will consist of:
    a) Mwizi Sub-county 
    b) Mwizi-Kabura Town Council 
    c) Bugamba Sub-county 
    d) Rweibogo-Kibingo Town Council

Rwampara County will remain with: 
    a) Rugando Sub-county 
    b) Kinoni Town Council 
    c) Nyeihanga-Buteraniro Town Council
    d) Ndeija Sub-county 

26. West Budama North East County created out of West Budama North County. It consists of the following:  
    a) Nagongera Sub-county 
    b) Petta Sub-county
    c) Kisoko Sub-county 
    d) Katajula Sub-county  
    e) Nagongera Town Council 

I will first harmonise the composition of West Budama County. I request my staff to look at that. I think you put in extra sub-counties. Please revise the composition of West Budama County. 

27. Buhaguzi East County being created out of Buhaguzi County consisting of: 
    a) Buhimba Sub-county
    b) Buhimba Town Council
    c) Bugambe Sub-county

The remaining Buhaguzi County will be left with:
    a) Kiziranfumbi Sub-county 
    b) Kabwoya Sub-county 
    c) Kyangwali Sub-county
    d) Kikuube Town Council 

28. Namayingo South County created out of Bukooli South County. The new county will consist of:
    a) Banda Sub-county 
    b) Banda Town Council 
    c) Mutumba Sub-county  
    d) Mutumba Town Council 
    e) Buhemba Sub-county

Bukooli South County will remain with: 
    a) Buswale Sub-county
    b) Buyinja Sub-county
    c) Namayingo Town Council 

29. Elgon North County curved out of Elgon County. It will consist of:
    a) Bufumbo Sub-county 
    b) Masira Sub-county 
    c) Buginyanya Sub-county
    d) Bumugibole Sub-county 
    e) Namisuni Sub-county
    f) Kamu Sub-county 
    g) Bulegeni Sub-county
    h) Bulegeni Town Council
    i) Sisiyi Sub-county

The remaining Elgon County will compose of:
    a) Bumasabo Sub-county 
    b) Buluganya Sub-county 
    c) Soti Sub-county
    d) Nabiwutulu Sub-county 
    e) Bulaago Sub-county
    f) Lusha Sub-county 
    g) Simu Sub-county 

30. Nwoya East County curved out of Nwoya County. The new county will compose of: 
    a) Koch-Goma Sub-county 
    b) Koch-Goma Town Council
    c) Lii Sub-county
    d) Alero Sub-county 
    e) Paminyai Sub-county 

The remaining Nwoya County will consist of:
    a) Anaka Sub-county 
    b) Anaka Town Council
    c) Lungulu Sub-county
    d) Got Apwoyo Sub-county 
    e) Purongo Sub-county 
    f) Purongo Town Council 

31. Finally, a new county called Samia-Bugwe Central County curved out of Samia-Bugwe County. It will consist of:
    a) Masaba Sub-county 
    b) Masafu Sub-county
    c) Masafu Town Council 
    d) Masinya Sub-county 
    e) Buhehe Sub-county

The remaining Samia-Bugwe County will consist of:
    a) Busime Sub-county
    b) Lumino Sub-county
    c) Lumino Town Council 
    d) Lunyo Sub-county
    e) Majanji Sub-county
    f) Namungodi Town Council 
    g) Sikuda Sub-council 
    h) Buyanga Sub-county 
    i) Dabani Sub-county 
    j) Buteba Sub-county
    k) Busitema Sub-county 
    l) Tiira Town Council
    m) Bulumbi Sub-county.

Madam Speaker, there is an amendment under Samia-Bugwe Central County; it was a mistake; I think we have mixed up the sub-counties. Therefore, Samia-Bugwe Central County will compose of: 
    a) Masaba Sub-county 
    b) Masafu Sub-county 
    c) Buhehe Sub-county
    d) Masafu Town Council

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, maintain silence; and the noise is coming from the big people. 

MR MAGYEZI: The remaining Samia-Bugwe South County will compose of: 
    a) Lunyo Sub-county 
    b) Busime Sub-county
    c) Lumino Sub-county
    d) Majanji Sub-county
    e) Lumino Town Council

Honourable members – (Members rose_) - can I finish my submission; you can raise those matters after? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, allows the minister to finish his presentation. 

MR MAGYEZI: Madam Speaker, arising from the discussion on Tuesday, 30 June 2020, Members will have noted that there may be some applications or requests, which have not been brought to you for approval. I would like to present them so that the people out there know that their applications were not lost but they are still work in progress. We still have some consultations to do on their boundaries, composition, population and other factors. 

Members also raised the question of the criteria and I would like to be very clear that we create the counties as per the formula given to us by the Constitution. That is; we look at the population quota. In the population quota, we take the total number of the inhabitants of Uganda and divide it by the number of constituencies. As per December 2019, the UBOS official statistics gave us a population of 44.270 million people and we had 296 constituencies. So, the population quota we used is 150,000 people; I would like to be very clear on that. 

However, the Constitution also allows us - the figure may be low; the county may not meet that population quota but we go ahead and create it because of the following additional factors: means of communication, geographical terrain and land area, the level of the economy and the wishes of the people. The wishes of the people take into account the identity and hard-to-reach areas as given in the minute of the district council. 

Arising from that and the process we are still carrying out as a ministry, I would like you to allow us to continue doing our assessment. The following, however, are on table:
    1) Achwa County in Kapelebyong
    2) Aruu Central County in Pader
    3) Butambala South County in Butambala
    4) Igara North County in Bushenyi
    5) Kitagwenda South County in Kitagwenda
    6) Ajulu County in Gulu 
    7) Buruli North in Masindi
    8) Oyam Central County in Oyam
    9) Budiope Central County in Buyende
    10) Kazo North County in Kazo
    11) Kilembe County in Kasese
    12) Butebo East County in Butebo
    13) Bulamogi Central County in Kaliro
    14) Koome Island County in Mukono
    15) Bugusege County in Sironko and 
    16) Budadiri West in Sironko.

Madam Speaker, having presented to you the proposed 46 new counties and those, which are still work in progress, I now beg to move that Parliament considers and approves the new counties and takes note of those we still have as work in progress. I beg to move. (Member rose_)


THE SPEAKER: No, we have a motion. Honourable members, are you now invading the microphone? When we commenced the proceedings, we were 163 and the quorum is 148. Presently, we are 176. I now put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the counties be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, under the Constitution, we had 256 constituencies. It is now necessary that we state the number of constituencies for purposes of the Electoral Commission. Can I invite the Minister of Justice to present the number of constituencies in Uganda?

4.59
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Speaker, this is a motion to prescribe the number of constituencies in Uganda under Article 63(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, section 11 of the Electoral Commissions Act Cap. 114 and rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda.

“WHEREAS Article 63 (1) of the Constitution empowers Parliament to prescribe the number of constituencies for purposes of elections of Members of Parliament;

AND RECALLING that on 9 August 2016, this august House, under Article 63 (1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, prescribed 296 constituencies;

AWARE that Parliament recently approved and created cities, 10 of which took effect on 1 July 2020;

NOTING that each of the cities comprises of two divisions, which are equivalent to municipalities;

FURTHER AWARE that Parliament has passed a resolution to create 46 new counties;

FURTHER MINDFUL of the need to create a new constituency called Nakawa West in Kampala Capital City Authority owing to population density in Nakawa Division;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved and prescribed by Parliament of Uganda that the number of constituencies in Uganda shall be 353.”
I beg to move.

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is a procedure prescribed for creation of constituencies and I would like to invite honourable members to at least listen to the following: 

Population is one of the base lines for creation of constituencies in this country and we agree that there is no one here who doubts that Kampala alone has over five million people. Kampala contributes around two thirds to the subsistence of this economy — (Interjection) - Just a second, honourable members. I will put my request.

Kampala is represented by only nine legislators with a woman Member of Parliament representing five million people. We are all representatives here and you are aware of the burden that comes along.

Secondly, Nakawa has 300,000 people – (Interjection) - it is better that I finish my deliberation. I know you have gotten a new county but let us talk of equity. Therefore, when you look at constituencies in Kampala, Makindye Division has over 450,000 people, Nakawa – (Interjection) - I rose on a point of procedure, please. Rubaga Division has over 400,000 people, Central Division; daily and night population combined has over three million people.

What yardstick is the honourable minister coming up with for these people to be represented by only nine people? Therefore, we are standing up for equity and justice. Sebei sub-region alone has only 350,000 people and it has nine Members of Parliament. Let us talk with facts and statistics - (Interruption)

MS AMONGIN: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Aware that we have come a long way with this motion that was tabled by the minister, it was deferred and the procedures for a particular area to acquire a constituency have to be demanded by the people. Hon. Nsereko is a senior Member of this House. From the processes we have been taking in this House, he should have engaged directly - Kampala Central should have submitted to the Ministry of Local Government.

At this time when the House is in harmony, is the hon. Nsereko in order to come and derail the efforts that have been put in place by the Minister of Local Government and the honourable members present in this House? 

The Speaker: Honourable members, I agree that some places are big and have big numbers. However, there is a procedure you follow to ensure that the process is done.

Mr nsereko: Madam Speaker, I would like it to be put on record. There is no district council in Kampala – (Interjections) – that is one of the measures and the honourable minister is there.
 
We have Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) headed by the Lord Mayor and there are no minutes to that effect. Let us justify with equity - Do not escape equity using loopholes and stampeding people with numbers - 

The Speaker: Order, order!

Mr nsereko: The amount of money that people in Kampala contribute is a lot – (Interjections)

The Speaker: Honourable members, I am putting the question that the 353 constituencies are prescribed by this Parliament.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Mr ochen: This is unfair to other Ugandans – (Interruptions)

Mr nsereko: Whatever you say, this is injustice - (Interjections) - Buganda has over five million people and it has only 78 counties. This is -  

The Speaker: Let us proceed to item six – Honourable members, can you please take your seats? Take your seats! Honourable members, please take your seats.

Honourable members, House is adjourned to Tuesday.

(House rose at 5.12 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 04 August 2020 at 2.00 p.m.)
  
