Tuesday, 31 July 2007 

Parliament met at 2.57 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you for today’s meeting. First, I regret to inform you that our colleague, hon. Kamanda Bataringaya, who lost his daughter about two months ago, has lost another one and she is being buried today. She is called Miss Leah Mujenje. I want to request you to stand up in her honour. 

(The Members stood and observed a moment of silence)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Secondly, I want to remind the House that if we conclude responses to the State of the Nation Address today, we shall suspend the plenary until 13th August to permit the honourable members to deal with the policy statements.  

Again we have a full House; I think Parliament is becoming very popular. We have Ms Maja de Vibe, a new governance advisor from DFID. You are welcome Maja. She is the Corporate Policy Manager DFID Kampala. We also have many students from St Noa Mawagali Senior Secondary School, Jinja District. You are welcome. They are represented by the Jinja Members of Parliament. We have St Henry’s College Kitovu. You are also welcome. They are from Masaka. We have scouts from Baden-Powell Memorial School, Nakawa Division, who have come with one of our senior scouts. We also have senior scouts in the gallery, Mr Pinto and his colleagues. You are also welcome. Thank you very much.

3.01
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Madam Speaker, I am very sure that my dress code this afternoon is very friendly.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The rules allow it. You are looking very smart.

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you. Madam Speaker, you conveyed to this Parliament information about the loss of another daughter of our colleague, hon. Kamanda. I thought that you would allow me, on behalf of the Opposition and I believe all my colleagues in Parliament, to convey to hon. Kamanda and the family our personal – (Interjection) - Yes, the Speaker has done it and I requested specifically. I wish we had known earlier; probably some of us would have gone for the burial. Since we cannot, just allow us to convey our condolences to the family and particularly to our good friend, hon. Kamanda. 

It is very tough for a parent to lose two children in a space of two months and any words that we say to comfort him on the Floor of this House are really necessary because I do not know how he is handling. We pray to the good Lord to give him and his family strength to bear this very terrible tragedy. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.02
MR HUSSEIN GODI (FDC, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Arua Municipality I want to convey my condolences to the family of hon. Kamanda.  

Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of serious concern in reference to intelligence reports that there is a rebel scare in West Nile. Three weeks ago, Gen. Aronda travelled to West Nile and met the army leadership in 409 Brigade. Among the issues he handled was a detailed follow up, which was to be submitted to him later this week by ADCU Gen. Bamuze and Capt. Akasa. 

The only disappointment I have as a leader is that I was not involved in any meeting or consultation, even though it was a military matter. I was disappointed with that intelligence report, which is supposed to be submitted to Government this week. In the report they have listed Obongi County, Madi-Okolo, Arua and Koboko as areas where recruitment is going on. They allegedly stated in that report that hon. Godi, hon. Wadri Kassiano, hon. Fungaroo and hon. Reagan have been sponsoring that programme, something which we detest.  

Madam Speaker, this is not the first time that an allegation of such magnitude is made about me. Last year on 28th July, President Museveni invited presidential candidates to go for a chat at State House and that day coincided with my victory party in Arua Municipality. Col. Besigye happened to be the chief guest at that party and therefore he skipped the State House function. A week after that, a reporter of Red Pepper, Arinaitwe Rugyendo, made a full report in the Red Pepper saying that I used that opportunity to brief Col. Besigye about the meeting which I had had with Kony. However, it was after that victory party that I drove to Gulu to board a plane with Norbert Mao to fly to Garamba where I met Kony for the first time. 

Madam Speaker, we feel this is an issue which needs rapid response. As a leader I feel insecure because three weeks ago, my house was surrounded at night and I had to call Edward Ochom at midnight - he can confirm this - to come and give me support. I thank him for the rapid response through the OC Entebbe who came to my residence and secured my safety.  

I want to state that it is true there have been arrests in West Nile. The time they arrested the suspected PRA suspects, there was one Mzee who was arrested in that lot called Mzee Awara, who up to now has never been brought to court. There are many other people at large who are still in Arua Government prisons and have never been brought to court. 

I want to state categorically that no amount of intimidation can compel me to succumb to NRM in West Nile. I came to this Parliament after winning 70 percent of the votes and beating five able-bodied men, including the NRM candidate who President Museveni campaigned for. Therefore, I believe –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Godi, you indicated that you wanted to inform the government that you were worried about your security. I think you have done that. Kindly conclude. Do not go into anything else on who you defeated and so on. There is no election petition here. (Laughter)

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

3.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES)(Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I wish to lay on Table a proposal to borrow UA 19.21 million from the African Development Fund and another UA 19.21 million from the Japan Bank of International Cooperation -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I want to know if it is procedurally right for the Minister of Finance to do what he is doing when he seemingly has failed to do the most obvious thing we expected him to do. (Laughter) The other time we did not allow Kirunda Kivenjinja to make a statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, have you looked at the Order Paper? The next item is that very important issue. (Laughter) Let him lay the papers on the Table then we shall call him for that very important item. (Laughter) 

MR OMACH: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your protection. I would like to lay on Table a proposal to borrow UA 19.21 million from the African Development Fund and another UA 19.21 million from the Japan Bank of International Cooperation for financing the Bujagali Interconnection Project. 

This project is to meet energy needs of Uganda’s population for social and economic development in an environmentally sustainable manner. It will entail transmission lines – 75 km of double circuit 220kv three-phase overhead transmission lines that will be erected from Bujagali to Kawanda; 15 km of double circuit 132kv overhead transmission lines which will be erected from Kawanda to Mutundwe sub-station; erection of 132kv double circuit transmission lines from Bujagali to complete the transmission to the existing substation at Nalubale; and a 5km 132kv overhead transmission to be constructed from Bujagali to the other transmission lines. 

The second part of it will be substations. There will also be the third part, which will be environmental measures, and then finally it will also cater for consultancy services. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the terms and conditions of this financing are the usual very favourable terms: a maturity period of 50 years including a grace period of 10 years and a service charge of 0.75 percent on disbursement and outstanding amounts. I beg to lay, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will commit it to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I want to seek your indulgence to adjust the Order Paper so that certain business is handled by the Parliamentary Commission; that is why the commission exists. I beg for your intervention, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What business? 

MR EKANYA: It is for Parliament specifically. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, it was on the Order Paper because it concerns the whole country. That is why we asked for a statement. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS

3.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES)(Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I would like to thank you and the Parliament for passing the vote-on-account for the financial year 2007/08 on time on 27 June 2007. It is our understanding and undertaking that the people of Uganda who are employed by the government of Uganda will be paid their salaries and allowances by the 28th of every month. This is what we stand by.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, this financial year we are changing the system of payment. Instead of utilising cheque payments we are now moving into electronic funds transfer, so the salaries for the month of July have already been transferred to all Government institutions. However, I wish to clarify that there has been a slight delay largely on account of the transmission from the old manual system to the electronic funds transfer system. 

The new system required all accounting officers to provide details of bank information for all Government institutions and funds recipients. The releases have been made to votes where the required information has been submitted to the Accountant General’s office. That not withstanding, I have provided information and my ministry has undertaken to ensure prompt payment of the July salaries. I would like to give you the chronology of what happened regarding this month’s salaries. I will read slowly. 

On 11th June this year, we appointed accounting officers for central ministries. On the 27th of last month, we approved a vote-on-account as I have already indicated, and on the same day we appointed local Government accounting officers. Issuing of the circular for standing instructions for salaries for the financial year 2007/08 by Ministry of Public Service was done on 2nd July 2007. 

Printing of monthly payrolls by Uganda Computer Services was done on the 10th of July for traditional civil servants including Parliament of Uganda and on 16th of July for the teachers. On the 18th and 26th of July 2007, disbursement of salary funds by the Accountant General’s office took place.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, you will note that the actions above were taken in the spirit of ensuring that Government policy of paying salaries by 28th of every month is respected.

This morning, I did confirm with the Bank of Uganda that they have effected transfers of salaries to the respective commercial banks and all Government employees should be able to access their July 2007 salaries shortly. As I talk now, salaries for members should be in their banks by this afternoon.

Madam Speaker, the shortcomings have now been sorted out between my ministry, Bank of Uganda, commercial banks and accounting officers of spending agencies. The month ahead therefore should see timely action in not only payment of salaries but also for payment of goods and services in line with the budgets.

Finally, I want to put it on record that the level of preparedness by my ministry in opening transactions this financial year has been unprecedented. I thank you for listening and I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.16
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr John Nasasira): Madam Speaker, I will start and I will read slowly –(Interruptions) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us listen to the Minister. You wanted information about the roads in the country and he is here. 

MR NASASIRA: Last week when Parliament was debating the President’s State of the Nation Address, some honourable members raised issues related to the conditions of some of the roads and bridges in their constituencies. The contractor carrying out resealing works on Kampala-Entebbe Road was queried. The poor condition of some of the roads in the country and bridges, such as Aswa River Bridge, were also raised by honourable members. 

In addition to last week’s debate in the House, several articles and letters in the press on the state of our roads have featured regularly. The most recent article is one where a daily newspaper carried a story alleging that some members of the Committee on Infrastructure had said that despite a lot of money given to the ministry, no work had been done. I have since learnt that the paper had quoted some members of the committee out of context. In any case, what has been done is there to be seen and what is not yet done is also there to be seen. Nevertheless, the public and indeed the country need an explanation to all that has been reported.  

My ministry has done a lot of work on our roads and it continues to do a lot of work, but also a lot of work remains to be done and this is a fact of life. Before I answer some issue – (Interruption)

MS JALIA BINTU: Madam Speaker, I have observed carefully that almost half of the members on this side do not have a copy of the report yet the Opposition has. May we access the report?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where are the papers? Honourable minister, how many copies of the report did you bring?

MR NASASIRA: We printed very many copies in hundreds and they are coming. I do not know whether all of them have arrived but I can see that this side is fully catered for. I do not know what happened. Maybe if you could give me a few minutes, more copies should be distributed to this side.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, I think let us defer this briefly while the papers come. Let us now have the scouts’ statement.

STATEMENT TO PARLIAMENT BY THE UGANDA SCOUTS PARLIAMENTARY UNION TO MARK 100 YEARS OF SCOUTING
	
3.21
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am sure the statement is being distributed –(Interjections)- Tomorrow, the 1st of August, the Scout Movement celebrates 100 years since Robert Baden-Powell founded it in 1907. This is a historic event by any measure.

On behalf of the Parliamentary Scout Union and the Scout Movement, I would like to thank you in a large measure for the opportunity you have provided me to present this statement before this august House. I have met a number of young Scouts and Girl Guides who have told me that they are relatives and friends to, and are supported by, honourable members of this august House. Honourable colleagues, the Scout Movement is exceedingly glad for your support and appreciates your interest in this voluntary but noble cause of scouting.

Madam Speaker, 100 years separate us from 1907 when Baden-Powell envisaged the dream of an army of young people who love their God and country coming together to selflessly help those in need. The Scout Movement has travelled a long way on the wings of that dream, and today we honour Mr Baden-Powell.

Honourable colleagues, before I turn to the details of the century celebrations, allow me to indulge you for a moment in a brief history about this humble movement. The Scout Movement of Uganda was founded by an Anglican missionary, the Reverend Canon H.M Grace at Mbarara High School in 1925. Two years later when Rev. Canon Grace was transferred from Mbarara Diocese to Buganda, he embarked on spreading the values of this movement starting with Mengo Government officials. However, kingdom officials were sceptical about the intentions of the white man and resented scouting. 

At the time, King Daudi Chwa together with Ham Mukasa had travelled to England on official duty. Upon return, King Chwa, who by providence had had an opportunity while in the UK to learn about scouting, immediately directed the Buganda Kingdom to embrace scouting. His action marked the beginning of scouting. 

In 1965, Kabaka Daudi Chwa decided to donate land at Kaazi, 15kms south east of Kampala, to the Scouts and Girl Guides for the sole purpose of camping. The name Kaazi means little rock, and the site is considered to be one of the most beautiful in Africa. It has since remained a national training and camping centre for the Uganda Scouts Association. We shall always be grateful to the Kingdom of Buganda for this generous contribution. (Applause)

In 1944, the Uganda Scouts Association was formally registered as a corporate body. Two years later, the Baden-Powell family donated a building on Buganda Road, which is now the headquarters of the movement. In 1963, the Uganda Scouts Association was formally established through an Act of Parliament. 

Let me say something about the structure. A council heads the Uganda Scouts Association and below it there is a board for policy formulation. There is a national executive committee and district executive committee and these committees trickle down to the lower levels. They are charged with the sole responsibility of administration. Other structures include the Uganda Parliamentary Scout Union, which is part of the wider global body of networks of parliaments. The World Scout Parliamentary Union and the National Scout Parliamentary Association are part of this network. These national associations exist in almost 100 countries and their members include MPs of national parliaments, Senators and deputies. Today, similar statements like this one are being made in over 50 national assemblies. 

In the Eighth Parliament, the union is finding its ground with an encouraging number of 15 registered members. It is the union’s mission to support and advocate the cause of scouting at policy level and to integrate it in national planning formulation. We are currently negotiating with the administration of Parliament to allocate us an office to assist us in the smooth running of the union. I must report here, Madam Speaker, that your office has so far indicated a positive attitude. 

The Assets of the Association

The Uganda Scout Association has an asset base countrywide of approximately Shs3 billion and is managed by a board of trustees. Our core asset is the human resource of our voluntary members who currently stand at over 600,000 members. This figure ironically exceeds the total population of my district, Kabale, and it is almost twice the population of Butaleja District. Globally, we have more than 10 million members.

Madam Speaker, allow me to use this opportunity to correct the wrong impression in some quarters of the public who think that scouting is all about camping. Scouting goes beyond camporee and jamboree. It embraces the value based non-formal education and engages in community development. Scouts are change agents. They are actively involved in a vast number of issues affecting communities where they live, tackling local problems. Some of the voluntary activities they engage in include health and immunisation, HIV/AIDS awareness campaigns, civic education, environment protection campaigns, career guidance among others. These activities and work are meant to promote such objectives as world peace, co-existence, international understanding and cooperation. 

Because of these good principles, the Scout Movement has produced some of the bravest citizens of the world. In science, the bravery of scouting took Neil Armstrong to the moon in 1969. On the political scene, the scouting principles of self sacrifice made former US President, John F. Kennedy, one of the great pro-poor presidents the world has ever seen. 

Back home, the scouting principles of love for country produced one of the most eloquent leaders of our time, Mr Milton Obote. (Applause) The scouting principles of self-sacrifice, took some of the 27 young heroes into the bush to liberate our country from tyranny. (Applause and Laughter) I would like to report that the support for scouting that has sustained our own president, H.E. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni - our patron - contributed a lot in moulding him into the most courageous and charismatic leader, unmatched in the history of our country. (Applause)

To mark this historical event, the centenary celebrations will be held in Sironko District tomorrow, August 1st 2007 at Sironko Township Primary School. The theme of the celebration will be “One World One Promise”.

As part of the pre-celebration activities, in East Africa we organised a peace caravan, which started out on 19 July 2007 at Dar-es-salaam, through Uganda and will tomorrow end at Mt Kenya. The caravan, which carried a message of peace, had 16 people, four of whom were Ugandans. I met one of the Ugandan Scouts on the caravan, a 17 year-old, and this is what she had to say: “I have travelled through our East African countries interacting with needy communities and I now fully realise the need for a united East Africa. I carried a message of peace from Uganda on my journey and I would like you to deliver it to our MPs.” 

Madam Speaker, I now want to deliver this message, which was carried by the peace caravan for the last two weeks across East Africa. It is signed by hon. Stephen Kalonzo Musyoka, who is the Chief Commissioner of Kenya; hon. Maggie Kigozi, the Chief Commissioner of Uganda; and Lawrence Muhamwa the Chief Commissioner of Tanzania. I have laid the message on the Table. 

In conclusion, I would like to appeal to the government and especially the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to take advantage of this organised and tested movement as a platform for promoting value based and non-formal education in our country.

Secondly, as Ugandans and Members of Parliament we must stand up to the powerful idea that children’s rights are human rights. The sure way of protecting and guaranteeing these rights is to build a value based system of education that trains our children in good citizenship, respect for others and love for God and the country. There are a number of ways that we can do this but we believe that scouting is next to none.  

Thirdly, the years have gone by and the Scout Movement has changed, for instance today we have girls who are now Scouts. The movement has expanded, creating structures at district levels.  The resource is steadily increasing and the movement continues to engage our children in education and training activities.  

The current law, the Boy Scouts and Girl Guides Act 1963, needs to be amended to match the changes that the association has undergone, and also to cater for its future. We need a law that regulates these trainings and encompasses age, among others. We must state that other countries have put such laws in place. Uganda should not be left behind, honourable colleagues. We are working on a Private Member’s Bill, which will soon be tabled before this august House. We are counting on you, honourable members, to legislate for this noble movement. When finally this Bill comes to this House, we shall count on you.

Lastly, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, at the dawn of this new century of scouting, let us feel the wind of scouting blow our backs, pushing us forward to a brighter future. Together let us do something so that 100 years from now our grandchildren will look back and say, “This was really the beginning of the new era of scouting.”  I thank you.

3.34
MR HAMSON OBUA (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker.  First of all I would like to salute my chair of the Parliamentary Scout Union, and salute you and your office in particular for the support you are rendering to Uganda Scouts Association. 

Madam Speaker, 100 years down the road the Scout Movement across the globe is alive and kicking, and there is a fundamental precedent that we are setting in Uganda today - we are recognising the fact that what Uganda Scouts Association is doing is something very instrumental to our people. 

I would like to inform this Parliament that scouting is a movement that nurtures, prepares and grooms young people and above all instils discipline in them. I would like to give one example and say that some of us are in this Parliament because of scouting. I started my leadership career as a Cub Scout in P1.  I then served up to the last position of a troop leader. I later on joined student politics, and then came to youth politics and now I am here in Parliament. So I am what I am because of the Scout Movement.  

I would like to further inform this Parliament that my first trip outside Uganda was to represent this country under scouting. In 1996 I was part of the team that won at the national camping and then we went to Nairobi, Kenya, to represent Uganda at the East and Central African Jamboree. Young as I was, Uganda won the East and Central African Jamboree that took place in Nairobi and it has kept on winning.

I would like to appeal to this Parliament that Uganda Scouts Association should get the support it deserves from Members of Parliament. I also want to appeal to the young people outside there to emulate some of us who are here ably representing them; we started from that very humble background and gradually rose up to where we are. 

I want to appeal to young people to join the Scout Movement and Girl Guides Movement. This is the only way we can nurture young leaders. You might have heard about the late Dr Apollo Milton Obote, he was a Scout, and the current President of Uganda is our patron. These are clear examples from President to President. Maybe the next presidential material would also be a member of the Scouts –(Interjections)- and hon. Okot Ogong is here, he is our member.  

Madam Speaker, I would like to inform this Parliament that the Scouts motto is “Be prepared”. Every time as a Scout you have to be prepared, and that also applies to leadership. As leaders we should be prepared. Our founder’s -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is so much noise. I do not know what is going on today. Order please. Let hon. Obua speak.

MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, I am just concluding. I was saying that what is fundamental for us is the support we should give to this movement. I am optimistic that with our support Uganda will continue leading and winning in jamborees outside this country in scouting. Our founder’s motto is, “Leave a place better than you found it”.  As a Member of Parliament now, at the end of five years I would like to leave this Parliament better than I found it.  

Madam Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity. I rest my case here and say asante sana.

3.40
MRS BEATRICE LAGADA (NRM, Woman Representative, Oyam District): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I am not a Scout but I am a Girl Guide, a sister organisation to the Scouts. Therefore, on behalf of all the Girl Guides of Uganda, I would like to congratulate the Uganda Parliamentary Scout Union and all the Scouts of Uganda on these wonderful 100 years of existence and for the celebrations that they are going to have tomorrow.  

Madam Speaker and honourable members, values are inculcated in one at a very tender age. We are what we are today because of what was either put in us or not put in us when we were young. In this country we have a very serious need for Ugandans who are selfless, who have a voluntary spirit and whose words can be relied on. I therefore wish to urge all members in this House to support the Scout Movement and the Girl Guide Movement in our constituencies.

I want us to reflect a little; many times we all have public functions and how many times have you seen Boy Scouts and Girl Guides playing roles that we never think about but which are very crucial to the success of the function. We always look at them there collecting bottles, trying to control the crowd and many times they even go without a bottle of soda at these public functions which we hold. They are our children and we are trying to groom them so that they are better Ugandans tomorrow.

Many years ago, I was a member of an organisation called the Uganda Voluntary Works Association, and it was mainly made up of Girl Guides and Boy Scouts. This was an organisation that would go out to organisations like Save the Children and spend time once every month with vulnerable children that need help. I believe I am what I am today because of that exposure – (Interjections)-I am a woman on whose word you can depend and a woman of honour. Therefore, if you want to have Ugandans of integrity, whose word is dependable, about whom you can say “I believe because it is so and so who has said so they will do exactly what they have said”, then we need to bring up more Scouts and Girl Guides in this country.

I am reminded of an experience I had that I would like to share. I was travelling those days when I was RDC of Mbarara and a school boy stopped me in Nateete and asked me for a lift. I decided to give him a lift because it was raining. When I asked him where he was going, he told me that he was going to Kings College Budo. I asked him, “Where is your leave-out chit?” He did not have it because somebody had grabbed some things of his. I said, “How do I know that you did not escape from school?” He told me, “There are two reasons, Madam; one is because I am a Scout and two because I am a Budonian.” I believed him. (Laughter) That is the spirit that I would like us to inculcate in the young – “because I am a Scout and because I am a Budonian”. I believed him and took him. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

3.44
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Soroti Woman Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank hon. David Bahati for the statement. I am wondering why hon. Bahati did not find it necessary to refresh this House. I used to be a Girl Guide some time back and then I became defunct, but I thought if hon. Bahati had refreshed us on the Scouts’ motto and the rules that govern the Scout Movement, his statement would have been complete. I expected him to remind me just of one thing, that a Scout is loyal to the country. That is what I expected. 

Madam Speaker, recently I met a young girl. She took me on and said, “Honourable member, you see the problem with you MPs and all the leaders of this country is that we can no longer put our faith in you.” Those are the words of the little girl. She said, “All of you are thieves, you are lazy, you go to office after 9.00 O’clock and you leave your coats in offices”. That is what the little girl was telling me. I thought if the young children of this country feel this way about us, then someone has to remind us that we need to be loyal and faithful to this country.  

That is what Scout Movement is about, and that is what the Girl Guides in this country pledge to do. They pledge to do their duty to God and to this country, not to their stomachs, not to anybody but to God and to this country. I would like to encourage us; if you are thinking of a better generation, a generation that will love Uganda so passionately, more than we have loved this country, the best way to go is to invest in the Scout Movement and the Scripture Union so that the children are taught the ways of God. 

Madam Speaker, the Bible in Psalm 119:9 says, –(Interjection)- Do not say Amen yet. You say Amen when I have finished. (Laughter) The Bible says, “How can a young man…” - or if you want the gender sensitive version you say, “How can a young person keep his or her ways pure?” The Bible says, “By walking according to the ways of God”. That is what we teach young people in the Scripture Union and in the Scout Movement. I would like to encourage and support the spirit of scouting in this country and pray that we raise a generation that loves Uganda and loves God more than our generation. Thank you. (Applause)

3.47
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity to talk about young children becoming responsible citizens of our country. First, I wish to convey my condolences to hon. Kamanda Bataringaya for the loss of his two daughters in such quick succession. We have not been told the cause of their death but it gives us yet another opportunity to ponder on the health facilities in our country. However, that will be a subject for another day. Today I wish first of all to thank hon. Bahati and the honourable members that have contributed and made statements on this day when we celebrate 100 years of scouting. 

I stand here as a Girl Guide - once a Girl Guide always a Girl Guide. I stand to pay tribute to Lord and Lady Baden-Powell and to Lord Baden-Powell’s sister, Agnes, who after three years of scouting in 1910 decided to form the Girl Guides Movement with just a handful of girls, and we shall be celebrating our 100 years in 2010.  

Although their numbers were very small, the girls passionately believed that they should have the same opportunities to develop their skills as the Boy Scouts did. It is extra-ordinary to think that from such a humble beginning, girl guiding and boy scouting is a movement today that has grown to be one of the largest voluntary movements in the world, with a staggering membership of 10 million as hon. Bahati has just said. 

Madam Speaker, scouting and guiding provides a safe space for children to have fun, to try new things and challenge themselves. In this age of so much destruction with the internet, so much pornography and many paedophiles, girl guiding and scouting provide such a space. It is incumbent upon all adults to support any organisation that channels the energies and the attributes of our young people into healthy alternatives in which they should all grow. 

Some of us who had the honour of being nurtured as Girl Guides still uphold the values of honesty, integrity, reliability, respect for God’s creation including animals and plants as well as caring for others as we perform the daily mandatory requirement of the good turn to this day. These are values that we would wish for every boy and girl of Uganda to grow up with. 

I, therefore, agree with hon. David Bahati that the Ministry of Education should once again take up this institution of guiding and scouting very seriously. They should emphasise it because Lord and Lady Baden-Powell when they founded it for England were kind enough to bring it to Uganda. We should honour them by promoting it as much as possible. 

The celebrations will not only remember our rich history and reflect where guiding and scouting are today, but we also look at the future as we continue to grow. It is very befitting indeed that this celebration coincides with the day that we celebrate the birthday of the Kabaka of Buganda, a day for which the leader of the Opposition and the Opposition Chief Whip are very elegantly turned out. It is very important because as hon. Bahati said, it captures the role of Buganda, of Kabaka Chwa, in the promotion of guiding and scouting. 

I would like to thank the Leader of the Opposition and the Chief Whip for representing Parliament on this very great day and call upon the whole House to treat such days as a days that will bring us all together, if only to turn out as elegantly as the two ladies and gentlemen in the Busuti and the Kanzus. Congratulations Scouts. Congratulations Girl Guides. May the memory of Lord and Lady Baden-Powell live on to inspire us. Thank you. Ssabasajja awangaale.

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Madam Speaker, I would like to correct the record because at that function this Parliament was represented by none other than the Speaker and not the Leader of the Opposition. Maybe he represented the Opposition but Government was represented by the Prime Minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I just want to ask the lady members of this House, especially the Girl Guides like me, to pick ourselves up and revive the Girl Guides Movement. In the Sixth and Seventh parliaments we had started. Hon. Balemezi was our convener. So, ladies, let us pick ourselves up before the 100 years anniversary. I thank the Scouts for reminding us. Minister of Works, I hope now you have sufficient papers.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.55
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr John Nasasira): Madam Speaker and honourable members, to get the record straight, I will start all over again with my statement so that it does not mix up with the Scouts and the Girl Guides.  

Last week when Parliament was debating the President’s State of the Nation Address, some honourable members raised issues relating to the conditions of some of our roads and bridges in their constituencies. The methods of work by the contractor carrying out resealing works on Kampala-Entebbe Road were also queried. The poor condition of some of the roads in the country and bridges, such as Aswa River Bridge, was also raised by honourable members. 

In addition to last week’s debate in the House, several articles and letters in the press on the state of our roads have featured regularly. The most recent is when one daily newspaper carried a story alleging that some of the members of the Committee on Infrastructure had said that despite a lot of money given to the ministry, no work had been done. I have since learned that the paper had actually quoted some of the members of the committee out of context. In any case, what has been done is there to be seen and what is not yet done is also there to be seen because you cannot hide roads. Nevertheless, the public needs an explanation to all that has been reported as being true or false.  

Madam Speaker, my ministry has done a lot of work - as I will explain - on our roads and it continues to do a lot of work. As you will travel around the countryside, you will not miss the ministry doing work. However, there is also a lot of work still pending, and that is a fact. 

Before I answer some of these issues that were raised during the debate, allow me, Madam Speaker, to welcome you from Obongi together with other honourable Members of Parliament who braved the tough Moyo-Obongi Road and the delicate bridge that they crossed. This road under Moyo District will be rehabilitated this financial year. (Applause) My ministry has provided Shs 450 million to Moyo District for its rehabilitation. Furthermore, this road will be taken over by the central Government together with other district roads that are going to be taken over, totalling to over 5,000 kilometres, in our new restructuring and reform of the ministry and its institutions. 

I would also like to assure the people of Gulu and Kitgum District that a design for a new Aswa Bridge is underway. A consultant, M/s. Norplan (U) Ltd, was hired by my ministry sometime back to design and supervise the construction of 25 bridges spread all over the country. In fact, the consultants have already started geo-technical investigation for Aswa Bridge and we are on site between 20th and 24th of this month. 

As regards Kampala-Entebbe Road, the ministry had already been addressing the problem regarding the works management by the contractor, M/s Energo (U) Ltd, who is resealing the road. This project is supervised by a Ugandan consultant, M/s MBW, on behalf of the ministry. However, in their effort to speed up the work because of the pressure we have been putting on these contractors so that we can beat the rain and the CHOGM deadline, they were closing half of the road for long distances. This had already been stopped, actually by none other than me when I visited the project before this matter came to the House. 

The second problem of the stones peeling off the road has to do with bitumen and this is being addressed. Let me add that such problems occur in construction. What is important is to address the problems as they occur and solve them. That is what we are doing on that road. 

Let me now make a general statement on the state of our roads and the progress of reforms in the ministry. This is to answer the concerns that have been raised in this House and those by the public through print and electronic media. In order to do this, I would like to give the picture of the road network in the country and under what authority it falls. 

As you see from my statement, on the table under what we classify as national roads totalling 10,800 kilometres, 6,600 kilometres of these are tarmac and 7,200 are murram. They are under my ministry for both policy development and maintenance. The districts look after 27,500 kilometres which are all murram. The urban authorities look after 4,300 kilometres, including Kampala City Council, of which 600 kilometres are tarmac and the rest - 3,700 kilometres – is gravel. There are also community roads, which total to about 35,000 kilometres, which are either gravel or earth. 

My ministry is responsible for policy and technical guidance for the districts, urban and community roads. However, this is not the perception and impression in the country. Every road that is in bad condition is assumed a failure of my ministry. Nobody seems to think that it is a failure - even when we have sent money to the districts - of the district authorities or urban authorities. 

A good example was last year when Kampala City roads were completely unacceptable for any modern city. The outcry was so big; the FM radios were up in arms. Unfortunately for us, much as we are responsible for policy and guidelines, the blame was totally put under the ministry and the Minister of Works for that matter. I had no choice except to take over some of them at the beginning of January, and I have not handed them back to the Mayor until we are able to understand what will happen to them. With our minimum resources, we were able to repair and patch up most of them to a passable condition. What amazed me is that as soon as we patched them, the outcry was, “Why don’t they reconstruct them. They have just patched!” I see the honourable MP for Kampala Central is saying, “Yes, why only patch and not reconstruct?” Of course we would wish to reconstruct but the funds do not allow, as I am going to explain. Let me state that a patch is better than a pothole.   

The development of our road infrastructure can be classified as follows: First, there is the upgrading of gravel roads to tarmac. The second intervention is the reconstructing of those tarmac roads that have aged. The third is the gravelling of the gravel roads that have had wear and tear and are also aged. Finally, it is the maintenance, both routine and periodic, which comes once in a while for both tarmac and gravel roads. These interventions must be done appropriately and in a timely manner. 

Roads have a lifecycle when we design them, as I will explain. At our country’s independence, the colonial Government handed us about 1,000 kilometres of tarmac roads which they had managed to construct in 70 years. As you remember, they were here for 70 years and so they left us with 1,000 kilometres of tarmac roads and others were gravel or earth. By 1971 when President Obote was overthrown, his Government had added another 700 kilometres of tarmac roads. Idi Amin added 20 kilometres for his nine years and when the late Obote returned, before he was overthrown, his Government had added another 70 kilometres. By 1986, Uganda’s tarmac road network totalled to about 1,800 kilometres and 85 percent of this was in dire need of repair. The gravel roads were in a similar state. I think we all remember, since we were all here, that these were rehabilitated between 1986 and 1996. Since that time, we embarked on upgrading more. 

The roads that have been upgraded are listed at the end of this statement and I will invite honourable members to go to the end of my statement to see the new roads that we have tarmacked. I have listed the roads from the period 1996 to 2007 but as I mentioned in my note below, there is also Mityana-Mubende Road, 86 kilometres, and Kyotera–Rakai, 17 kilometres, which were tarmacked before that period. In all, the roads that are about to either be completed or have been completed are over 1,000 kilometres in 10 years. 

I can proudly say that in the last 11 years, the government has upgraded more gravel roads to tarmac than any Government in Uganda’s history, and this is a fact - tarmacking roads to West Nile, Bunyoro, Toro, Kapchorwa, the Tanzanian border, Mutukula, Rukungiri, Ibanda, Mbale and others in central Uganda. With the support of this Parliament, we shall continue to upgrade until all the parts of the country are served with good tarmac roads.

I have a friend of mine who travels on Jinja-Bugiri Road; he is a spokesman of one of the political parties. Every time he comes back, he writes in the papers that I am a very useless minister and I should be sacked. I might not be so useful but at least all these tarmac roads have been done under my charge in 11 years.

Madam Speaker, where we have fallen short is on reconstruction and maintenance of the roads. That is where we have fallen short. On the upgrading, I think we have done relatively well. On the maintenance of those roads and reconstruction of those that were aging, we have fallen short. 

Roads in Uganda are designed to have a lifecycle of about 15 years although they may last for 20 years if adequate and timely maintenance is carried out and they are on good terrain. I am bringing this up so that honourable members and I can share this knowledge together as we look at the condition of our roads. I want to inform the House that timely repairs on our roads have not been possible mainly due to budget constraints. For purposes of scrutiny, I have attached a paper, entitled “Inadequate Road Funding: A Cause for National Concern.” It is marked appendix 1. This is the paper I presented in 2003 at a retreat with Members of Parliament. 

Why was I saying that inadequate funding is a cause for national concern? It was because I could see that we were going to get into the bad situation in which we are now. When you look at page 2 of that appendix, you will see why there is an outcry. The outcry is not on upgrading of roads. Of course there are more roads that will require tarmacking, and I want us to separate the two; the outcry is on the backlog of roads that are not fully maintained. 

If you look at the table appearing on the appendix, you will realise that between 1996 and 1999, we had almost completed rehabilitation. The basic reason is that at that time we were in partnership with our development partners to fund road maintenance. However, as you can see, from 2001 we started getting a funding shortfall because of budget constraints, and by Financial Year 2002/2003 we had a shortfall of US$ 20 million while during Financial Year 2003/2004, we had another shortfall of US$ 20 million, which was required for maintenance. 

This table talks about the situation as at the time I presented this paper, but I can give you more documents for the Financial Year 2004/2005, which shows a shortfall of US$ 19 million. The Financial Year 2005/2006 shows a shortfall of US$ 32 million and that of Fiscal Year 2006/2007, in which we are, experienced a shortfall of US$ 31 million of the required US$ 70 million. This means that we are getting slightly over 50 percent of the funds we require for maintenance and yet even with this budgetary constraint we have to share the budget. 

While we were having this shortfall and deterioration of some of our roads, we were building schools for UPE. It was some kind of sacrifice so that you could get some children to school while you were hitting a few potholes -(Interjection)- the Ministry of Education will give you statistics of how many schools have been built since 2001.

Madam Speaker, I would like honourable members to appreciate the fact that even if you are a good driver and you have a very good vehicle to drive from here to Tororo, if you get fuel that can only take you up to Jinja, that is where you will stop; you cannot complain about the vehicle or the driver. This means that you cannot move to Tororo unless you have enough fuel. Therefore, I would like honourable members to understand this point so that we can work together and see how to get adequate funding to enable us handle our road network, to save it from deterioration. 

To address this problem of road maintenance, my ministry has embarked on major reforms whose progress is given in appendix II of my statement. I hope that honourable members will have time to read the document entitled, “Road Sub-Sector Reforms and the Emerging Issues”, which is attached to my statement, so that we are together. The reforms are going to be completed in 2008. 

Finally, my ministry’s strategy for improving road development and maintenance is given in the attached appendix III. The key components of the reforms are the establishment of the National Road Authority and more importantly the establishment of a road fund. The Road Fund will be used for the maintenance of national, district and urban roads. The Road Fund Bill will soon be coming to this House and I am appealing to honourable members to support it so that we can move. 

Our estimate is that through the Road Fund we will be able to raise US$ 100 million a year, of which the districts will get adequate funding for their maintenance. The urban authorities will also be able to get adequate funding for road maintenance. The same will apply to the National Road Authority. So, as I predicted in 2004 that this would be a national concern, I can also confidently predict that with this Road Fund in place, potholed roads will be hard to find on our road network by the end of 2010. I can repeat that with adequate road funding, potholed roads will disappear from our road network.

Madam Speaker, as I conclude, let me mention a few key roads whose condition has been poor or where the ongoing contracts had been problematic. I will start with the Jinja-Bugiri Road project where work is progressing well. The contractor there has been instructed to intensify maintenance ahead of construction to improve on the condition of the existing road so that those who are using it are not inconvenienced much. This project is expected to be completed in December 2008. 

The Kampala Northern Bypass is another project that has been in the papers many times, but I want to inform the House that work is progressively going on well. The project is expected to be completed by the end of the year. 

Accordingly, repair works have started on the Bwaise-Luweero-Kafu Road whose bad and pathetic situation I must apologise for. Let me also say clearly that the work going on on this road is not a full reconstruction like the one we are doing on Jinja-Bugiri Road; they are just repair works. The US$ 20 million being used on this road was cut from the budgets for the Karuma-Arua and Busunju-Hoima roads. This was done because of budget constraints. I want to inform the House that this decision was reached after we discussed the idea with officials from World Bank. So, we decided that we cut off that money so that we are able to bring that road back to a reasonable condition while we plan to get adequate funds for its full reconstruction. 

You can imagine that we are spending only spending US$ 20 million of what we have on this road compared to US$ 65 million that is being spent on the Jinja-Bugiri Road. The reason is that there we are doing full construction. In my language they say, “Omuburyo bwokurya busha, orya akafuunzi”, which means that instead of eating nothing, you would rather eat a small bird. That bird is very small. I do not know its English name. It is a very tiny grey bird. So, we are just giving out that small bird for that road as we mobilise funds. I am hopeful that at the end of it all, that road will definitely be in a better condition for the people who use it. 

The start and end sections of Busega-Mityana Road will also be repaired in the same way as we are doing on the Bwaise-Luweero-Kafu Road. The Bwaise-Luweero Road is also in two sections, Bwaise-Luweero and Luweero-Kafu, and work has started simultaneously on both of them. It will be done twice to speed up the reconstruction. 

The reconstruction of Masaka-Mbarara road will start by January 2008 because the tender has now been finalised and a warded. While the repair of Kampala-Jinja, Kampala- Masaka and Mbarara-Kabale via Ntungamo road will also start soon, I have just picked these corridors because of their major importance and the condition in which these roads are.

Madam Speaker, as I said earlier, the details of my ministry’s activities for this financial year are all covered in the ministerial budget policy statement. I, therefore, do not want to give all the details of the work that is going to be done. 

Let me now clarify on why the roads in our country are in this condition. Our statistics shows that 30 percent of our national roads are in good or excellent condition. It further shows that 35 percent of them are in fair and another 35 percent, in poor condition. If this fair status is not handled quickly, such roads will also go poor. 

So, I appeal to honourable members to support my ministry in all respects so that we can raise enough money to reconstruct and maintain roads in the country because without money, we cannot do much. If you do research in many countries, you will realise that the problems of bad roads are in every country not only in this country. It is still a budgetary problem in many of our developing countries where the budget has to be shared by many sectors.

Therefore, the impression that where you find a bad road it is because people in my ministry do not care, is not correct; they care only that the resources to do that are not available. Our budget and the work we do are transparent. I hope you will have the time to read the appendices 1, 2 and 3 that are attached to my statement so as to internalise more on the status of our roads. You will also be able to internalise the way we want to reform the ministry to prepare for adequate funding so that in a couple of years we, as a country, get out of this difficult situation that we have found ourselves in.

Madam Speaker, through you, I want to thank honourable members for giving me their attention.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, some of you spoke about the status of your roads and some of those roads are reflected in this statement. Really, you want us to open the debate? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we cannot open the debate. Just ask the minister for clarifications. Shadow Minister for Works, but please be very brief.

4.21
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR WORKS (Mr Patrick Amuriat): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I also would like to thank my counterpart, for his statement to this House. 

Madam Speaker, I suggest that such statements from our colleagues be always given to us, the shadow cabinet, early enough so that we are able to scrutinize them and adequately respond. I hope that practice in the future will help us.

Madam Speaker, I have a few comments specifically on the statement though I also have some general comments that I thought I should bring out in this House. 

The first comment that I would like to make is that, I know that several years ago there was a policy statement to the effect that 60 bridges would be constructed in Northern Uganda. I am surprised to hear the minister talk about only 25. What has happened to the other 35 bridges that are not included in the minister’s statement? 

I am saying this because during my recent tour of West Nile region, I saw many bridges that are in very deplorable conditions. This has made connectivity from one place to other very difficult and I think the Obongi case is even spelt out in this statement; the same applies to Aswa Bridge. (Interjection) This is something in the Northern part of the country and it has been brought to this House many times. So, I think to question me would be out of the question.

Madam Speaker, I thank the minister and the government for blowing their own trumpet by giving us a chronology of events on how they have performed very well in the road sector. However, the minister’s statement does not reflect on how much money has been spent on these roads over the last twenty years. I am sure that much more money has been borrowed for roads under this Government than any other post-independence Government.

Madam Speaker, it is also important that as we speak on the Floor of this House, we be sensitive to the regimes that came before this one. To say the Idi Amin constructed only 20 Kilometres of roads and yet I know that Mukono-Kayunga-Njeru road was constructed in his regime is being very insensitive about past regimes -(Dr Mallinga rose_). Well, you will be given the opportunity but at least I know that and the minister will respond to that effect. I think he is being unfair- (Interruption)

DR MALLINGA: Madam Speaker, is the honourable member holding the Floor in order to mislead the House by saying that the Mukono-Kayunga up-to the bridge road was built by Amin? As much as I know, that road was built around 1969 when I was in my final year at the medical school. (Laughter) Who was the president in 1969? 

MEMBERS: Obote.

DR MALLINGA: So is the honourable member, therefore, in order to mislead this House by stating that Amin built that road?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, if you have no other contrary information to what the Minister of Health is saying, you are out of order. If it was Obote, then please give him the credit but do not give it to Amin.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, I stand by what I said and I think the records in the Ministry of Works can speak for me. 

That a side, I would like to urge the Ministry of Works to take works on feeder and community roads seriously. While making his submission, the minister and it is reflected on table - (Interruption)

MR NASASIRA: Madam Speaker, I though that having been given information by my colleague, hon. Mallinga, my shadow colleague would take it seriously because as we all can see, hon. Mallinga is an old man; he has been around for sometime. (Laughter). But since he has insisted that the records in the ministry will tell the truth, let me give him the records now.

Mukono-Ssezibwa road, which goes up to the bridge was constructed in 1961 by the colonial Government. Independence was in 1962 - but I do not see why we should worry about who built what. I stated who constructed what in my statement. The Obote I Government constructed Ssezibwa/Kayunga road in 1964 - (Applause) - and the Kayunga, which we call Bukoloto road to the sharp corner, for those who know the road. Now, from that sharp corner up to Njeru, was constructed in 1971 by Obote, opened by Amin.  

MR AMURIAT: There is a clear contradiction between what the Minister of Works has said and what the Minister of Health has said. But I would like to be permitted to continue, Madam Speaker.  

On local Government roads, it appears the ministry has solved its responsibility of taking care of these roads. Whereas the controlling authority remains with the district, I think it is the responsibility of the Ministry of Works to see that there is value for money in as far as these road works are concerned. And I believe that is why we have a commissioner responsible for urban and district roads, Madam Speaker.  I think it would be incompetence for the minister to come here and say, “Well, the district roads are the business of the district.” It means that no follow up is made to see if the money that is sent from his ministry is properly utilized.

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, I wish the minister would check Appendix 1 page 1, where it is clearly stated that under RSPD 1, which was amended, the mains are being catered for by the ministry. 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. I would like to inform the House that the maintenance of roads, as the minister has stated, is not only for the local Government. I travel very often to my constituency, that is Kitgum District, and I pass through Luweero and Nakasongola.  But whenever I am travelling, I meet small kids on that road with hoes, pouring soil on that road. In other words, they are the ones who maintain the potholes on that road. I thank you.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, hon. Byandala really collaborated my argument, and I wish to thank him for that. I would like to turn to page 5 of the minister’s statement, particularly on matters relating to two key projects: the Jinja/Bugiri project and the Kampala Northern Bypass. 

I often ply the Jinja/Bugiri road and only yesterday, in carrying out my duties, I visited the Kampala Northern Bypass. I wish to thank your office, Madam Speaker, for providing the necessary facilitation in terms of transport for me to go to the Northern Bypass. But I can bet that Kampala Northern Bypass will not be completed by the end of this year judging from what I saw. I would like to predict that this project would not be completed before March next year.  

On the Jinja/Bugiri road, the amount of suffering on this road is beyond proportion and I know, Madam, that you are also a victim of that road. One day you got trapped on this road while travelling back to Kampala. I also nearly spent that same night on that road. It is the main artery and vein of this country.  It is where our imports get into the country and our exports get out of this country. But the road project has taken nearly four painful years. We are now being promised another one and a half painful years on this road. 

Madam Speaker, there is something in the Ministry of Works, which I would term as “Time Insensitivity Syndrome.” Delays in road projects have become the order of the day. I would like to bring to the attention of this House the delays on Kafu/Masindi road. This is a project that begun nearly three years ago. It was meant to go on for two and half years and then be completed. But until this day, the road is incomplete; we still have nine undone kilometres. 

I have made a quick calculation –(Interruption)- the minister is boasting that it is out of 40 Km. It is out of 44 Km? Anyway, for your information honourable minister, I have made a quick calculation, which reveals that the contractor is working at a rate of 3/4 Km per month. But this is not the rate at which our road works should progress. I think this syndrome needs to be treated Madam Speaker, because it is not good for the development of this country.

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. We appreciate the work that Government has done. But to put the work that Government has done in context, including what my honourable colleague is talking about, I would like to bring to the attention of the House a fact that the Kampala/Gulu road, which is 330 Km, which was done in 1970/72 when technologies were even much poorer than now, was built in three years!

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much Leader of the Opposition for strengthening my point. The other issue I want to touch on, and I think I will not get tired of raising this, is the matter of value for money. It is now a naked fact that our rates in terms of construction of roads are the highest in the region. To construct one kilometre of a road, we spend nearly one and half times what the other countries within this region spend. I have vivid examples:  Recently, I went with the chairman of our committee and other colleagues to Tanzania, and we visited Arusha/Dodoma road that runs through to the Ngorongoro Crater - the figures are available for the minister of works to prove that. The road construction costs in this country are the highest in the region.       

I also would like to plead that the Ministry of Works be given independence. I know that my colleague the Minister of Works is working under very tough conditions. Yes, there is a problem of financing, but I think it is within the mandate of this House to assist the minister to secure adequate finances. But there is a big problem of patronage and interference in the work of the minister. I have read a letter from the highest authority in this country instructing the minister to pay a local contractor that is a non-performer, and that is Zzimwe Construction Ltd. This is a letter that was displayed before the Committee on Infrastructure and I think it is a clear indication of interference on the work of the minister. 

You are a poor maintenance regime, and you have already mentioned that. And I am surprised that the Ministry of Finance is collecting money through fuel, arguably for road maintenance, to contribute to the road fund. But no law has been passed, what is going to happen to the money that is being collected for road maintenance between now and the time when the law comes into being? I thought that a visionary minister would bring it to the Floor – I know it is the responsibility of the Ministry of Finance and I do not see them on the frontbench; probably the Rt hon. Prime Minister will respond to this.

Finally, the ministry has got poor public relations. Recently, you have tried to improve on this by coming on television and explaining to this country on what is happening on the projects and the road network. But you need to strength that PR muscle so that the population is well informed about what you are doing.

And I would like to add that Karamoja is part of Uganda. I have recently visited Karamoja, and while blowing his own trumpet, the minister talked about the work that was done in the central region and he stopped in Mbale. He did not even go beyond Mbale. But, Madam Speaker and colleagues, the country extends beyond Kapchorwa and Mbale. 

Your ministry has recently promised the people of Lango and Teso that you are going to upgrade the Soroti/Dokolo/Lira road. I know it is included in this report –(Interruption) 

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: I have read the statement of the minister. When you turn to page 6, the heading is, “New tarmac roads constructed in the last ten years, 1996-2007.” And road number 20 is Lira/Soroti, one of those new tarmacs that have been constructed. So, I do not know which one of those you are complaining about, according to the minister it is done.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much for that information. Madam Speaker, I travelled along that road as recently as two months ago, to check whether the pledge given by the ministry in their policy statement that work would commence in July had become a reality. But apart from the compensation that is being done at this moment, which is also very poor, no physical work is seen on the ground. And to follow up on that information, the minister needs to be –(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I want to thank the shadow minister for giving way. He is echoing what hon. Malinga has put across that in the list of the roads on page 6, Soroti/Lira road is mentioned as a tarmacked road. But it is clearly stated that, “The works for upgrading to tarmac…” if he has not gone to school to learn English, he better goes back. Therefore, is it in order for the honourable member to mislead the House by saying what is not stated in the statement?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Say again what you said, I do not think I caught it properly.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, the heading of page 6 is, “New tarmac roads constructed in the last ten years” not “in the process of construction” unless the minister is admitting a contradiction in his statement; that will be upon him to clarify.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable shadow minister, there are two sections: there are roads 1-19. Then there is a word “total” and then length is 1,037. Then, “The works for upgrading” -(Interruption)- whatever the case. But here they say the construction is in progress and will be completed in December 2008.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, I think the statement is mixed up on this page and I wish –(Interruption)

MS EKWAU: Thank you very much, hon. Amuriat, for giving way. I want to give this information to this House. On the 27 July, in the year of our Lord 2006, the Minister of Works and Transport told this House that by the first week of August, work will have started on Lira/Dokolo road. And the fact that he has not given us – 19 is a continuation up to 20. That shows that that is what his ministry has been doing. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Anyway, he will tell us where the road is. Conclude, hon. Amuriat.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, that surely should not be a bone of contention. The bone of contention is that work has not started in time and I think that should be the concern of every body in this House, especially the Minister of Works.

Madam Speaker, as I wind up, I would like to say that we do not expect economic growth without a good road network, and this the Minister of Works knows very well. We also do not expect to be able to provide essential services to our people without a good transport network.  I would like to appeal to this House to support the minister when he brings his policy statement here asking for more money. But, also to caution the minister that the opposition Government is not going to tolerate no value for money; we want value for money. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, we are not opening a debate on this matter. We talked about the roads and the general debate of the State of the Nation Address. These are just answers to some of the issues raised. We are going to do the policy statements where we shall discuss roads. Again, you will have an opportunity to talk about these issues. We shall come back and report on those roads and you can also speak then. We also have a general debate of the budget where you can talk about roads. Please, let us not reopen this matter.

4.49
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like the minister to clarify this. If you say a road is under repair, what is supposed to be the lifespan, like this Luweero/Gulu road? What is supposed to be the lifespan of Bugiri/Malaba road? You have stated that the lifespan of roads is supposed to be 15 years? However, I want you to go to Malaba and look at the potholes on Bugiri-Malaba road.  Are you aware that there are already potholes on that road which was built two years ago and yet according to you the lifespan is 15 years? Who eats the money for 13 years?  

MR BYANYIMA: Clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Will you take it?

MR EKANYA: No. I do not accept information because I have problems with the Chairman of the Committee on Works and Physical Infrastructure. (Laughter) What was the condition of the road works done in Kabarole municipal council? Was it supposed to be easily peeled off by the residents of Kabarole municipal council? Was that the standard and quality of work? Or are you aware that the work, which was done in Kabarole municipal council, was so poor that the population had to peel off the material because it was inconveniencing them? 

Another clarification is, you have stated that on Jinja-Bugiri road you have agreed with the contractor that repair works continue as construction goes on. Are you aware that what you are telling us is not true? We drive on that road often and the potholes are beyond repair. They damage our vehicles and you have heard that the Deputy Speaker got stuck there and MPs have slept on that road. Is that the maintenance as work goes on to make people sleep on the road or what is it? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that is enough.

4.52
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. I have a few clarifications, which I want to seek from him and this concerns the upgrading of the 11 black spots on Kampala-Jinja road. When you read the minister’s statement on page 5, the minister has ably advised us that this Kampala-Jinja road reconstruction will begin next year in March. While driving on that road, you see that the upgrading of the 11 black spot has already begun. You will see that in Namanve there is construction just as in Kayanja, Namawojjolo and Namagunga.  

So, instead of working on the black spot and leaving gaps of less than a kilometre, why don’t you just award one tender such that the entire road is worked on rather than inconveniencing road users month after month? The work is very good but I would rather that you did the entire road than concentrating only on the black spots. More black spots are bound to emerge when you work on some parts and leave out others. What plans does the minister have if funds permit? Since we are going to establish the road fund, I would love that we urge Parliament to give the Minister of Works and Transport more funds such that the construction is done on the entire road. I thank you.

4.54
MS BEATRICE MAGOOLA (NRM, Woman Representative Iganga): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to learn from the minister whether diversions are allowed technically so that we could speed up the road construction from Jinja through Iganga and Bugiri. I have seen that people are going on the same road to and fro and the road construction is going on and this slows down the speed of constructors. 

I was wondering whether diversions could be made at Walugogo through Luuka, Buwenge and Jinja and then another diversion from Buranga, Namasiga and Kakira. That way, the contractors are given both space and pace so that they can work on that road a little faster than it is being done. Presently, the road is very dangerous. Road users drive so slowly that sometimes we get stuck for an hour or two at one point or another. If nothing is done to speed up the work, I am afraid many more people are going to die on that road. I thank you.

4.56
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank honourable members for their contributions, starting with my shadow colleague, and in principle for their support that as a country, we should do what is possible to find funds for maintaining and developing our roads. 

I want to quickly go through what was raised by hon. Patrick Amuriat. The 66 bridges hon. Amuriat is talking about which were designed in the North were designed because when we did 54 in the central, south and west, the North was going through insurgency so we designed 66 to cater for the North and eastern part of Teso region. 17 and 21 have already been awarded and work is about to start in West Nile region. 

For the 17, we have been able to acquire a loan from the Islamic Development Bank. The loan is before Cabinet and will soon be coming here. That takes us to 38. Those bridges that are coming here cover what I would call - (Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, honourable minister. Madam Speaker, I would like the minister, as he is trying to narrate how many bridges are in the pipeline to be constructed, to clarify to this House and to the people of Gulu, Kitgum and Pader when exactly will Achwa Bridge be brought on board. It is in a very sorry state and it is an emergency. Thank you. (Mr Tinkasiimire rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Honourable members, Members are under the impression that we are still on the State of the Nation Address. We concluded that on Friday last week. Today is for the ministers to answer. [Hon. Members: “He was in prison”]. No, he came back. He will speak during the general debate. He was not in prison. He was working in a committee I think. (Laughter)

MR NASASIRA: The bridges are on the way. All I can say on the Achwa Bridge now is this. The way we work is that, you study and get a design; you work out the design and then you market the design to the banks for financing. I can assure you that it is on course for its development. As soon as the design is finished then we shall start the negotiations with the banks for its construction. It is quite a big bridge, as you know. It is not something small that we can just slot in on our budget. But at least we are on the way. I am sure as an honourable lady you understand this. (Laughter) When you are looking for children you know they are on the way and you patiently wait. I would like to appeal to her not to demonstrate as she is threatening.

I have answered the issue of Kayunga road, on whether it was a main or not. For district roads, we do follow up but you see districts have got their own revenue also. We give standards but what we follow up are the conditional grants we give to districts for these roads and they are supposed to be accountable to us. We do follow up on the districts.

With kids filling potholes on Gulu road, I think this is a voluntary exercise. They are not part of our maintenance team. It is true I have seen some kids there but this is purely voluntary. They are not part of our maintenance programme. 

Jinja – Bugiri road having spent years, surely my colleague the Shadow Minister, you know the problems we faced with the contractor. This road would have been finished now but the contractor had abandoned the site for three months –(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: I am sorry to keep standing up every time but this is an itchy issue that I thought I should seek clarification about from my colleague. The first contractor was dismissed and he is no longer on the road. I do not know what contractual penalty clauses you invoked on that contractor. Did he just get away with it, having caused us all this inconveniency? I think the country needs to know whether penalty clauses we invoked and if the contractors complied with those clauses.

MR NASASIRA: Madam Speaker, we did invoke all the necessary clauses within the contract including the clause of abandoning work and if my colleague will recall, since he was here in the Seventh Parliament, I made three statements on that project. One of them was the statement informing Parliament that we had expelled that contractor. To show that we were correct, this contractor took us to court in Paris and in South Africa, because that is where he had banked the advance mobilisation money. We have won both cases in court and recovered our money.

The fact is that we lost time. Secondly, I want us to realise that this money we use is not necessarily from our budget. This money is sometimes grants or loans. In this case for Jinja – Bugiri, the money is a grant, a donation from the European Union and they have their conditions of engaging other contracts.

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. You talked about these children that they are not part of your team. But you did not go on to tell us who those children are and what we should do with them because this is actually child abuse. What should be done with the children? We need the minister to clarify because we get these children on the road trying to fill the potholes. Thank you.

MR NASASIRA: We shall investigate this children matter and definitely I will consult with my other colleagues who handle children matters. However, I would like to appeal to all of us to discourage these children from going on the road. It is even dangerous for their lives. I understand they do this to earn some “kikumi kikumi.” We should work against it. In any case, since I am hoping that with good funding from the road fund in a couple of years, we should not have these potholes any more. Those children will automatically disappear from our roads.

So, we lost time but we saved the country money. Who is going to accept a contractor who refused to work because he is claiming billions and billions of money and extension of time? We will not, as long as contractually we are right. So, we saved the country money but we lost time and we have to go through the process. I think the papers say that it has taken five years, but this is not true. We have started and so far the work is going on very well. We will finish. (Mr Akena rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Please, Members. Minister, can you conclude. I need to go to the Ministry of Energy, the Ministry of Health - Is it really vital?

MR AKENA: It is extremely relevant, Madam Speaker. I am seeking clarification because I have a project, which began in the 1980s; this is Malaba-Jinja road. I am wondering if this is still the same road or works which are still incomplete. This work began under the UPC Government and there was some funding which was done. I wonder whether this is the same road, which is not complete some 20 years later. (Laughter)

Similarly, there is also the Pakwach – Nebbi – Arua road, which actually began in the late 1970s and was continued in the early 1980s and possibly completely under the NRM Government. So, I was just seeking clarification as far as these roads are concerned. Thank you, Madam Speaker.
 
MR NASASIRA: Yes, in the 80s, the Bugiri-Malaba road was repaired. Maybe I should clarify this. A road has life; you design it for a lifetime of maybe 15 to 20 years and when it is finished, you start maintaining it. But the road gets old because every day its layers are hammered by vehicles. However, after about seven to eight years, it starts wearing and tearing away and at that time it might have developed one or two potholes and cracks. And normally with money and a good maintenance system, you repair that and you put a coat of tarmac on top.

Between 15 and 20 years, the layers would have now broken down. With a shortage of money, what we have done is what I have explained about the Luweero road; you come and cut out the damaged areas and repair them although you must do it on time. Some of these roads have lived their life like the Kampala-Kafu road or the Kampala – Masaka - Mbarara road. 

So, what happened in 1980 is that, there was that repair exercise for a road that was already old because Malaba road was finished in 1961. It had never been reconstructed and 19 years later, it had lived its life. However, in the 80s the money was not enough so there was this patch up job. So, what happened is that a few years later, it served its purpose and it was reconstructed in the 90s. 

For the Pakwach - Nebbi road, maybe I should give you information. Yes, it had started. In fact, the contractor had shaped the road for nine kilometres. When the war broke out in 1979, he abandoned the work and he left his machines and we had to start from scratch some years back. He sued Government. 

Kampala Northern Bypass is expected to be finished at the end of the year. I was very cautious in my statement because I am also a professional engineer. So, we are time sensitive.

Let me also clarify what the Leader of Government Business said about constructing the Kampala - Gulu road of 330 kilometres in three years. That is not true. The Kampala-Bombo road was constructed around 1958 and those were called peri-urban roads. The next phase was constructed from Bombo to Wobulenzi and that was about 1961. The construction of the Wobulenzi - Gulu road was done at the same time with two contractors. So, the more contractors you put, the quicker you finish. 

Roads most expensive in the region: I would say yes and no. Madam Speaker, this has been talked about in the press and everywhere. I have a report carried out by Messers Policy Research Cooperation of Belgium and Royal Haskoning. I will bring a copy to Parliament. The firm did a comparison study for four countries: Ethiopia, Tanzania, Uganda and Zambia. What was proved was that as far as road maintenance unit costs are concerned, Uganda was the cheapest in the region. I think we need cheers for that. These are locally contracted and locally financed by our budget.

But Uganda was found to be the most expensive in construction and in development. These are almost 80 to 90 percent funded from the funds that we get outside by foreign contractors, but that should not surprise you. We are the farthest from the sea; the price of fuel in Kampala is almost twice the price of fuel in Addis Ababa. You can go and check. Our cement is very highly priced and you will not get your roads cheaper if you are still using foreign contractors for major projects. That is why sometimes we are accused of using kid gloves on some of our local contractors. We must train our local contractors so that they take on these jobs; they will be cheaper. So, it should be our focus that we build the Sterlings of Uganda. These Zzimwes can become Sterlings if they are well handled. So, we should not be intolerant with our contractors. 

The Entebbe road: There is a road being done from Entebbe Airport. It has 12 kilometres of a dual carriage way and the balance of 53 kilometres are single. It is similar to the Jinja – Bugiri road. The Jinja – Bugiri road is an 11 kilometres dual carriage way and the remaining 65 kilometres is single. We are spending $68 million to reconstruct that road. The cost of the other road is $100 million. We have compared many prices per kilometre and we found that we are fairly comparable to many roads. If you want, I will come and give a statement here with facts and figures from all the regions. 

Poor public relations: I thank my shadow colleague for the advice. I think we have been too quiet. We thought that roads would talk for themselves, but it is only the bad ones that talk, the good ones are quiet. So, we shall find a way of making these good ones talk too.

Physical work on Soroti - Lira road: The process of the first section of the Soroti – Dokolo road has been completed and I expect to invite you colleagues and others from the region to sign the contract in Soroti in August. Today is 31 July.

Hon. Ekanya, if you say the road life span is – I have explained the span. Let me say this again because we need to understand these roads. The roads in Uganda that were done before independence and soon after independence were never reconstructed when they were of age. What we have been doing is really a patch up job. We are now working out a complete review of the focus of how to handle the roads and we must agree with our development partners. A patch up job will not help. For example, you remember how bad the Kampala-Jinja road was in 1986. It would take you five hours to get to Jinja but we reconstructed it fully in 1991.

 This is 2007; 16 years later and by now the ministry should have a full reconstruction contract going on. We are going to do a patch up job because that is all the money we could raise from the European Union for backlog maintenance. It is called maintenance. When we patch up now, after five years – because you patch what you see has failed, but the other patch is also sick. The other sick part comes after two years and we are accused of doing shoddy work. 

MS KAMYA: I thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. The minister has on several occasions compared the construction work before independence and after independence. I am wondering whether the minister is aware that the roads that were constructed before independence were constructed under different circumstances, for instance, under a much smaller population and a much smaller movement of trade and vehicles. 

I would also like to have a categorical statement as a way of clarification from the minister. I have personally heard that at many times, the layers that the minister is talking about are shared out before work begins; that layer A belongs to so and so, layer B is for so and so; that so many inches on the right are for so and so and that the road actually gets three of the six or so inches. 

I would like a categorical statement from the minister on the question of corruption because when the minister says, we do not have enough money and that we need to talk to the donors, then we must factor in the question of corruption. Whether the minister knows about it because it is rampant everywhere and whether it is true, and whether PAC has not mentioned anything about corruption and what the minister is going to do about it.

MR NASASIRA: Well, if I have been eating layers, then they are not working very well on my body. Anyway, on a serious note, I have told you that a study proved that Uganda is the cheapest on road maintenance. I have also told you that that road maintenance is carried out with funds from our budget, decided and supervised by us but in most cases our own contractors do it. 90 percent of the development work is funded by funds from outside and let me tell you that no road that is funded together with any bank or European Union is constructed and approved by us alone. Unless you are trying to claim that the layers are a global meal because if you do not have faith in your Ugandans then I hope you have faith in where we borrow money. 

This road is checked layer by layer, inch thickness by inch thickness and approved by supervisors. So, this myth of eating layers - I think those are people who imagine that if they were there they would be eating the layers. (Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please let the minister continue. 

MR NASASIRA: I cannot guarantee 100 percent corruption free work; I am not God, but we will try to do our best and get value for money. So, hon. Ekanya, the Tororo-Malaba road was constructed one layer short. That layer was not eaten but it was not provided for because the budget could not allow for it. 

If you travel along the Tororo - Malaba road, you will see that the areas which are failing are actually on the right hand side as you go to Tororo, which carries the loaded traffic coming this way. So, one of the problems that we are fighting is corruption on our weighbridges. It is a very serious problem. In the first place, I will not expect an overloaded truck because these trucks are overloaded in Mombasa and they pass through about five weighbridges before they cross into Uganda. So, it is a very serious problem but one layer was never done.

We saved $20 million from an old project of a grant from KFW and we asked KFW to use it on that road because it was in bad shape. $20 million was used to reconstruct 82 kilometres; Bugiri – Malaba and Busia, but that was not enough. If you go to the Ministry of Finance, you will find correspondences requesting for more $9.0 million to put on a layer. It was not available in the budget and we are still searching for it.

Hon. Nsubuga talked about upgrading of black spots. I agree with him; the clarification that he required was logical. Why not do black spots now and then come back to do the repairs if you cannot do the same? The black spots were a project envisaged earlier and were financed through a loan from the World Bank. It was procured separately and as I have told you, Jinja road should now not be repaired but reconstructed fully. We talked to our development partners in the European Union, and if you heard a few months ago, we signed an agreement for backlog maintenance. So, Kampala – Jinja road will be under backlog maintenance just for repairs to stop it from deteriorating. 

Finally on diversions, it is a good idea. Normally, we have temporary diversions on the side of the road but the money was not enough to construct diversions everywhere. In that respect, we cannot divert this traffic to Walugogo, Muloko and Bulanda at Kakira because these roads cannot take the capacity of the trailers that we have. Of course, we would want these trucks to be off our road; it is even better when we are doing our work because they destabilise the work and they sometimes affect the strength of the road. However, that is how we are trying to manage with the available resources. Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I understand that the minister has forgotten the issue of community roads.

MR NASASIRA: There was an issue raised on the community roads. Really, we handle community roads at policy level because the department of DURCR (District Urban and Rural Community Roads) - but the supervision of most community roads is done at LC III level. So, you should be dealing with LC III chairpersons. 

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS DELIVERED TO PARLIAMENT ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY H.E THE PRESIDENT ON 7 JUNE 2007.

5.23
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): I thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members, for giving me the opportunity to respond to a few issues that were raised, first of all by the Leader of the Opposition, my brother Elephant Latigo and the other Members, during the course of debate of the State of the Nation Address. 

I will start with the issues raised by the Leader of the Opposition and I will summarise them –

•	that despite the apparent high GDP, the economy remains the greatest challenge for the country particularly in the areas of availability of power, among others;

•	that on the power supply side, Government is drawing Ugandans into false comfort when the situation is really bad and will deteriorate over the short term and it will not be possible to commission Bujagali within the stipulated 44 months;

•	that the challenge of cement, the main ingredient in dam construction, has caught up with us and we must brace ourselves for up to a 50 percent increase in the cost of the construction of the Bujagali dam;

•	that there is false optimism based on the availability of money of our own yet with corruption, lack of physical infrastructure, weak logistic capacity and hurried execution of projects to address reckless political promises, we have never prepared ourselves as a country for such huge projects like the NRM is trying to undertake;

•	that instead of rushing to build two costly projects, Bujagali and Karuma, Government should consider building a single dam even at Murchison Falls with a capacity of 650 MW or Ayago North with 450 MW, to buy us time to prepare to build smaller dams in a more cost effective manner;

•	that on the petroleum side, the expression “our oil” is this all embracing? Is there an oil and gas policy? Does Government advocate for a national petroleum development and use plan that will guarantee transparent and fair sharing of benefits and establish a broad balance in use both in the short and long term benefits to all?

Madam Speaker and honourable members, my response to the above issues is as follows. 

Do we have a plan and a strategy for electricity supply to the country? The answer is yes. However, it is true that the country has experienced some difficulties in the areas of power supply. We have stated reasons before why we are experiencing power shortage: The first reason was the prolonged drought, which affected the East African region from 2003 and subsided in October 2006. It affected the country’s hydropower resources on which we had been depending for a long time. 

The second reason is the delay in constructing new power plants to meet the growing demand for electricity while the third is that, there has been the over dependence, in the past, on external financing for our country’s power needs. We have looked at all these reasons and in our view, we have clear solutions to these. 

Madam Speaker, Government has a plan to meet the country’s electricity supply in the short, medium and long term. This plan includes the provision of the emergency thermo power supply with a 100 MW already installed and injected into the system, 50 MW to be installed by October this year and a further 50 MW based on heavy fuel oil to be installed by May 2008. The plan also involves, in the short term, to implement system loss reduction measures and energy efficiency measures including the distribution of 800,000 energy saving bulbs which is ongoing. In the medium term, as you are all aware, 250 MW from Bujagali –(Interruption)

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for clarifying the issues that the Members have raised. I also seek clarification. In one of the documents from Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Energy, the Ministry of Energy commissioned the 50MW, which is going to use heavy diesel and they are going to decommission another 50MW which uses light fuel. 

Now, the problem stands that the power problem is going to continue for long and this Parliament should be advised and should actually be looking at ways to solve the power problem. Otherwise, if Government is going to inject a lot of money today into a project which is going to last for one or two years then be decommissioned, why do we not go for heavy fuel rather than invest money and after one year decommission? That is the clarification I want to seek from him.

MR BYANYIMA: We realise that the fuel that is used for this thermo power is tax-free and we are looking for every coin on fuel now. Now, Shell brings into the country 99 million litres, which it gives to Agreko untaxed. That fuel finds its way on the market. Yes, we would rather tax the fuel and leave the rest to Agreko and Government rather than have that fuel come to the market. That is the problem all oil companies - Shell is a king. Shell is the one that brings that fuel to Agreko. So Shell has a supernormal profit because they take the fuel there and bring it back and supply to the market. So, the government loses money on tax on fuel itself. I want him to carry out an investigation. A number of fuel dealers here are getting fuel from Agreko in Industrial Area. 

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable members for the points they have raised. Clearly we shall make sure that we bring those points on board at an appropriate stage. 

Madam Speaker, I talked about Bujagali, Karuma and 100 MW of the Simba hydropower projects to be constructed to meet the growing demand for electricity. Several renewable energy projects including biomass cogeneration in the sugar factories, small hydropower schemes, solar PV and solar thermo gasification etc will be developed. With the commercial discovery of oil and gas resources, an early production scheme is being packaged with one of the companies, Tullow Oil, to produce 50 to 100 MW, and I am sure we are going to be revising these figures upwards very soon, that is thermo generated power using heavy fuel oil and gas by the year 2009. The above projects are a clear manifestation that the future of power supply in this country will be steadily improving and the roadmap we are following is very clear.

On Bujagali and Karuma, Government has not hurried to build the Bujagali project, as the honourable member seemed to observe. Work on Bujagali started more than 10 years ago. Our main hindrance has been the availability of funds to realise construction of energy projects, that is, to develop and construct energy projects. I, therefore, wish to take this opportunity to thank honourable members, including my brother, for having endorsed the establishment of an energy fund, which has now made it easy to contribute to the financing of the development of power generation capacity in the country. 

However, we need to take into account that the lead-time for development of power projects is long because of feasibility studies and environmental studies, which need to be carried out. Procurement of sponsors and contractors has also to be carried out. Protracted negotiations with various parties including lenders and project sponsors take a lot of time. 

In that regard, Bujagali and Karuma which are at an advanced stage now need to be carried out in terms of implementation as opposed to others which would have given us more megawatts because no work had started on them. I would, however, like to assure Members that according to the government plan, the development of hydropower sites at Murchison Falls and Ayago, are also clearly indicated and we shall be sharing this information with you.

The Leader of the Opposition expressed apprehension of Government capacity to construct Bujagali and Karuma projects due to infrastructure and logistical capabilities. I wish to point out that the Bujagali hydropower project is not the first hydropower project to be implemented in this country. There are others that have taken advantage of available logistical and infrastructural presence in the country. 

The Owen Falls project, Nalubaale, was first constructed in the late 1940s when the infrastructure and technology were less sophisticated and less abundant. In the recent times, work has been carried out on the extension project, the Kiira power station. And other projects, which have been carried out of a hydro nature, include Mubuku III for Kasese Cobalt and presently Nyagaka in West Nile. I wish to assure everybody that Government has the capacity to move these projects to completion with available logistical and infrastructural support.  

Madam Speaker, there is the issue of corruption which was raised by hon. Latigo. I wish to point out that no corruption cases have been cited during the re-packaging of the Bujagali project. Furthermore, all the requisite preparations right from the selection of the sponsor Bujagali Energy Limited, selection of the engineering procurement and construction contractor, economic and financial analysis of the project mobilisation of funds have been accomplished in an open and transparent manner.  Therefore, the country is more than ready to implement the Bujagali project. 

Work has commenced and we expect commissioning of the first 50MW after 36 months, that is, in July 2010. The entire plant is expected to be ready for commissioning within a period of 44 months. All stakeholders, including the government of Uganda, the project sponsors, Bell, the lenders and the contractor Salini, have signed agreements which incorporate stringent penalties on the side of Bell and Salini if timelines are not met.

Cement shortage and high prices of cement: The construction of the Bujagali project is being blamed for the shortage and high prices of cement in some quarters. I would like to point out that the construction of the Bujagali project is not responsible for the current shortage of cement or even the high prices of cement in the country. The shortage is due to the boom in the construction industry arising out of sound economic policies of our Government. Secondly, the peace in the neighbouring countries of Sudan, Eastern Congo and maybe Rwanda to which the NRM Government has contributed has led to an increase in demand for cement from our factories.  

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like the minister to clarify to this House how many tons of cement have in the last two months left this country and have been exported to Southern Sudan, Congo or Rwanda because according to the information available, I have been one of the people trying to export cement? However, for the last three months, Hima Cement and Tororo Cement suspended exporting of even a single bag. The cement being used in those countries is Bamburi from Mombasa.      

MS KAMYA: I thank the honourable minister for once again giving way. The clarification I am seeking, Madam Speaker, is the apparent coincidence of the rise of the price of cement with the date of the budget. In Rakai District particularly in Lyantonde where I come from, I was there a week before the budget and cement cost Shs 25,000. Immediately after the budget I went back and cement was at Shs 31,000. Can the minister clarify the coincidence of the rise in price of many consumer products to the budget? Thank you.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, it is true there is a shortage of cement and it is also true that some people have taken advantage of this to increase the price of cement. As a ministry, we have taken off time to pursue interventions that will help to increase the supply of cement because our view is that, once there is increased supply to meet demand then we shall be in a position to sustainably and earnestly address the issues of pricing because it is a fact that the price of cement at the factory has not increased, but on the market here the prices have increased. 

It is true that there is a current shortfall of nearly 500,000 tons and this is the problem, which we as managers of the sector responsible for those who supply cement are concerning ourselves with. In that regard, I would like to report that we have had interaction with Tororo Cement and they are working in a very expeditious manner to expand the capacity of the factory. They had put in place buildings; they had also acquired equipment. We have requested them to speed up completion of their expansion programme so that their current production can move from 450,000 tonnes a year to 900,000 tonnes a year. 

Similarly, we have talked to Hima cement and they are also working on expansion of production from 300,000 to 780,000 tons per annum by the year 2009.  We are likely to register faster expansion in hon. Ekanya’s constituency. I know you have been in regular contact with Tororo cement factory and I think this has been helpful. 

Other interventions include exploration and development of other limestone resources countrywide to increase cement production in the medium term. The already identified limestone occurrences include: Muhokya, and Bwera in Kasese District, Dura in Kamwenge, Kaku in Kisoro, Metu in Moyo and Katekekire in Karamoja. We have been frantically working on extending the power line to Moroto and Katekekire so that the rocks, which are now being transported to Tororo for crushing can be crushed from Moroto and if need be, a factory for cement is established at Katekekire in Karamoja.  

The honourable Leader of the Opposition and other Members of Parliament raised a number of issues regarding the oil and gas sub-sector. I wish to respond to those issues as follows: Regarding the background and status of hydrocarbon exploration in Uganda, the Albertine Graben, which forms the Northern and the most part of the Western arm of the East African Rift System, is the principle prospective area for petroleum in Uganda. 

The Petroleum Exploration and Production Department, since its inception in 1991, carried out geophysical and geological surveys and identified prevalence of optimal conditions for generation and accumulation of hydrocarbons in the Graben. Subsequently, the Graben was divided into seven exploration areas of which four areas are licensed to oil companies after signing Production Sharing Agreement (PSA) with Government. 

The four licensed areas are: Exploration Area 1, licensed to Heritage Oil & Gas and Tullow Oil Plc in July 2004; Exploration Area 2, licensed to Hardman Petroleum Africa now Tullow Oil Plc in October 2001; Exploration Area 3A; licensed to Heritage Oil & Gas and Tullow Oil Plc at 50% each in September 2004;Exploration Area 4B; licensed to Dominion Petroleum Ltd July 2007; Exploration Area 5, licensed to Neptune Petroleum (U) Ltd of Tower Resources Group in September 2005 The department monitors the operations of the licensed companies to ensure compliance with provisions of the production sharing agreements and laws of Uganda, which guide the upstream petroleum activities in the country.  

Madam Speaker, discoveries have been made in the following areas: Mputa, in Exploration Area 2.  Two wells; Mputa 1, Mputa 2 were drilled in 2005 and 2006 respectively and both discovered oil. Mputa 1 was tested and flowed 1,100 barrels per day of oil. This oil is sweet (low sulphur content) but waxy with API gravity averaging 30o. We shall be providing more information in regard to what we are doing in the petroleum area when we hold a seminar for Members of Parliament on petroleum issues.  Waraga in Exploration Area 2 -(Interruption)

MR KIGYAGI: As Parliament, we have heard of the production sharing agreements but nothing has been mentioned on the signature bonus. Could the minister also throw light on that because we have not heard it and we know it happened. 

MR MIGEREKO: The signature bonus is part of the agreements we signed in the production sharing agreements. The agreement is one and it has several components. That was just one of the components. We agreed with the committee that we shall avail to you these production-sharing agreements so that members can be in position to clearly get on board in regard to the kind of commitments we have been entering into with the oil companies. This information will be made available. 

Then there is Kingfisher in Exploration Area 3A. Kingfisher-1 and its sidetrack Kingfisher-1A were drilled in 2006 and 2007. Both wells flowed 13,893 barrels of oil per day. This oil is also sweet (low sulphur content) but waxy with API gravity averaging 31o

Then we have Nzizi in Exploration Area 2. Two wells: Nzizi 1 and Nzizi 2 were drilled in 2006 and 2007 respectively and both discovered hydrocarbons. Nzizi 2 was tested and flowed 14 million cubic feet of dry natural gas. We shall be providing more of this information when we meet in a seminar to bring you on board in regard to what is happening in the oil and gas sectors. The above prospects represent less than six percent of the whole Graben. More prospects have been discovered and plans are underway to drill and test them. 

There was also the issue of the expression, “our oil” by His Excellency. “Our oil” is used by Government in an all encompassing manner meaning that the discovered oil in Uganda belongs and is vested in the people of Uganda and not only those in Government. 

This is provided for in the Petroleum Exploration and Production Act, 1985 Chapter 2 Section 1, Vesting of Petroleum. It specifically says, “Without prejudice to the exercise of any right under this Act, the property in, and the control of, petroleum in its natural condition in or upon any land in Uganda is vested in the government on behalf of the Republic of Uganda.”  So, when the term “our oil” is used, it is meant to include all of us in Uganda. (Interruption)

 MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, you are a lawyer. Article 1 of our Constitution is very clear. The other day when we amended the Constitution - this House in the last Parliament was forced to amend that article related to petroleum and other minerals and we vested it in the government.  

Madam Speaker, that is very dangerous. It is very dangerous and the Minister needs to come out honestly and clarify. Because if it is vested in Government, it means that the people of this country have no right to say- and that is why the Minister in charge of Constitutional Affairs moved to change that clause to vest it in Government instead of vesting it in the people. I want to urge the Minister to consider that in the coming amendment of the Constitution, this should be done urgently otherwise we are going to be robbed, and robbed once and forever.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the honourable minister for giving us the details of how various wells have been identified and how the drilling is going on. Really the main concern for the people - we who come - from Bunyoro; we know that the oil is there and those companies are there; we found that they are there though we do not know what exactly they are doing because you are saying you signed contracts with them. But we have never- even your ministry has chosen to lock and throw away the keys to where that contract is so that it can never even be accessed by a committee of Parliament. 

We are concerned about the oil policy; you are saying that you are making the oil policy, which is the gist of the matter. We the people of Bunyoro are going to be directly affected. We have already started facing the problems- hon. Minister; I want some clarification on these matters. We are already facing a problem of prostitutes on the ground. We have so many trucks crossing through our dusty roads and the people who sell meat in these small butcheries can no longer sell; more than half of their meat is filled with dust. 

We already have a problem that women on the ground particularly those that are doing fishing. We have not been told how they are going to handle the issue of oil spilling into the lake, so we are worried about what is going to happen. Do we have the capacity of going to fish in the deep waters, what is going to happen to us? 

Lastly, our share as a kingdom -(Applause)- of necessity you may say, “It is our oil.” Either it was a deliberate move to change the law, to say it is within the mandate of the government and not the people. But the people of Bunyoro are saying, we are major stakeholders in this matter; we are going to be directly affected; we need a share and we have been left behind for a long period of time either intentionally or by history. We need to address this matter. And honourable minister, you should clarify on these matters early enough.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I would like to say that I do not quite recall what the former provision said because I did not come with the Constitution but to the best of my knowledge, minerals have always been the preserve of Government. And if you look at Article 244, the only bailing out clause, which is important in my opinion, is the first clause of Article 244, which of course protects individual properties and is subject to that law. It says, “Subject to article 26 of this Constitution, the entire property in, and the control of, all minerals and petroleum in, on or under, any land or waters in Uganda are vested in the government on behalf of the Republic of Uganda.”  
 
Now, three says, “Minerals, mineral ores and petroleum shall be exploited taking into account the interest of the individual landowners, local governments and the government.”  So, I think really the law is very well harmonised and I do not think there is much problem about it.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable Attorney-General, has there been a meeting of the stakeholders, landowners and Government on this matter? I think that is what these people are asking. 

MS BINTU: Madam Speaker there has never been any consultation with stakeholders and we have been asking the Minister in charge to consult us that is why we are raising this concern.  We want the whole process of developing a policy to be transparent and the stakeholders should be consulted. Ugandans and the people from the kingdom need to be consulted. We want to avoid the scenario happening in other oil producing countries; we want to try and redress some of those things so that we do not also fall victims. So when is the policy going to be developed and when are the people of Bunyoro going to be consulted? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us hear from the Minister of Fisheries, he had something to say about oil spillage.

6.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES) (Mr Fred Mukisa):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to allay the fears of my colleague from Bunyoro. Right now as we talk, starting from yesterday, a stakeholders’ workshop is being held in Hoima by the BMUs and Fisheries; I opened it yesterday and the concerns of Fisheries are being addressed. All the Beach Management Units on Lake Albert are being taught how to relate with the new developments. I even had a brief meeting with the Prime Minister in his office yesterday.

They have to learn how to relate with the drilling going on and everything else. Because I am concerned with my sector, I would like to assure you that the Fisheries sources are going to be very well protected. After consulting with the Beach Management Unit, we shall consult with the whole population but this is as far as the Fisheries sector is concerned.
 
MS SEKITOLEKO: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I am actually perturbed and disappointed with the honourable minister’s response. He is telling us about a workshop in Hoima and yet we the stakeholders in Bunyoro were not even invited. Surely, how can he stand up and tell us how he has organised a workshop about oil in Hoima, which is in Bunyoro and we are not invited? We are here wondering as to what is taking place. Surely, Madam Speaker- (Interruption)

MS OLERU: In fact I was worried and I just want to get a clarification. I want to know who are the stakeholders in Uganda –(Applause)- because I think we as MPs are stakeholders in everything as we are representatives of our people. Right this morning, there was a problem in the Lobby. Some of the key officials or the ministers almost picked a quarrel here in the Lobby this morning. The issue was one of the ministers was in the constituency but the MP did not know. So, in the process while he was there, there was sort of misinformation. At the end, they were finger pointing each other and the other asked, “Why did you not inform me? Why do you go and de-campaign me?” They were taking everything here in the Lobby and I think that was because she was not involved; she was not informed and that is why she really felt –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: The information I want to give is that in the last Parliament under the Chair of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker, the Prime Minister issued guidelines that any Minister should not go into the MPs constituency without informing the area Member of Parliament. Like the other week, we were all with hon. Mallinga; I was invited and we were together launching DDT. So, I do not know whether this is a new development for the Minister of Fisheries to go and start teaching people fishing when the MPs are in Kampala and they do not know. If the Speaker’s guidelines have already been changed and the Prime Minister’s directive is being openly abused by his subjects –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us get clarification from the Minister.

MR FRED MUKISA: Madam Speaker, I was not going to visit any individual constituency. I went to a district and the neighbouring districts were invited. The chairmen of those districts were invited, the CAOs were there and the beach management units. Drilling is multi-sectoral; you do not expect fisheries to organise a multi-sectoral meeting. I had to organise and inform people about what is going on in my sector. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to seek a clarification from the Minister who is just sitting down. (Laughter) I really wonder how a minister goes for a meeting with the chairman of a respective district on an issue of national concern on national resources - a very important matter in the district and how he could not invite MPs. (Applause) This is very alarming. Remember these are resources for the district and now that is where actually the MPs are raising concern because they were not invited. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, you know we were dealing with energy. Let us go back to the energy.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, this issue actually is very important. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Nsubuga.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am just surprised that hon. Tinkasimire raised a pertinent issue and the honourable Minister of State for Justice and Constitutional Affairs actually replied regarding the share people have when oil is discovered within their land and benefits. But when the hon. Minister of State for Fisheries stood up and he gave the argument that there is a workshop for BMU, he just derailed this Parliament. 

Yesterday, I was from the Islands; we know very well that BMUs were launched in December 2005 and that was the time when we were preparing as a nation to go into another phase of elections. So, from that time to date, these Beach Management Units have not been effective. If I can mention some of the objectives of BMUs, they are to modernise the fishing sector. So, the BMUs have been called countrywide and there are various workshops going on; one is even in Mukono for the Central. It is not connected to oil. It is not. Madam Speaker, we do not have oil in Buvuma, but all the chairpersons for BMUs have assembled in Mukono. 

I would love to urge this august House to request the Minister of Fisheries to bring a full detailed statement regarding the management of Beach Management Units because as we talk, my people are still practicing illegal fishing. When we go to tell them, these BMUs were given power, but they are actually not empowered. They are powerless. So, this subject is extremely pertinent. Even last month a crocodile ate one of my fishermen because of illegal fishing. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, I also have BMUs in my place, but let us complete the issue of energy.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, maybe before the minister comes in –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you talking about BMUs as well?

MR MUKISA: Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: No, Madam Speaker. You had given me the opportunity before the Minister. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, is it about the BMU? If it is not, let him conclude the BMU and you come back to energy.

MS ALASO: Well, it started from energy to BMU.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, what is it?

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I see you have really had to endure this. But, I actually had a very serious quarrel in my heart with the coming in of the BMUs at a point when we are discussing a very big issue in the life of- and in matters of oil all over the world; the question of stakeholder involvement. Irrespective of what the present position of the law is, it is crucial. 

You know the conflicts in the Niger Delta because of oil. You know the Ogoni massacres; it repeats itself everywhere as long as the community does not feel that they have been involved and they are not on board. Many times people have argued and have said, “You see oil can be a curse; it can be a blessing.” That question my colleague has asked of who the stakeholders are; as long as the people of Bunyoro do not feel they are stakeholder, we will have problems in this country because of that oil. We will have destitute on the streets. 

It is healthier for the government of Uganda to begin stakeholder engagement now before the first litre of oil leaves the oil wells for purposes of sale because then they will be on board. They will own the process; we will be able to understand as this country what royalties accrue to them, what will be done to those who are going to be displaced. But if we keep pushing this thing because every time the stakeholder involvement question comes, Government says we will consult. 

Exploration has gone on, soon we will be refining and the next day we will be exporting, but we will say we will consult them. At the last minute, Madam Speaker, it will be explosive. I want to implore Government really to do the consultation of stakeholders in the nearest practical and possible future. Thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let the Minister of Energy resume the Floor and we finish his sector. Switch off your microphones; the Minister is on the Floor.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank honourable members -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is not the end of this subject. I said we had a general debate; we are now going to discuss policy statements where you can raise this matter. We shall come to report when you can also raise issues again. Then we shall have the debate on the budget when you can raise the same issues. (Interjections) You are insisting?

MR OKECHO: Yes, I am insisting.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the problem?

MR OKECHO: The problem is that the Minister has given us a litany of various explorers in Bunyoro. I think about 20 of them are out there and then there was a simple point which actually one of the Members asked here to do with signature bonuses which actually would go a long way in contributing to the construction of the infrastructure and sorting out the issue of the dust that is going on around there.

I think there is no clear answer being given by the Minister. This is a very important point, which the Minister must clarify. Each company operating in an oil exploration area like that is expected in many cases to actually give or present or sign up a signature bonus of not less than $100 million per person. So, we expect that a lot of money can be raised to help out in infrastructure development. So, I do not know who actually looks at these agreements from other countries with respect to our budget. I expect some good amount of money from all these explorers out there.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Members for the intervention they have made. What we are going to do is to make sure that when we come up for discussions in the districts - because we are planning to go to every district in the oil producing area - when we meet Members of Parliament, all these issues that they are currently raising will be clearly attended to. If we have no clear answers to them, we shall request Members to help us in generating good answers because we want everybody to participate in generating a clear and sustainable way forward for the oil and gas industry in this country. We are aware that our oil has been an explosive matter in a number of countries. Our view is that these problems can only arise if the leadership is not listening to what the people are saying. 

The record of the NRM Government in regard to listening to people is very clear. I have been listening, the leaders of NRM are listening and we shall make sure that all these issues are brought on board. Madam Speaker, we shall also be providing a timetable of our visits to the districts so that nobody says that we are in the district without their knowledge and involvement. We shall also make sure that the draft policy, which we have, is shared out. We intend to start with our committee and thereafter we shall let you know. What I can emphasise to the House is that NRM listens and acts as per peoples’ mandate and requirements.

There was the issue of visits by Members of Parliament to the petroleum exploration areas. In April 2007, Members of the Committee on Natural Resources and some Members of the Committee on National Economy visited exploration area 11 where the first oil discovery was met. Plans are underway to organise similar visits of other Members of Parliament to the other oil producing areas. Members of Parliament who will be free at the time we shall organise such visits, will be able to visit.

Madam Speaker, a member raised the possibility of Parliament having a role in controlling oil proceeds to ensure transparency and he cited the case of Norway. What I know is that in Norway’s oil the Ministry of Finance and the Central Bank control proceeds. The role of Parliament is to regulate the percentage of the oil proceeds to be used to support the national budget. 

The above arrangement has been extremely successful for Norway and Uganda Parliament will very soon be discussing the way our Parliament should relate to the Oil and Gas industry in this country. 

Madam Speaker, there were issues on rural electrification that were raised during the debate. For example, hon. Ekanya raised issues concerning stoppage of rural electrification and completed schemes, and failure to energise completed schemes. I wish to set the record straight and point out that Government is continuing to pursue construction of rural electrification schemes; we have not stopped.

However, due to the need to provide funds to subsidise the high thermal power tariffs, the scope of rural electrification slowed down a bit and what we are currently doing is to focus on rural electrification projects, which target economic activities. The economic activities that we are targeting include fish landing sites like Waka Waka in Iganga District, mining areas like Butiru, in Bugisu, Agro-processing factories like Kayonza in Kanungu and district headquarters.

Accordingly, Madam Speaker, you are aware that I have given instructions that new generator sets for the time being be provided to Moyo, Moroto and Adjuman districts, as we work on a long term sustainable solution for power supply to these areas.

Madam Speaker, I wish to also to clarify that I never informed my brother hon. Ekanya in confidence that UMEME is not meeting its concession obligations of paying the monthly lease fees. Contrary to hon. Ekanya’s assertion, UMEME has continued to meet its obligation under the concession agreements including payments of monthly lease fees of $ 1.6 million.

The disappointment of hon. Ekanya and others however, is the assumption that UMEME is not extending power beyond the 1 kilometre radius of the existing network which falls under their jurisdiction. Unfortunately, this is what the concession agreement stipulates. Government has tried to find a way around this problem. We are trying to get other people to manage concessions outside the UMEME concession area. In that regard- (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: I want to seek clarification with the help of the Attorney- General that is the minister aware that the failure by UMEME to extent electricity to 1 Kilometre radius is a fundamental breach of the contract? Is he aware of that?

MR EKANYA: In addition to what hon. Otto saying, I want to state that when I stated here that the minister told me in confidence, I did not mean that the minister should have emphasised this; he told me this from the lobby.  The minister said, “It is true we have a challenge with UMEME.” as regards what he is saying; it was not about implementing the agreement and that is exactly what he meant when he said that UMEME is not implementing the provisions of the agreement which requires them to extend power within 1 kilometre radius. 

May I now ask the minister to comment on the fact that the ministry gave UMEME a right to draw from Government accounts? I am saying this because I have information to the effect that if, for example, Ministry of Lands delays to meet its bill, UMEME will draw that percentage which they are supposed to remit to Government direct from Government account, without Ministry of Lands verifying and confirming it. If the Ministry of Education delays to pay, UMEME will come with a bill of say, Shs 200 million and will submit invoice to the ministry saying that they have withdrawn such money which such a ministry is supposed to pay. 

Through that agreement UMEME was supposed to reduce loses from 25, as the study indicated to 10 percent. This is not happening. In my opinion, there is so much detailed information that the minister is hiding. Therefore, I want to ask the minister to lay the initial agreement and supplementary agreement, which he signed recently on Table, if he think we are not serious.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, these agreements are public documents. Members of Parliament once they ask for them, they will be availed. There is nothing we are hiding. Our culture in regard to availing information is very clear. I have already indicated to hon. Ekanya that he should feel free to ask for these documents; feel free to ask for the information and you will get it. These documents will be laid on Table, once I am required to do so.  Madam Speaker, it is very clear that we have nothing to hide -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure and beg your indulgence to request the Minister to lay the documents on a fixed date.  I beg you indulgence.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, do you remember that in the Sixth Parliament we had tedious debates over whether those agreements should come to the House or not; it was not a pleasant experience.  So, if the documents are available, lay them.

MR MIGEREKO:  Madam Speaker, as you know in the Sixth Parliament there was no UMEME. So, there could have been no documents on UMEME for me to lay on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I am not just talking about UMEME. Do you remember the debate on Bujagali power purchase? Do you recall that we had such battles over the power purchase?  Okay, lay what they are asking for.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Further information.  Madam Speaker, I want to take it upon myself to inform the minister that we want to find out the type of agreement he signed with his company, Tullow Oil Heritage, on our behalf. I am saying this because two months ago we wrote to the permanent secretary of his ministry and gave him a copy, but up today, we have never heard any response.  So, how can the minister come on the Floor of this House and hide behind the Speaker to tell us lies?

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA:  Madam Speaker, with all due respect I have been listening to my colleague, hon. Tinkasiimire. But the language he is using has surprised me; I have never heard of it through out the time I have been in this Parliament.  You cannot refer to a hon. Minister as, “This man.” 

Secondly, although the issue we are debating is in regard to the agreement between UMEME and Government, hon. Tinkasimire is now mixing it with Tullow Oil Heritage.  Is he in order to refer to the Minister as, “This man,” and also mix up issues?  I know he has interests in the Bunyoro oil, but the issue at hand is energy and not oil.  So, is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The language used might have been bad, but I think the bottom line is that people do not know what these agreements are about. I think that is the whole crux of the matter.  I want to think that people want to know about both the Heritage and the power purchase; that is all they want.

MR KIGYAGI: I want to say that the Committee on Natural Resources has received the power purchase agreement between Government and UMEME; it was also submitted.  We have it but –(Interjections)- we do not have the recently amended one, though we have requested for it. We hope that as they come before the committee, they will present it.  Otherwise, we have the one between Government and UMEME. 

MR MIGEREKO:  Madam Speaker, I would like to assure you that the documents will be laid here though some of them are actually already in the public libraries in this city.  So, really we have nothing to hide at all and you know that I am very good at obeying your instructions. (Applause)

MR OKOT OGONG:  Madam Speaker and Members of Parliament, what I know for sure is that we have no agreement.  What we have is a memorandum of understanding. In that memorandum of understanding there is a secret clause that bars people from accessing all the information about it. The memorandum of understanding I am talking about is the one between Tullow Oil heritage and the government of Uganda. We do not have any agreements with all those companies though we are about to start drilling that oil; we have no clear agreements. My concern is that a memorandum of understanding has no legal effect. 

Anyway, whether we have memorandum of understanding or agreements between the government of Uganda and Tullow Oil heritage, can we have any documents that are available laid before this House so that we can look at them, and also scrutinize that secretive clause prohibiting us from accessing information? 

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Madam Speaker, in the last Parliament I was a member of the Committee on National Economy. During that time we tried to get the agreement between oil companies and Government, but we were bluntly told that, that was confidential information. Yes, we were told that and that was two year ago; and I do not think that, that agreement has ever been revised or amended.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, I would like to say that with modern technology nobody can have the ability to hide these things. However much you do it, you will find them on the Internet.  I know that many agreements that have been considered confidential are now on the inter-net.  So, I think the environment in which we are working has changed -(Interruption) 

MR WADRI:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I see my friends on the front bench of the government side excited about the way I am dressed up today.  You know, for today I was also a Mulangira (Prince) called Kayemba. (Laughter) The clarification that I am seeking stem from the point of information that the Leader of Opposition has given, and which coincides with what hon. Okot Ogong has said.  

When we read the State of Nation Address, we were concerned about the word, “our oil”. So, unless it is for security reasons, we should not have the agreement kept secretively. I think it is in our interest as a country and more so as leaders to know what type of agreement our Government has entered into with oil companies, on behalf of our peoples. If we the people at this level cannot access information about this agreement, how about the ordinary Ugandans in Rhino Camp and Hoima; I think it is very important that we get to know these details.  If the agreement is kept away from us not for security reasons, then why can’t it be made public?

MS ALASO:  Thank you very much, hon. Wadri.  I would like to remind you, hon. Wadri that in the Seventh Parliament we passed a law in this House guaranteeing the right of access to information and we have a right to access this kind of information.  In the last Session of Parliament I put an oral question to the Minister of Information. I wanted to know how many people had requested for this type of information and how the Ministry had handled it. Unfortunately, that question was not answered. Anyway, I still believe that as Parliament, we have a legal right to ask for those documents to be laid on Table, given the fact that we have a law that allows us that opportunity. 

MR KIGYAGI:  I would like just to clarify one thing. Honourable members, at least the little information that I have on international organizations is that in the period of exploration, these companies risk their heavy capital and names -(Interjections)- hold on let me tell you what I know.  In the Oil sharing agreement, there is a confidentiality clause. 

MR OTTO: Madam Speaker I do not what to risk moving a motion that the MP for Mbarara Municipality no longer be heard, I just what to raise a point of order. Madam Speaker, I do not know since when the MP for Mbarara was appointed Minister of Energy. Is he in order to assume another man’s portfolio when the man is still alive and kicking? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we gave Members opportunity to chair committees and sometimes they become very knowledgeable. So, I think it is in that capacity that hon. Kigyagi is giving that information.  

MR MIGEREKO: I would like to thank the chair for the role he has been playing. Madam Speaker, I was talking about concessions. Yes, there is the UMEME concession, but we are also trying to make sure that we develop other concessions outside the UMEME concession. For instance, we now have a concession for Kanungu, Kibale, and there is a concession that is coming up in Kikagati; we have a concession coming up for Kasensero – and these are business opportunities in which Ugandans need to participate. We should not let only foreign companies to monopolise this business.

Madam Speaker, we have also been having very serious discussions with this sector with UMEME, proposing that areas which are within their vicinity, which have schemes that have been completed, and need to be energised, and we do not have a concession running; UMEME can take over the energising of those lines. 

We have had fruitful discussions, only that the discussions have taken a bit long, but I think we have been able to over come that problem and many schemes that have been completed and are due for energising will be energised. And many schemes, which are awaiting completion, will be completed in the course of time. But I clearly understand where Members are coming n this matter.

Madam Speaker, there was the issue of Kikagati Mini-hydro Power Project. The fact that there were issues of ground rent which were raised by Uganda Electricity Distribution Company Ltd, who are the owners of the land where the Chinese company, China Shansheng would like to construct their mini-hydro power station. 

It is true there were protracted negations between UDCL and other stakeholders. We have, however, been able to reach an understanding between the Ministry of Finance, this company and the Ministry of Energy. The only problem that is still outstanding is to do with issues regarding Tanzania, because River Kagera is shared by both Uganda and Tanzania. If we are going to establish a hydropower project in that area, we need to reach an understanding with the Tanzanian Government, so that just in case there are issues of flooding and resettlement, we can agree on how to handle them. 

I have already contacted the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister in Charge of East African Affairs on this matter. He will assist us to convene a meeting with Tanzanian authorities so that we can be able to over come that problem.

The other issue that was disturbing the project developers was extension of power from Mbarara to Kikagati and then later on from Kikagati to the National grid. This required a total of $US3.5 million and we have secured that money because we badly need the power in Kikagati. But this will also help us to service that concession. This line stretching from Kikagati to Mbarara will also be used to service trading centres along the way and within that general concession area.

I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members for having –(Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, I wonder why the Minister chose only to respond to hon. Ekanya’s concerns. Honourable minister, there is a concern regarding the small projects of rural electrification – Madam Speaker, can I be protected from the Chief Whip?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, you are have the Floor.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Now, back to the point, the minister has talked about the Waka Waka. This project has been on for the last six years. Money has appeared on policy statements for that project. And not only that one, there are about three landing sights: Bugoto and some other place in Bugweri. Every financial year, money is reflected in the policy statement for that. 

Hon. Ekanya is at least happy that he can talk if wires and poles at his place, but for us we have nothing. There are about three landing sights with economic potential, but there is nothing like wires and poles. So, I do not know whether the ministry is so excited with only oil and that is why it is not looking at those small projects.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, mine is on the manner in which the minister has decided to avoid a very fundamental issue, which was raised by hon. Odonga Otto concerning the breach of contract. Is it that UMEME is not adhering to the agreement to extend power to a radius of one kilometre? He has told us that they are now looking for some other people. I thought he should tell us whether that is not fundamental enough to cause the contract to be cancelled. 

MR OKOT: Madam Speaker, this honourable minister is my good friend, but he is handling a very critical ministry. Four years ago, I made request to the Ministry of Energy to extend power to Dokolo. As you are aware, Dokolo is soon becoming very important in that we shall have many people to consult –(Laughter)- so we need power, so that when my visitors come, they will be able to get power there. And the distance is not far; it is about 17 kilometres. 

I made my request, it was granted and they even made the provision to extend power to Dokolo. But it is now coming to four years, but I have not seen any pole, wire – yet the minister is aware the Dokolo will soon become the centre of Uganda. (Laughter) So, I request the minister to do the needful so that we can develop our country. Thank you.

MR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The other day, one of the issues that were raised was the cost of power, especially under rural electrification, and Kanungu is one of the districts that have benefited from this scheme and the minister said it. I came back from Kanungu yesterday, and only two people in Kanungu town have been able to get connected, the rest can not afford the electricity. 

So, we need a comment from the Minister on what the ministry is doing to ensure that power is affordable at the community level. Like we heard from Arua, it is a very big problem. We heard from hon. Arumadri that people there are failing to access the power because of the cost. This is the same with Kanungu. So, what is the Ministry doing to ensure that it is affordable by the rural communities?

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You recall that when hon. Ekanya raised the issue of the increase in the prices of cement, the honourable minister actually confirmed that the increase in the prices is not due to the forces of demand and supply. He admitted that there is a third arm. My appeal goes to the Minister of Energy and the Attorney-General because under liberalised economy, there is need to have consumer protection laws such that the consumer is not exploited. I would like to urge the Attorney-General, the Minister of Energy, the Minister of Tourism, Trade and Industry to take it on so that they formulate a law regarding consumer protection. 

You will recall last year, or is it this year when the price of sugar increased because a few traders held the supply and the demand increased, consequently leading to the increase prices. I think there is need to protect our people in the struggle to eradicate poverty. I would love to get a commitment from the front bench as to when the law to address that concern will be brought to this House. Thank you.

MR ALEX BYARUGABA: Further information on that, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Honourable members, I think let the Minister conclude.  (Interruption)

MR BYARUGABA: Yes. I would like to raise something on that very particular issue. Madam Speaker, I stay in Gaba and for about a week now, Gaba has not had power. This is a huge part of Gaba Seminary and the surroundings. When we inquired, we were told that these people’s transformer got a problem and that this problem is not likely to be solved because all the money that UMEME collects, it just takes out and collects again from the consumers. They collect more, take out and yet put in nothing. This is the biggest problem we have and if need be, honestly, the Minister should either put a commission of inquiry or this Parliament sets up a select committee to investigate this problem. It is a big problem, Madam Speaker.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, I will start with the issue of the UMEME concession, and in particular the fact that the concession agreement had given them opportunity to run the network within a one kilometre radius on either side of the network. That is what the agreement presently stipulates. One needs to look at the agreement and may be look at areas that need to be reviewed. It is also true that UMEME just like Stanbic were uneasy and apprehensive of extending the network to areas where they thought their operation would outstrip the in-flows. We had this problem with UCB, we had it also with UMEME.

MS EKWAU: Thank you very much. The honourable minister knows that one time I had hope of getting electricity in Kaberamaido but according to his reactions this afternoon, it as if all the hopes are completely faded. I hear of one kilometre radius and yet we have a high voltage line running all the way from Owen Falls Dam, up to Lira spinning mill. Honourable minister, where does Kaberamaido lie? You remember that in the mid 1960s, Kaberamaido had electricity from a Government that cared. (Laughter) If you really care this time, where does Kaberamaido lie? I thank you very much.

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank my colleague the honourable Minister. I really do not want to disturb him but we need to put this on record. When this concession to UMEME was being made, was it in the interest of Ugandans or in the interests of the electricity company? Part of the argument, for example, that was given to us about Stanbic bank was that the interest rates, because UCB was very inefficient, the interest rates would come down in due course. Yet they have never moved. In fact they moved upwards, then side ways. (Laughter) Honourable minister, how do we concession out these things to the extent that areas that do not have lines and are not in even one kilometre radius may never get electricity? How do we sort these things out?

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, I fully understand the point that Members are making but as I stated, that is the agreement I found in place. My view has been that we should create business opportunities for other Ugandans out of the prevailing situation on the ground. We have dealt with people of Kilembe in Kasese and they have created a concession for themselves so that they can be in a position to run power extension within that area up to Bunyaruguru. We are giving them support to make sure that they start off.

I have also talked about other concessions. It is true there are a number of issues, which we need to deal with and those we shall make sure that we handle. However, I would also like to appeal to Members to try and take advantage of the emerging business opportunities that are coming up with concessions. We can no longer just look at one distribution company for the country. We should be in a position to establish, put in place as many distribution companies for our areas as we can. You know we have a duty as leaders to create employment for our people. This is what we are apparently also trying to do given the circumstances on the ground.

Madam Speaker, I will turn to Kaberamaido. It is true there was power supply to Kaberamaido. The lines were vandalised. A number of times we have come up with proposals for ensuring that that particular area of Kaberamaido up to Dokolo are reconnected on power supply and I want to assure you that the Rural Electrification Agency has been working on something to make sure that the entire Teso region can be reconnected, particularly in those areas which have infrastructure. Many of those areas have some basic infrastructure. It is a question of rehabilitating that infrastructure and we get power in the system. My view is that you should give us time; we are going to attend to issues of power supply to Kaberamaido and all the areas in the general Teso area.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please conclude. Honourable members, really, you can catch the minister outside. (Laughter) please, let us conclude this matter. 

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, there was the issue of small rural-electrification schemes particularly on the landing sites of Lake Victoria. It is true that when we were coming up with the Waka Waka scheme, we had also captured a number of fish-landing sites on Lake Victoria. It is unfortunate that the work has slowed down, mainly due to financial constraints but I would like to assure hon. Kubeketerya and all the Members of Parliament who represent constituencies along the shores of Lake Victoria and Lake Kyoga, that fish-landing sites are a priority. Whenever we extend power to a fish-landing site, we get a fish factory. So, fish-landing sites are a priority and as soon as financial resources flow our way, we shall make sure that even the areas that I have not mentioned, but which I have discussed with individual members are taken care of. 

Madam Speaker, there was the issue of cost of power supply to Kanungu and West Nile. It is true that I have received reports in regard to installation costs for power in the West Nile concession under WENREKO. I have also received a report on Kanungu. Normally, what we do when these matters come up is to ask the regulator to carry out a study on the cost of providing power so that we can be in position to engage the concessionaire for that area and this is what I will do. 

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I did not intend to disrupt the minister’s submission, but I just wanted to find out whether its procedurally right for the minister to give open-ended promises. In the case of the Ministry of Works and Transport, the Minister would say by such and such a time we expect this product to be delivered and that by such and such a time, we expect this process to start. 

However, what the minister is submitting today is really open-ended. There is no commitment on the part of the ministry. Is it procedurally right for the Minister to proceed this way without giving commitment to MPs and to this country? For how long will Kaberamaido wait? For how long is Ongino going to wait? For how long are the centers at the shores going to wait? I think this is the real commitment that we would like from Government. 

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, it is true that each of us would want to know exactly when power is going to reach each constituency or a certain production facility in his area. I would like to say one thing. The whole country needs to be electrified and I can say that within the given resources available to us, I will be in position to communicate when I come back here, about which areas are likely to be in position to get power and when. 

It is also not right to categorically state that everything is a promise. For instance, in Kilembe, the Kilembe concession is ongoing; the Kanungu concession is on and so is the WENREKO and the Waka Waka concessions. Really, let me try to find out how much money we have particularly in light of the power shortages that we have had, and then I will be in position to assertively and authoritatively inform the honourable members. I know for instance that hon. Latigo knows what is happening in his area and I will also report on that one.  

The last issue that came up is the issue of price of cement and consumer protection. I know the Attorney–General will be in position to comment on that one. My efforts particularly at this stage have been mainly focussed on ensuring that the factories we have can increase on their production but also to ensure that we get more cement producing factories in the country because unlike a few years ago when one was not sure when he should build a factory or not, under the NRM Government today, you are certain when you start thinking in that direction, that you will be able to see that project cede light at the end of the day. I am sure that with those remarks I can sit down.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development. Honourable members, I think for today we have done enough. We shall sit again tomorrow and we will start with the Minister of Defence to be followed by the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Affairs.  We will then proceed with the Minister of Health and then we will go to the Minister for Ethics. So, honourable members, the House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow. 

(The House rose at 6.59 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 1 August 2007 at 2.00 p.m.)
