Tuesday, 24 July 2012

Parliament met at 2.13 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in Chair)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, welcome to this sitting. I would like to thank you for the respect we gave our colleague yesterday and the preparations for his burial are ongoing. We need to continue joining them in prayer such that the family may have the strength to deal with the problems that have hit them and all of us.

Today we begin in earnest our debate on the State of the Nation Address, and as I said, we had consulted with whips and we had agreed on some formula, but I have not got the feedback on how we are going to proceed with this debate. But be it as it may, we will start the debate today in earnest and see how far we will move.

Also, our colleagues who are from the Islamic faith are fasting so we have to try and roll up business early enough for them to be able to break their fast in the evening. So, Parliament should be closing latest 6 p.m. such that we give the Members opportunity to go back and be with their families as they break the fast. So, we need to move with business as fast as we can. For the whole month, we will be observing this, so it is important that we use the time properly.

2.15
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of national importance -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mawanda, we had agreed that those matters of urgent public importance will come at the end. So, we will not change the rules now.

PETITION BY THE UGANDA TRADERS ASSOCIATION OF SOUTH SUDAN

2.16
MR ONYANGO KAKOBA (NRM, Buikwe County North, Buikwe): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a petition from Members of Uganda Traders Association of South Sudan. Generally, this petition has complaints about non-payment for the goods and services supplied by these traders, and also harassment. The details are contained in the petition.

To: The Parliament of Uganda,

The Humble Petition of Members of Uganda Traders Association of South Sudan;

Regarding: Complaints about non-payment for the goods and services supplied by these traders, and also harassment

Therefore, your petitioners - the traders under this umbrella - pray that – 

 (1) 	Parliament urges Government to intervene in the plight of Ugandans trading in South Sudan and act immediately in addressing these disputes and grievances. And ensure that the Ugandan traders’ business interests in South Sudan are protected.

(2) 	Parliament urges Government to institute appropriate policies and mechanisms that will ensure that the Ugandans trading in South Sudan are secure and are treated with fairness by both the agents of the Government of South Sudan and by their Sudanese trading counterparts.

(3) 	Parliament urges Government to immediately intervene in the follow-up of the compensation claim of the 96 affected traders amounting to USD 14,875,421 owed by the Government of South Sudan, its agents and citizens arising from the unpaid for supply of goods and services.

(4)	Parliament urges Government to provide a feedback on the outcome of its intervention on the plight of the petitioners within one month from the date of presentation of this petition.

(5) 	Parliament urges Government of Uganda to provide an emergency financial support to the affected traders to alleviate their current deplorable condition.” 

And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will forever pray.

Mr Speaker, those are the prayers, and attached to the petition are the signatures of 38 petitioners. I beg to lay the petition on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you very much. The petition stands referred to the appropriate committee. The committee needs to work on this petition faster than they do on Bills, motions and other matters. Petitions are specific and they address matters so they should take less time in dealing with them.

Allow me to alter the Order Paper to allow the hon. Latif Ssebagala to present a second petition.

PETITION ON COMPENSATION FOR THE LAND ACQUIRED BY THE UGANDA-KENYA PIPELINE EXTENSION PROJECT FROM THE RESIDENTS OF NAMERE, SEKATE AND KWATA ZONE OF KAWEMPE NORTH

2.20
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am moving under Rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda.
I am presenting this petition on behalf of the people of Kwata, Sekate and Namere zones in Kawempe North Constituency as regards to Uganda-Kenya oil pipeline compensation.

To: The Parliament of Uganda,

The humble petition of the residents of Mpererwe and Komamboga parishes Kawempe North Constituency, stress that the subject matter of this petition is the compensation for the land acquired by Kenya-Uganda pipeline extension Project from the residents of Namere, Sekate and Kwata zones following the gazetting of the said land.

Therefore, your petitioners pray that -

In November 1995, a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) was signed between the Government of Uganda and that of Kenya with the objective of studying the feasibility of extension of the oil pipeline from Eldoret in Kenya to Kampala Uganda.

The study was completed in December 1999 and it was established that the project was feasible.

In October 2000, another MoU was signed between the Government of the Republic of Kenya and the Government of Uganda with the main objective of implementing the feasibility study on the extension of the Mombasa – Eldoret oil pipeline to Kampala that was completed in December 1999. 

The proposed Kenya-Uganda pipeline is to extend from Eldoret through Malaba and Jinja, to Kampala giving the pipeline a total length of 320 kilometres. The project was launched in 2007 under the arrangement that the Uganda Government had to acquire the way-leaf and other land rights. 

Accordingly, in May 2008, the project was due to start with the compensation of the land owners. In April 2009, the land through which the pipeline was to pass was gazetted by the Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources. This affected many land owners in various parts of the country who were told to stop using and developing or in any way dealing in their land. Since then, the said residents have not been using their land and they are now facing economic hardships as they cannot viably use the land upon which they used to reside, but also from which they used to earn a living. 

The petitioners’ grievances have not been addressed by the concerned authorities despite persistent reminders, thereby causing great anxiety and suffering both economically and socially. 

Wherefore by this petition, your humble petitioners pray that:

(i) 	Parliament resolves that the Government of Uganda immediately compensates them for the over four years that they have not been utilising their land; 

(ii) 	the land be immediately de-gazetted; and

(iii) 	any relief deemed necessary to assist the concerned citizens to live a normal life be given.

And your petitioners will as in duty bound ever pray,” and hereto append their signatures.
 
Mr Speaker, I have over 78 signatures appended and as far as this petition is concerned, we are just working as the voice of the voiceless because many people from as far as Malaba to Buloba are suffering. So, I am really raising it on behalf of them. 

Allow me lay on Table, this petition concerning the Kenya-Uganda oil pipeline, on which over 70 residents have appended their signatures. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record capture that. It stands referred to the appropriate committee for expeditious action. I am sure the issue doesn’t only involve the people of Kawempe; it involves people all around and the committee should be able to look at this in a comprehensive way and come back to this House within the timeframe.
 
DR TWA-TWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You will recall that when we adjourned last Thursday, there was a motion on the Floor being debated, which we hadn’t concluded, and even the key ministry had not yet responded. In other words, we had not yet concluded on that motion.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which motion was that?
 
DR TWA-TWA: That was the HIV/AIDS report, but it is not featuring on the Order Paper.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is because the people who were supposed to process it are not here. When the team comes back, we shall be able to deal with it. Thank you.
 
MS KABASHARIRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the same note, when we adjourned - I think it was on Wednesday - the Minister for Local Government was supposed to bring us a statement concerning the elections under Local Government. Also, the Minister of Agriculture in charge of Animal Husbandry was supposed to bring a statement, but somehow he disappeared from this House and remember, Mr Speaker, you said that he would bring it today when we resume.
  
I have brought it up because I am not seeing it on the Order Paper and we are really suffering in our area. We would like to know what the government is trying to do as far as Foot and Mouth Disease is concerned. Our people cannot take their milk; our people cannot sell their cows and yet school fees demands are coming soon. So, we would really like to know what the government is doing. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we usually put on the Order Paper matters that are ready. We don’t put items whose documents we have not seen. Normally, the statements are brought in advance so that we can competently put them on the Order Paper to avoid putting things that are not there. But since the Rt Hon. Leader of Government Business is here and those undertakings were made here; could you please clarify on the matter?
 
DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, I wrote to the Minister of Health a simple question in May to which I wanted an oral answer.  I wanted to know why there is a road toll in Mulago Hospital that is being charged to everybody who is entering Mulago with a car while taking a patient, and yet there is no road toll in Nakasero Hospital, which is a private hospital. So, I wanted to know which one is private and which one is not. But up to now -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What do you mean by road toll? 

DR BITEKYEREZO: They charge money for every car that enters Mulago Hospital and I feel it is not right since it is a Government hospital where people should not be paying while taking patients. So, it is not an incentive.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, indeed that matter was raised as a question and an answer is still being awaited. Maybe you could give some recaps on those issues and we move on.

2.30  
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, I will perhaps extend this question to accessing the airport, where you also find a road toll and make some payments there. But I will ask the Minister of Health and the Minister of Works and Transport to explain why these road tolls are there. I have undertaken to ask them to come and answer. Thank you, Sir. 

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the issue that the honourable colleague has raised, I don’t know how Government would like to treat it, especially what she has mentioned about the diseases affecting our animals in Western Uganda. I should maybe declare my interests; I am a farmer, and a cattle keeper, but the rate of death of animals due to diseases and the ineffective drugs being supplied to us, need an emergency intervention and yet the Ministry of Animal Industry is treating it as a by–the-way. 

When you make a survey, you cannot believe the number of animals which have died in the last three months. We are losing out on business; we are totally being pushed out of farming and the government is quiet. What do we do? There is need for special intervention by Government. The importation of drugs has been left to business people – to whom it may concern. And, if you are telling us to go into massive production, within the next five years we are going to have a problem with milk supplies, yet Government is looking on. What do we do?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kakooza, we are supposed to respond to a statement from the minister. That statement was supposed to be made last week, but then they said they would make it today, Tuesday this week. This statement is not here. Can you ask the honourable minister to come with a statement tomorrow at 2o’clock to deal with these matters? [Ekanya rose_] You are seeking clarification from the Speaker? Under what rule?

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am not seeking clarification from you, but I just needed your guidance. We have medical doctors here and the minister needs to tell us whether the meat from these animals that are dying because of complications are not being consumed by people, which will in turn cause drug resistance and other complications.

So, I just wanted to seek your intervention, that when the ministers bring the report, they should give us scientific advice and precaution that the people in Western Uganda and the rest of the country, are not eating meat that is poisonous. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But I thought that statement was made when the minister was here the other time, and he said that the meat you are eating here is safe. I don’t know whether you want a full statement on the safety of the meat or something.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, yes, we need a full statement concerning the meat and also the issue of the nodding disease. These things are related. In the North we had the nodding disease and drug resistance and now the cows have drug resistance in the West. These matters need to be addressed jointly.

MR KATOTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. If we are to consider the situation, I think it would be procedurally right for the government to first concentrate -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you ruling now on the matter?

MR KATOTO: No, I am not ruling. Is it procedurally right for the government to concentrate on cattle when it has not finished the issue of nodding disease? I would request that the government first concentrates on nodding disease and then comes to -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think all those issues are affecting the citizens and that is why the concerns are being raised.

2.35
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Female Youth Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Kindly, before the Leader of Government Business responds, I ask that he also addresses the issue of the Youth Venture Fund. If I kept silent here, I would not be doing justice to the people that I represent. I remember last week those two issues were very contentious and we were expecting a statement from the honourable minister. Therefore, we would also like to hear feedback on that so that it is urgently dealt with. It is an issue that has been pending for the last three months.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. On the Youth Venture Fund, indeed a statement was brought to the Speaker’s Office. We looked at the statement and we thought they needed to add one or two things before it comes to the House. It was with us last week and it was the ruling of the Speaker that it would generate more debate than the kind of thing we were expecting. So, I asked the minister to go back and review those points, which had already been raised here because there were no answers in the statements that we received. So, they were asked to go, beef it up and come back to Parliament. Hopefully they are coming this week.

DEBATE IN REPLY TO THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION DELIVERED TO PARLIAMENT BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT ON THURSDAY 7TH JUNE 2012

RESPONSE BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN PARLIAMENT TO THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION AS DELIVERED TO PARLIAMENT

MR MUWUMA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I sit on the Appointments Committee and I remember we did approve over 70 ministers. We are about to consider sensitive business to do with the State of the Nation Address and I can only see two ministers on the front bench. Is it procedurally right to proceed to consider such a sensitive matter without the presence of ministers who are going to implement the recommendations and proposals from Members? Thank you.

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Mr Speaker, I am equally perturbed why the front bench is empty, but I believe it will not stop the House from conducting business, and my being here is to take note and to bring everything to the attention of the ministers. At the same time, there will be a record in the Hansard. So, I think we should go on. Otherwise, if my colleagues want us to suspend the House because there are no ministers here, then that is their wish.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we receive the reply of the Leader of the Opposition? I don’t want to run late again and then other issues crop up.

MR MEDARD LUBEGA: Mr Speaker, this is a response to the State of Nation Address by the President and I assume the Executive are his representatives here. They have all decided to boycott. I don’t know what they are communicating to the country, whether they don’t take the State of the Nation Address seriously or it is Parliament that they don’t treat with respect.

If the Leader of Government Business is perturbed and cannot account for the whereabouts of his team and whether they are on the front line, what do we do? Can we just communicate to ourselves, because he says that they will pick the Hansard and go and read? My proposal is to suspend the House for at least ten minutes because these individuals have offices in Kampala and I have seen this Parliament doing it before. So, let the Leader of Government Business be given ten minutes, he contacts his colleagues and tells them, if they are sleeping to wake up, that Parliament is going on.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And in the meantime?

MR LUBEGA: We suspend for ten minutes.

MR NDEEZI: I sympathise with the honourable members, but I believe the composition of Parliament as clearly spelt out in the Constitution is known to all Members. Also, the quorum is known to all Members. There is no provision in the Constitution or in our Rules of Procedure, which says that if the front bench is empty or has only two ministers, Parliament cannot proceed. We are free to continue according to our Rules of Procedure, even if there is only one minister or two. So, I am of the opinion that our colleagues should accept and present the Opposition’s views, which all of us are eager to attend to. Thank you so much.

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to inform the honourable members that yesterday we had a shock concerning the loss of our beloved colleague, hon. Oromait. Many Members are still recovering from this shock and some of them, including the ministers, must have gone for the prayers in Jinja. You can see that the House is not fully constituted. So, I feel that we can still continue. Secondly, this paper by the Opposition was distributed the other time; we have it and have already internalised it. What we are doing now is for the purposes of the Hansard. Please, let us proceed. Thank you. (Applause) 

MRS BAKIREKE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As the President was addressing the nation, the media captured the pictures of people who were present. Most of the ministers were captured while either sleeping or looking like people who are sleeping. For that reason, they were absent even when the President was addressing the nation. No wonder the Frontbench has started gathering some few colleagues, but it is still empty – almost sleeping! I would, therefore, suggest that in view of the fact that even in the very presence of His Excellency, people were captured in positions which indicated that they were either sleeping or apparently sleeping, we can still go on in their absence. Every time we come here, we are spending taxpayers’ money. I hope those colleagues who are absent will find us on the way or be informed of what transpired here by the Leader of Government Business. I beg to move.

2.45
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to make a reply, on behalf of the Opposition, to the State of the Nation Address by the President.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have one hour for your presentation.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, President Museveni delivered his Seventh State of the Nation Address to this House and the nation on Thursday, June 7 2012 at the Serena Conference Centre. As a tradition and practice, this year’s State of the Nation Address opens the second session of the Ninth Parliament of Uganda. 

The State of the Nation Address provides an opportunity for a country to hear their Chief Executive outline his party’s or Government political agenda, the proposed policies and new legislation. It is also a ceremonial event that allows the head of state to review the past session.

Mr Speaker, a State of the Nation Address is very distinct in nature.  In the wisdom of the framers of the 1995 Constitution, under Article 101(1), the State of the Nation Address precedes the Budget and is meant to provide political direction to the national priorities. The State of the Nation Address is, therefore, an executive duty that portrays statehood at its best.

Unfortunately, this year’s State of the Nation Address, again, misses the mark and does not meet even the minimum standard expectation of policy review and direction to re-shape and re-cast the future of a nation in dire need of political, economic and social re-configuration. The President simply chose to make passing remarks on the economy, Dr Kizza Besigye, the media, the UPDF and the HIV/AIDS, even without any substantive reference to the legislative agenda of Government for the new session.  There was no account of what Government undertook to do even just for the last financial year. 

As a reminder, in his 2011 address, the President made certain promises as follows, among others:

a.	Commit to the rule of law in the management of public affairs (page 4).

b.	Transform three million households from subsistence agriculture to commercial agriculture; from hand-hoe to mechanised production; and from production for household consumption to production for export (page 10).

c.	Increase farm production and productivity through use of fertilizers, improved seeds and animal breeds (page 11).

d.	Increase milk processing capacity from 463,000 litres to 710,000 litres per day (page 12).

e.	Actualise the phosphate fertilizer production at Osukuru Hills in Tororo (page 15).

f.	Build storage capacity for food commodities at the farm level and subcounty level (page 16).

g.	Establish 18 regional trade information centres to undertake market information dissemination (page 16).

h.	Build and commission 19 rural electrification schemes by November 2011 (page 18).

i.	Refurbish and restock the Jinja fuel storage tanks (page 21).

j.	Reduce the teacher-pupil ratio to 56:1 in all Government schools (page 22).

k.	Complete and open Muni University by August 2012 (page 25).

l.	Progress on Kasese Airport Development Project and the Terminal Building on Masindi Aerodrome (page 32).

m.	Set up the National Data Centre (page 36).

n.	Complete the National Land Information System Centre by the end of 2011 (page 36).

o.	Legislate and operationalise the Uganda Land Commission as a statutory body (page 37).

p.	Publish the Judicial Commission of Inquiry Report on the burning of Kasubi Tombs (page 43).

q.	Constitute a committee to investigate political leaders and public officers implicated in corruption-related scandals (page 46).

Mr Speaker, in this year’s State of the Nation Address, we expected the President to advise us on which of the above priority areas he had delivered, and if not, what needs to be done. We believe that the President, having realised the embarrassing nature of the chain of false promises made year-in year-out, avoided giving a report on the touchy undertakings made last year, on which monies were appropriated. This would have painted a picture of a nation that is getting worse, and raised questions as to whether there has been value-for-money or whether money was actually spent on these areas.

President Bill Clinton once remarked that being a President is like running a cemetery. You have a lot of people under you and nobody is listening. (Laughter) You cannot be sure whether you are taking the right decision, because there is nobody opposing or challenging your current thoughts. That is why the President derives comfort in churning out policies in various forms, as though he was speaking to a cemetery that will not remember and follow up on what he is saying. That is why he refused to lay an account of his last year’s promises without which the address was just a report card.

MR MUKITALE: I have background literature and I have maximum respect for the Leader of the Opposition. I am surprised that in his response to the state of the nation by His Excellency the President, he seems to be imputing that we, including me and the Speaker who is in the Chair, are an equivalent of a cemetery. Is the Leader of the Opposition in order, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I listened carefully. I did not hear any direct statement to that effect. He was only expounding on a quotation from President Bill Clinton. In literature, we would say it is a metaphorical statement. It does not have a direct translation. In that regard, the order is not sustainable.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. The State of the Nation Address also came at a time when a major statement, the Poverty Status Report 2012, had just been released by the Ministry of Finance in May 2012. I want to interest honourable members to read that report before you debate this year’s budget. It makes important divergent revelations between what the political elite or appointees in the NRM super structures say or promise, and what the situation and the recommendations of the technocrats are. We will highlight only a few of these in the section on the economy below.  

Our success as a nation is not measured by how many years we have governed, such as over 26 years, or how many wars we have fought and won. It is measured by the quality of life of the citizenry, and you will agree with me that most of our countrymen and women, especially in rural areas, live a destitute life, a life of indignity, condemned to humiliating poverty, amidst the celebrated economic growth figures for over two and a half decades. 

Mr Speaker, an old woman in Kanungu or Kaabong, for example, who does not understand the fundamentals of economics, can only smile if she can put food on her plate. But when you start telling her that the shilling is doing well compared to the previous month, she will ask you, “What are you talking about?” given that she sleeps early because of darkness, and pays for medicine because there is none at the nearest health centre. 

The tendency of our President making empty promises year in, year out, must come to an end. We must actually start to see words transformed into serious action, because a nation’s success or failure in achieving democracy is judged in part by how well it responds to those at the bottom of the social order. We, therefore, need a government that will treat its citizens equally and is committed to listening to them.

Mr Speaker, my constitutional duty today is to respond to the President’s speech and point out the omissions in the content, that would constitute statehood as we know it in our generation. In doing this, I shall stay away from the many off-the-cuff remarks he makes, because they are largely that; off-the-cuff.

The Forum for Democratic Change Party, as the official Opposition, is constitutionally duty bound to hold the NRM Government accountable for its policies, programmes and plans, as well as compel it to account for over its 20 years in power. Our audit and score of the last session will, therefore, address the following:

1.	The political and legislative arenas: the state of governance, constitutionalism and Rule of Law;
2.	The state of the economy; 
3.	Some important references made; and 
4.	Conclusions and way forward

The Political and Legislative Arena

In his address to the nation, the President talked about security of both persons and property brought about by the NRM, and in particular, the discipline of the NRA/UPDF. He went ahead to congratulate the Police for successfully stifling Opposition party activities. In this, he was encouraging the Police and military to mete out more brutality onto the Opposition. However, he did not address himself to the recent killings of business people and prominent Moslems in Kampala and Mukono. 

May I remind the President that sustainable peace is not achieved by suffocating dissenting views and/or simply stationing policemen at every locus. It is achieved through respect of people’s liberties and equitable allocations of resources.

While the 2005 Referendum changed the legal framework for political parties, the envisaged political space has been highly patronised and only utilised for the sole favour of the NRM. Revival of multiparty democracy without the required will from the ruling NRM party to abandon its negative attitude towards other parties, still undermines the merits of the multiparty system in Uganda. That is why Government has even refused to operationalise the law for funding political parties.

Mr Speaker, we do not expect the President to heap praises on the Opposition, but the Constitution commands him to guarantee and create political space for party activities. All he has done is to misuse state power by curtailing multiparty activities, and to also suffocate and intimidate his own NRM Members for purposes of his regime longevity as opposed to the well-being of Ugandans.

As if that is not bad enough, the NRM legislative agenda for the second session of the Ninth Parliament, prioritises the passing of the obnoxious Public Order and Management Bill, to legitimise Police murder and brutality further curtailing political party activity and the enjoyment of constitutional fundamental rights and freedoms. I wish to reiterate that Uganda is effectively under an undeclared state of emergency since the 9 September 2009 Buganda riots. Preventive arrests have become the preferred choice by the Kayihura Police. While we could use the numbers to pass this unjust law, and let the NRM compel the Opposition to obey, this in itself does not make it binding.

We must remind the House that Grace Ibingira, who once championed the infamous detention without trial law which was called Public Order and Safety Act, was indeed the first victim of the same law he championed. We now remind and warn you that any such draconian laws will definitely catch up with its architects.

In Zambia, the Movement for Multiparty Democracy, that is MMD, was in power for over 20 years, oppressing the Opposition. Last year, they lost power and the current government is applying the same laws on them. MMD is pleading with the current government to amend the laws, which they had refused to do when they were in power. This scenario will soon catch up with us here. 

Even before the draconian Public Order and Management Bill is enacted into law, evidence on the ground shows that the Police have already assigned themselves the responsibility of granting permission to Opposition parties as to when, where and how to assemble, yet our Constitution is clear on fundamental human rights and freedoms, including the right to assemble, associate and demonstrate. This matter was even received -(Interruption)

MR KATOTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is it in order for the Leader of the Opposition to start lamenting and wasting our time instead of restricting himself to addressing the response to the State of Nation Address by His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda? Is it in order for him to continue even threatening us?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Leader of the Opposition has so far not violated any order of this House. He is proceeding according to order. He can, therefore, continue. The order is unsustainable. (Applause)

Honourable members, in the public gallery, we have students and teachers from ARP Technical Institute of Business and Technology represented by hon. Kabasharira Naome and hon. Yona Musinguzi of Ntungamo District. Please join me in welcoming them. They have come to observe the proceedings. (Applause)

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure in relation to the tradition and culture in this House, which I have been privileged to be in for 11 years. This speech being read by the Leader of the Opposition has been diligently worked on and written by a team. He is not talking off the head and he is not at any one moment even withdrawing from the written text, which could have been submitted to your Office in advance. But I am observing a culture where if we do not put a stamp, it may develop even next year and in future, where there are interjections arising just for the purpose of mere obstruction of the flow of the written text. 

So, just like when the President is addressing Parliament, we have to really hold our breaths even if we could rise on a point of order. Is it procedurally right to start developing this culture of interfering with a constitutional mandate which is being discharged by the Leader of the Opposition?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, besides what the hon. Odonga-Otto is raising, it is becoming the habit of Members of the House to rise on a point of information, point of procedure and even seek information from the Speaker and it is not fair. It is not only bad practice, it is even bad manners to proceed along those lines. So, I would urge Members, unless really there is a violation of the order of the House, you should desist from rising. Please, it does not help the debate. If there is a violation of the order, the House has got to be called to order, but there has to be a basis for that. For example, if there is a stranger in the House, that will be an issue that would call the whole matter to order because you do not know the intention of the stranger in the Chamber of Parliament. Honourable, please proceed.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would plead with your Office to hold more induction courses to assist us.

This matter has even received judicial interpretation i.e. Constitutional Petition No.9 of 2005, Muwanga Kivumbi Vs. Attorney-General. There is also enough evidence to show that no single Opposition party activity passes without teargas, water cannons, rubber and live bullets, batons, chaos, injuries and the endless blame on the victims of this terror.

We already know that President Museveni, doubtful of the loyalty and discipline of the Police, has kept them under constant surveillance and more directly under his control. This has made Police act like an enemy force towards civilians, brutalising every Opposition move to organise, instead of securing lives and property. This shows that we are treading on the path where Police are a master card to subduing citizens’ content. 

We want to inform the NRM leadership that no repressive government governs by repression alone, precisely because this renders governance unstable, unacceptable and expensive. As long as there is repression that is sustained for a long time, that pent-up anger explodes. The ground is certainly set for that explosion. While we recognise that our government has not driven us to absolute despotism, recent trends indicate that we could be headed in that direction. This has already been shown by a recent study made by Fund for Peace which categorised Uganda under failed states. 

Uganda’s history is rich with experience that the exit of any oppressive government begins with a decay of the core principles on which it was founded. However, for such a government to exit, some people must first say publically and loudly, like we are doing now, that something wrong is taking place. Our resolve is that we must rid our nation of all those people who think that anything which offends them should be removed. In doing this, we are energised by the words of Martin Luther King who said, “Our lives will begin to end the day we become silent about things that matter.” 

As Bertrand de Jouvenel, the French philosopher, put it, “A society of sheep must in time beget a government of wolves.” Therefore, no amount of force or brutality from either the Police or any other force will stop us from exercising our inherent rights. We shall not allow wolves to take our motherland - (Interjections) - Our advice to the Police is that they should not accept to be used to commit crime on anybody’s behalf because they will be individually liable for crimes against the citizenry - (Interjections) - We can no longer re-mend –

MR KATOTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. According to our Rules of Procedure, rule 75 - use of unparliamentary language - it is out of order to use offensive, abusive, insulting -(Interjections)- The Leader of the Opposition has said, “We shall not allow wolves”. If that was supposed to be used on any person, is the person a wolf? We can quote with evidence; it is written in his speech. He said, “We shall not allow wolves”. Is Uganda led by wolves? Is it, therefore, in order for that man to call Ugandans wolves? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Again, the word “wolves” contextually used is derivative from the quotation which the honourable member used. If I recollect, he said “A society of sheep must in time beget a government of wolves”, and his call is that we should not accept wolves. Would the honourable member be comfortable with wolves on his – Would you be comfortable with wolves around? (Laughter) There is no reference to anybody being a wolf. Please proceed.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We cannot remain in blissful silence when fundamental human rights of our citizens are undermined with insensitivity. We know that preventive arrest is a classic instance of political power not in accordance with constitutional principles for it affects human dignity and violates fundamental human rights. We further know that the attempt to silence a man or woman is the greatest honour you bestow on him or her. It means you recognise his or her superiority to yourself. 

The infusion of state structures with NRM party structures is a distress. Civil servants, RDCs, Police, Army, intelligence organs, Electoral Commission etcetera are all state structures and not NRM party structures. These should not be abused by the NRM. The Electoral Commission should operate as a state structure and not as an NRM structure. We advise state structures to serve all Ugandan citizens equally otherwise it will boomerang on them in the near future. 

I do not know why Ugandans do not learn from history. Freedom is an inherent right, but Ugandans are intimidated during broad daylight by these state operatives; for example, there is no election in Uganda without bloodshed. But Ugandans are watching and taking note of these individuals. They are taking note of the vehicles and guns they use to intimidate them and these persons will soon or later answer for their sins individually. 

President Museveni is abusing public funds, especially classified expenditure, using it for NRM activities. He protects corrupt NRM officials for selfish interests. This should stop. 

It is our responsibility as elected leaders to ensure that Uganda is a state ruled by democratic principles, underpinned by human dignity, equality and freedoms. Where there is separation of powers, corruption is investigated and wrongdoers are equally punished in court and their riches confiscated and services provided equally to all Ugandans whether in Government or the Opposition. In this regard, I intend to present to this august House the following legislations by way of Private Members Bills. They are:

1. 	Constitutional (Amendment) Bill 
2. 	Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill
3. 	Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill
4. 	Local Government Elections (Amendment) Bill
5. 	Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill
6. 	Police Act (Amendment) Bill
7. 	Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (Amendment) Bill
8. 	Universal Education (Primary and Secondary) Bill
9. 	Tertiary Education Loans Bill 
10. 	National Agriculture Development Bank Bill 
11. 	A motion for a resolution to disband the Privatisation Unit, which is wasting taxpayers’ money.

Mr Speaker, the political events of the Great Lakes Region are a big threat to the security and stability of Uganda as a land linked/locked nation. However, the State of the Nation Address makes no mention of the geo-politics. As we play host to refugees and internally displaced persons, we note with concern that the international security obligations in Somalia – (Interruption) 

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to seek clarification from the Leader of the Opposition on how he intends to do this. Does he intend to lay these Bills on the Floor or he intends to seek leave of the House when that time comes so that he can present these Bills to the House? I seek clarification on whether he is procedurally right to state that he is going to present this to the Floor of the House. He could have said that he intends to seek leave of the House so as to provide the necessary legislation. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Dombo, in this House any member can even threaten action which never comes to fruition. It is within the member’s right to anticipate action even if it never comes at all. I think that is within the right of the Leader of the Opposition. (Laughter) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, as we play host to refugees and internally displaced persons, we note with concern that the international security obligations in Somalia and the situation in Southern Sudan, DRC and Rwanda call for an addendum to the State of the Nation Address. 

The current role of the US AFRICOM programme calls for debate in this House as it distorts our sovereignty. In addition, there is proliferation of small arms in the region, with Uganda becoming a transit area for a growing illicit arms and natural resource trade. The nation needs to know the safeguards to such external threats, with the discovery of oil precipitating anxiety but with no assurances coming out clearly in the State of the Nation Address.

The state of the economy

The Ugandan economy returned bad news, and its performance is a source of great worry to every household and business.  Inflation has remained at a double digit figure, at 18.6 percent; economic growth has declined from 6.7 percent to 3.2 percent; and the central bank lending rate remains high as a constraint to the private sector to access finance. 

This level of growth performance is far below the Sub-Saharan average of 5.1 percent. It is also below the world economic growth average of 3.9 percent, and it is of course below the Rwandan growth rate for the same period of 8.8 percent. This is the balance sheet of President Museveni’s first year of the five years in his sixth term in Government. That is the bad news summary.

Mr Speaker, it was very surprising for us that instead of unequivocally announcing the bad news, the President chose to skirt around and avoided a direct announcement as his Government continues the same cosmetics to fight inflation. He instead preferred to find and drag in other innocent persons such as Dr Kizza Besigye as scapegoats for his failings. 

To say, “the Police was able to protect people’s property in the markets and shops from looters organised by Dr Besigye” is very unfortunate indeed. The President did not tell us anyone who was arrested and charged for looting, and who was organised by Dr Besigye, neither has Dr Besigye been arrested and charged for causing the looting of markets by organising looters. For the record, Dr Kizza Besigye is a dignified and respected national and party leader, who advocates for positive change in people’s lives through peaceful means. We demand that this unsubstantiated and wild allegation against Dr Besigye by the President be expunged from the record of this House.

Mr Speaker, the President further found solace in blaming it on the Leader of the Opposition yet he said this was a high sounding title that has no effect on the economy. By so doing, the President was, firstly, abusing the Constitution, because this title is enshrined in our Constitution. Secondly, the President was actually spot-on; he has confirmed that he does not take any advice from us legitimately made for improvement of public services. 

He did not take our advice to make good Basajjabalaba’s Shs 169 billion, CHOGM’s Shs 500 billion, Dura Cement’s Shs 42.5 billion, the Danze Project’s Shs 150 billion, ID Project’s Shs 200 billion, State House’s over Shs 200 billion yearly budget, CMB coffee stolen, grabbing of public land, loans borrowed in trillions to date, Shs 50 billion stolen in the Banana Project in Bushenyi, over Shs 200 billion stolen in NAADS, fake compensations by Ministry of Justice of over Shs 500 billion, UCB and NYTIL giveaways; the list is endless. This stolen money could have been used to make an impact in agriculture, health service, education as well as tame inflation. 

Mr Speaker, there would be no secret State House scholarships, no wasteful jets and no devastation from the nodding syndrome and preventable diseases and even now cattle diseases. To that extent, the President was right because he has ignored our calls for his Government to hold accountable all those who abuse public funds, which would have caused great impact in the lives of ordinary citizens who pay taxes to run the Government.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have used 45 minutes.
 
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I have to make my presentation so allow me to do so.
 
The NRM government has collected the highest revenue in Uganda compared to the past governments, that is, over Shs 11,000 billion per year compared to Shs 5 billion by the past governments. The NRM has ruled longer than the other regimes, that is, for over 26 years. However, it has performed poorly in terms of development coupled with poor service delivery. These past governments collected less revenue but did tangible developments and provided better services. Take Itojo Hospital, for example; when was it built? The members who come from that area will attest to the depressing condition this hospital is in now. This is just one of the many infrastructures that were left behind by the previous regimes, which have been ruined by the NRM regime. How about our public universities? All students were studying for free in the past governments; what went wrong?

Having announced the summary of economic performance for the year, allow me give highlights of some very important matters in this regard, knowing that the respective shadow ministers will make the necessary detailed sectoral responses, the aggregate of which returned the bad economic news. 
 
Where is the cause of the troubles we have? 

We take comfort in the fact that the NRM government is aware of the gravity of the economic decline and its impact on peace and stability. The Background to the Budget rightly confirms the grim shape of the economy. It notes, “This disappointing performance is the result of a remarkably volatile year… Unusually high levels of inflation and exchange rate volatility had particularly severe implications for the real sector, by undermining business confidence in the industrial and services sectors” That is on from page 20. “The temporal lapse in macro-economic stability that characterised the 2011 calendar year was the most important cause of the disappointing growth performance”. That is on page 25 of the Background to the Budget.
 
Which sector should we focus on? 

Mr Speaker, indeed the so-called industrial growth fell to 1.1 percent in 2011/2012 from 7.9 percent the previous year, and services growth fell to 3.1 percent from the celebrated 8.4 percent of the previous year. Agriculture instead returned from a negative growth of 14.6 percent to a positive 7.2 percent. The downward spiral and sluggish reversal in agriculture growth is the result of policy failure in agriculture and deliberate refusal to listen to our appeals to sink money in the sector as a first priority for an agro-based economy like Uganda. This would in turn address the chronic unemployment problem in the country.

Despite the Government’s belated realisation of the importance of agriculture, they still pay lip service to the sector. While the proposed budgetary allocation to the agriculture sector, which is touted as the backbone of the economy, has increased in nominal terms from Shs 434 billion to Shs 585.3 billion, in real terms it has reduced from 4.5 percent last year to 3.8 percent this year. The combined agriculture, water and environment allocation will also drop from 7.3 percent last year to 7.2 percent.
  
Why should such an important sector, which employs over 80 percent of our population, earning nearly half of the foreign exchange earnings, be continuously underfunded, fluctuating between three to five percent in the last two decades? Is it still sustainable to continue blaming poor performance of this sector on drought? 

Why should Uganda continue to be a net importer with a widening current account deficit, currently amounting to -11.95 percent, up from -8.1 percent of GDP in 2008/2009? Unless and until we increase our annual budgetary allocation to over 10 percent, agriculture growth will continue at a snail’s pace. It is high time we took a leaf from Rwanda, which has increased their budgetary allocation to agriculture to over 10 percent in line with the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme (CAADP) Memorandum of Understanding; otherwise, this will deny our smallholder farmers access to market and maximum returns.

The success of the agriculture sector was in the past driven by the cooperative movement but this was badly destroyed by the NRM government. Whereas the United Nations has named 2012 as the International Year of Cooperatives, our Government is only paying lip service. Even then, the remaining cooperative union, Bugisu Cooperative Union, is under threat from Government. We recommend that revival of cooperatives be put high on the agenda to assist rural farmers in marketing their produce. (Interjections) The citizens prefer to see results rather than documents. It is good manners to appreciate. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the Opposition notes with concern that Uganda has a very good young population. Those below 18 years constitute 54 percent of the entire population. Investing in a young population presents a huge resource challenge to all of us, political leaders. Investment in an effective education and skills system is a necessary prerequisite to overall development. Uganda must retool and re-skill her young population to be competitive in the labour market in order to move Uganda from the boda boda and roadside chapatti economy to a vibrant agro-based economy.

We therefore recommend:

•	Implementation of youth oriented agriculture development with agriculture policies that target the youth. 

•	Improvement of traditional methods to attract youth to agriculture through use of mechanised agriculture and appropriate technologies. 

•	Integration of agriculture in education to change the mindset of our youth to motivate and encourage them to explore and tap the opportunities in the agricultural sector.

The World Bank Ease of Doing Business Report has consistently ranked Uganda poorly. For 2012, Uganda has been ranked 123rd out of 183 countries, down from 119th last year and below Rwanda’s 45th position. Our deteriorating position results from four major weak criteria:

a) 	Starting a business dropped by seven points;
b) 	Resolving insolvency dropped by five points;
c) 	Getting credit dropped by three points;
c) 	Enforcing contracts dropped by three points.

Sometimes I feel embarrassed that we now have more lessons to learn from Rwanda than they have to learn from us, given our own history. Our small businesses collapse at the same rate as they are formed. Further, the projected investments planned by Uganda Investment Authority cannot be realised in full as much as the expected employment from them. 

We should stop the habit of promoting foreign investors, like Mehta, instead of equipping our local investors. Those so-called foreign investors take out profits made in Uganda while locals reinvest it here. We warn the current leadership that you are headed for a disaster if you do not streamline the youth funds very quickly. Youth programmes should not be discriminatory basing on political parties.   

Corruption and budget indiscipline continue to dog this country. What we see is a net effect of irresponsible fiscal stewardship of our money. That is why I appreciate the honourable Minister of Finance for being able to say it the way it is. Members, you have to believe her when she says recent years have seen inadequate budget discipline, increasing trends in supplementary expenditure, additional cash limits, intra-year reallocations, delayed releases and the accrual of domestic arrears. You must believe and support her to clean up this irresponsibility, irrespective of which side you sit. (Applause)

We, however, want to remind her that what is going on is more than what she describes. It cannot even be described as corruption or budgetary indiscipline; it is outright open theft and plunder with impunity. Endemic corruption is one of the factors siphoning funds and stunting economic and social development. It is like a tax on public and private funds that is taking away funds that would have been invested in productive sectors to promote economic growth and development. Even the delays in cash releases are caused by lack of cash when required, precisely for the same reasons I have already enumerated. 

The main challenge we have in Uganda is not lack of funds but rather lack of accountability. When Government does not deliver on its promises, a teacher or health worker does not show up for work or an unscrupulous middleman tricks farmers out of their money, nothing happens. People get angry but no action is taken as they have learnt to expect nothing different. To our citizens, the NRM government has become like rain; when it rains, they are grateful and when it does not rain there is nothing they can do. 

If we are to preserve our independence, we must not let our leaders load us with perpetual debt. Our people are tired of wasteful government programmes. They are also angry about the constant spiral of taxes and government regulations, arrogant bureaucrats and public officials who think all of mankind’s problems can be solved by throwing taxpayers’ money at them. 

Transport infrastructure is one of the critical catalysts of development as it facilitates access to economic and social services in any country. Road transport, in particular, remains the most commonly used means of transporting goods and services. However, the road infrastructure countrywide is in a bad state, calling for an urgent review of the much hyped 10-year road master plan. For a land linked/locked country such as Uganda, a well designed, maintained, linked and developed road network is a vital necessity to reduce the cost of transport and bring down the cost of doing business. It is an essential prerequisite for being competitive in the market place. I do not think that the President and his cronies have ever gone out of Uganda. If they had, they would copy what they see there and replicate it in Uganda.

Most of our rural roads remain impassable with heavy vehicles stuck in several feet of mud and passenger vehicles wading through brown stagnant water. In most rural areas such as Karamoja, Elgon areas and Kanungu where the Prime Minister comes from, most bridges have been washed away and farmers cannot take their produce to the market, with transport fares sky rocketing. While 1,855.9 kms of tarmac is proposed for 19 roads countywide, it still refers to the same roads that were on the priority list of the last State of the Nation Address. The question to ask is: Will Uganda ever expand its tarmacked road network at this speed of the NRM? What happened to the budget for these same roads passed last financial year? Who misused/ate the money?

Mr Speaker, this Parliament passed the Uganda Road Fund Act, 2008 which was aimed at assuring funding for road maintenance. In particular, section 23 (3) of the said law provides that, “Road user charges shall be remitted directly to the Uganda Road Fund (URF) on a monthly basis.”  The URF is a special account separate from the Consolidated Fund account, as provided for in the URF Act and Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003.  The URA collects all these levies for and on behalf of the Uganda Road Fund.

Politicians in government are reluctant to relinquish control of the cash flow from road user charges by exploiting Section 14 of the URA Act, which specifically directs URA to deposit all revenues it collects to the Consolidated Fund (CF). They take the liberty to allocate and appropriate only some of the said money to the rightful owner, the URF, and the balance is spent as government wishes. Last financial year, for example, Shs 20 billion was reduced from URF to meet supplementary expenditures of State House. This is very wrong and must be quickly corrected.

We, therefore, recommend that before passing this financial year’s budget, Parliament should put in place measures that will ring-fence the road user charges and specifically require that they be remitted to a specified road fund account in Bank of Uganda, managed by Uganda Road Fund, a fully-fledged body corporate lawfully created for the purpose. The Minister for Finance must be tasked to table a statutory instrument or bring an amendment to the URA Act to make it conform to the law and spirit of the Uganda Road Fund Act. An account of all fuel levies collected since commencement of the Uganda Road Fund Act should also be laid before Parliament for scrutiny.

Mr Speaker, allow me to use this opportunity to put Government on notice that if this money is found to have been unduly diverted to purposes other than road maintenance as lawfully intended, we shall institute public-interest litigation to challenge Government’s continued misuse of the fund, when taxpayers continue to perish in road accidents due to the poor maintenance of the roads across the country. In Tanzania, this was challenged and the Road Fund money is now paid directly to the Road Fund Account. It is respected and is doing well. The reason why it is done in reverse here is because of plunder motives, greed, selfishness and nothing else.  

The last transport train functioned two decades ago when the Uganda Railways Corporation (URC) wound up its services to the nation. The Rift Valley Railway (RVR) Consortium remains a hoax and continues to systematically strip and vandalize the national URC assets. 

Further, the last Uganda Airlines plane graced the skies twenty years ago. The state of aerodromes and airfields in the country is not mentioned in this year’s State of the Nation Address, neither is progress reported on the Kasese and Masindi projects.  Uganda is the only country in the East African region without a national carrier. In addition, the last ship to sail on our lakes, MV Kabalega, sunk ten years ago without replacement leaving Uganda, a country with numerous water bodies, to only operate modern rafts that it calls ferries. 

The 2012 State of the Nation Address does not make mention of the vital need to have an appropriate mix of transport options to ease transport costs and make Uganda a business destination. With Uganda Airlines, Uganda Railways, wagon ferries and the Road Fund already cannibalized by this government, doing business with Kampala will largely remain a mirage. There is an ongoing battle between conscience and self-interest but at some point, we have to take sides because the hottest place in hell is reserved for those who remain neutral in times of great moral conflict.

Poverty

The ultimate wish of poor African countries and responsible governments is to put poverty to the past and place a smile on the faces of citizens. This is a very important motive in appropriating funds. Public funds are allocated to various sectors for government to spend towards making life worth living for citizens, but this has not been the case in Uganda. It is dangerous to have a society, the larger part of which feels their stakes in it have been usurped or robbed because such a section where it may exist will unconsciously want to destroy their very country. But if they feel economically included, then they will want to die for their country.

The recent Poverty Status Report, 2012 is a revealing document and it vindicates us over what we have been saying here over the last 10 years plus. I will just give a small extract from the report for you as below:

•	The absolutely poor were 9.9 million in 1992/93 (56.4 percent); in 2009/10, they were 7.9 million (24.5 percent).
•	The non poor but insecure in 1992/93 were 5.8 million (33.4 percent); in 2009/10 they were 13.2 million (42.9 percent). That is where many of us fall.
•	The middle class in 1992/93 were 1.8 million (10.2 percent); now they are 10 million (32.6 percent).

The poor are those who are in category one. You may also wish not to get confused by the nomenclature “non poor but insecure”. This still means poor, because according to the report, they are able to meet their basic needs but remain insecure and vulnerable to falling into absolute poverty. They are about to fall there anytime. So, these are not really different. The nomenclature was created as a cover to portray declining poverty. 

In the same way, public sector management was created out of public administration to try to portray that a big government was no longer a big problem on the Treasury whereas it is. This extract shows that the number of people wallowing in poverty has increased from 15.5 million (89.8 percent) in 1992/93 to 20.7 million (67.4 percent) in 2009/2010. This indicates an additional 5.2 million people over the seven-year analysis period. This happened as the economy grew in the six percent range over the period. In our view, this is the litmus test for NRM’s stewardship over the economy. Declining economic growth and rising poverty are very good indicators of what is happening in the human development, infrastructure and job creation and livelihood sectors. It is the lowest common denominator of all our actions.

While the country’s poverty rate has halved over the past decades, in terms of sheer numbers more Ugandans now live in poverty than in 1986 when President Museveni took over power. These technical revelations now serve to disprove fervent denials by politicians over the past. Poverty is the reason we are all here on behalf of our communities. Now, this has returned a negative result. What other story does the President have to tell? In our view, it is now judgment time because the President has been allowed enough time to explain himself and his stewardship and the results are up on the wall for all of us to see. Uganda cannot afford to be in recovery mode for close to 30 years yet Rwanda has already taken off, unless Uganda is for the privileged few who have enriched themselves at the expense of the majority un-privileged Ugandans. In fact, recovery should have ended in 1989.

It is now clearly seen that the economy did very badly in the last year. The problems in the economy can only be attributed to three major causes: corruption, bad governance, and the rising cost of living which is a result of the NRM’s poor economic policies. There should therefore be no debate over this, or even blaming those who speak out or respond in various ways about it. The debate must be about how we should accept the truth, get over it, and forge ahead as a country. Our contributions and advice in this regard are always unreserved because we believe this country requires all our minds and hands together to move forward. This country belongs to all of us despite the different ideologies we believe in. No Ugandan wants to live in perpetual poverty, which is unfortunately the case for many Ugandans.

Social Sector

Health

A healthy nation is essential for human welfare and to sustain the economic development of any country. It requires governments to develop a vibrant health finance system to ensure that its people receive quality health services and are protected from associated and unnecessary hardships. It is public knowledge that as a country, we have a long list of unmet health care needs and our public health system continues to suffer from government’s misplaced spending priorities. In fact, our health infrastructure itself is very sick and in dire need of oxygen.

Mr Speaker, this august House will recall that the NRM health policy was to provide a Health Centre IV at Constituency level, bringing the total to a minimum of 215 Health Centre IVs countrywide. The policy also provides for a Health Centre III at every sub-county, making a minimum of 1,000 Health Centre III facilities. District Hospitals should total 112, with Regional Referral Hospitals. 

However, their common features are inadequate funding, no water, terrible sanitation, no drugs, under-staffing, low morale of health staff etc. 

Our women continue to die during child birth at an average of 16 women a day, both at home and in health facilities. This is clearly evident from my recent oversight visits to several health facilities upcountry, including Kabale, Iganga, Gulu, Tororo, Mulago, Itojo, Kasese, Fort Portal, Kisoro, Kanungu, Mbarara, Pader, Atutur, Bugiri, Arua among others.

The health infrastructure lacks preparedness to deal with any health disaster or emergency. Nodding disease in Northern Uganda is a living example of this lack of preparedness. The readiness, durability and resilience of the health infrastructure do not meet the growing health needs of the country. I wish, therefore, to send an early warning signal to the NRM Government that you have not built any capacity over the last quarter of a century of your corrupt rule to handle any epidemic including HIV/AIDS, in spite of the enormous resource flow - both in loans and grants - in the health sector.  Primary Health Care (PHC), drug distribution systems, curative and palliative care, lack effective coordination, leading to resource waste and failure of the health system.  So, what can the NRM Government do for the people of Uganda, with or without money?

	Those responsible for our health system are often globe-trotting to get the best treatment in the best hospitals where patients are treated quickly, efficiently, hygienically and with respect.  Our health system will not improve by just appointing some junior and obscure well-paid NRM cadres in State House to go around harassing and lecturing poorly-paid but well-trained senior medical officers. 

We can no longer continue to take pride in burying citizens whom we fail to look after, when they are in most need of our assistance.  We lost and buried Prof. Kakoma, Prof. Ssenteza Kajubi, Prof. Nabudere, Hon. Wanendeya, Cuthbert Obwangor, Lord Adimola and just yesterday our colleague Hon. Michael Oromait, who waited for 5 hours at a health centre with no help, and many other Ugandan citizens whose deaths could have been avoided. These are clear signs that the health care system is in dire need of urgent attention.

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, we, therefore, recommend a universal health system where every citizen enjoys financial protection from prohibitive health care costs and everyone is able to access good health services when they need them. This is possible. It is a matter of commitment by Government.

Education

Mr Speaker, education is the most powerful weapon you can use to change the world. It is universally recognised as one of the fundamental building blocks for human development. However, in Uganda, the misconception attached to the notion of free education has made the parents to relinquish their due responsibility. The question we have to answer as representatives of the people is whether we should shift from improving schools to improving parents’ welfare. This is the fundamental question we have to answer. 

Government must stop paying lip service to this sector, and proceed to adopt and implement the comprehensive recommendations and proposals the Opposition made in our last year’s response to the State of the Nation Address. Mahatma Gandhi said, “The three priorities should be Education, Education, Education” and you can see where India is today.  Instead of concentrating on this sector, we are treating teachers with disdain and dishing out school land to supermarkets, denying the schools land for expansion programmes necessary to improve the quality of education. Shimoni Demonstration School, Kyagwe Road Primary School, Kololo S.S.S. and East Kololo Primary School are just a few examples.

It is sad to note that all the good old traditional schools like Ntare, Mwiri, Nabumali, Tororo College, Vurra, Boroboro, Nyakasura etc. have been destroyed in this regime.  

The private schools which have bombarded this country in the name of development can only be afforded by the few privileged against the majority poor.

It was very unfortunate for Government to promise a pay rise for teachers this financial year, only for the President to threaten that teachers who demand for a pay raise would be fired and new ones recruited to replace them. It is very sad indeed, it back-stabbed our teachers.  We refer His Excellency the President to his own book, The Mustard Seed, about the science teachers.

Mr Speaker, before I conclude, allow me make a few comments in response to two other important issues mentioned by the President in his State of the Nation Address. I already mentioned that, because the economy had bad news for especially the President, he had to find someone to blame for it. But among all those he chose to blame, we are wondering why the Head of State should insult the media, the fourth state. It is not acceptable for the President to call the media a “corrupt, irresponsible and unprofessional group” without naming the people he is particularly angry with and thereby “grouping” the media as a whole and tagging them as such. 

The question that begs for an answer is whether the grand corruption that is crippling citizens was caused by the media. Is the media the “group” the President spoke about, when he reportedly told the President of Rwanda that Uganda is full of thieves? Are the media and DJs the ones always implicated by the Auditor-General and the IGG over massive theft of public funds? It is unfair for the President to engage in diversionary tactics, instead of tackling the grand corruption exposed in Government involving high ranking officials. 

We, therefore, recommend that the Leader of Government Business, on behalf of the President, retracts this unfortunate statement and assault on the media, to pave way for democratic development. (Interjections)

The President also lamented on the rising prevalence of HIV/AIDS, and blamed it wholly on promiscuity.  All the gains made so far are starting to get lost, primarily because of the loss of focus on the matter by our leaders. The reason this is happening, in our view, are the mixed and confused messages the President and his advisors are sending to the population.  At one point, he tells them to produce as many children as possible; after all, China has over 1 billion people, yet it is developed.  At another point, he tells the youth to rush and get circumcised enmasse, suggesting to them that there are greater chances of surviving HIV infection when exposed, if one is circumcised.  With all this mix-up, what do you expect?  Circumcision has always been a matter of custom, tradition and religion, just as it is in Bugisu, Sebei, Kasese and Islam. It has been practised long before HIV/AIDS came to be known. If circumcision were such a wonder gimmick for HIV prevention, why is there HIV/AIDS in Bugisu, Kasese and Sebei regions? 

Even if it were that effective, you cannot package the circumcision message in such a dangerous manner.  So, someone is misleading the country to commit mass-suicide by enticing the youth into circumcision as a means of surviving HIV/AIDS.  This is murder and we recommend that the President must get back to the drawing board as the chief PRO.

Conclusion and Way Forward

The State of the Nation Address came at the end of a very difficult year.  The President was constrained to swallow it, and he had no other option but to address us.  Matters that have kept Ugandans in poverty are now well known.  We just need the will on the part of our leaders to tackle them squarely.  Someone must decide to put 10 percent plus of the budget funds into agriculture for this year. Universal Health Insurance must start. Someone must punish harshly, or allow to be punished, those caught in corruption acts, and stop scape-goating and delaying this.

Mr Speaker, the present Government has pushed people too much to the corner. We know the primary concern of NRM leaders is to remain in Government at any cost as miseries of people multiply many-fold, since the 2011 Elections. Most of our people can no longer afford fuel and the business community is hurt by the increased bank rates, fuel prices and the rising electricity tariffs, but their cries are not heeded to. Our job is not to wait until Government falls into our hands like a ripe fruit, but to continue pressing for the desired change. (Applause)

Decency must be restored onto the public Treasury.  We want to see that public funds are spent only for economic rewards for citizens, not for political expedience.  People must be allowed to say and do their will as provided for by the Constitution of Uganda.  We demand recommitment and political reforms now, to guarantee that space for Ugandans, and put in place a framework for an independent Electoral Commission. We also need to operationalise funding of political parties as per the law.

Mr Speaker, what Ugandans want are not the usual sort of empty promises, as I have described in paragraph 4 above, because these have become stale.  We cannot as a country continue to be kept in an economic intensive care room for over 26 years. (Applause) It is now time for us to unplug all these tubes and gadgets around us, and walk out of this room to our economic freedom and health, and demand that whoever is making us bleed is made to answer.
	
The way forward for this nation is to recast her priorities and remove the political, administrative and budget distortions, inconsistencies and contradictions, corruption and waste. Otherwise, the 2012 State of the Nation Address can only be characterised and rated as a Moses Golola performance, much hyped and yet non-performing; simply empty talk. (Applause)
	
Steven Jobs, an American businessman, designer and inventor had this to say, “Your time is limited, so, do not waste it living someone else’s life. Do not be trapped by dogma, which is living with the results of other people’s thinking. Do not let the noise of others’ opinion drown out your own inner voice and most importantly, have the courage to follow your heart and intuition. They somehow already know what you truly want to become. Everything else is secondary.”

I want to thank you, Mr Speaker, for bringing us safely to where we are now, one year down the road. The turbulence in the journey notwithstanding, we are still here together. That is enough testimony of the resilience of Parliament to withstand storms. The Opposition is a strong advocate of parliamentary independence and autonomy. We will, therefore, continue to do all in our power to ensure that the Constitution is respected, that Parliament is respected, that the media is protected to play their professional role as the fourth state and the people’s voices are allowed space to thrive.

I thank you very much, God bless you. For God and my country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have listened to the Leader of the Opposition. The motion is that thanks of Parliament be recorded for the clear and precise exposition of Government policy contained in the State of the Nation Address by His Excellency the President to the Parliament on Tuesday, 7 June 2012. That is the motion.

I should propose it for debate, but as I said at the beginning, there were issues that we had consulted with the whips of the different parties in this House, on how to proceed with this debate, and we are still waiting on responses.  

I am hoping that I will get that feedback this evening so that by tomorrow, we will be able to have a more organised debate on this particular matter.

MS KABAHENDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was here last week on Wednesday and I received a copy of the response to the State of the Nation from the Leader of the Opposition. I religiously read it and kept it, and I deliberately picked the copy that was given out today, but I have discovered I have two different copies. I want to come, specifically, to responses 30 through 34. They are very different from what I have today and even the page numbering is quite different.

I would like to seek from you, procedurally, which of the two copies I am supposed to discuss. Both copies claim to have been delivered to you and us on 7th June 2012, but I have two different responses. I would like to know from you how I can proceed when I start debating.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The reply to the State of the Nation Address is part of the debate on the State of the Nation Address. That is the opinion of the Opposition on that and they are entitled to change their position as they like. We will go by the presentation captured by the Hansard.

MR SEMUJJU NGANDA: Mr Speaker, we are on item number five, “Debate in reply to the address on the State of the Nation delivered to Parliament by His Excellency the President on Thursday -” The guidance I am seeking -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, continue downwards. 

MR SEMUJJU NGANDA: “Motion that thanks of Parliament be recorded for the clear and precise exposition of Government policy contained in the address on the State of the Nation by His Excellency the President to this Parliament on Tuesday, 7 June 2012. “

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And down there, response.

MR SEMUJJU NGANDA: “ - Response by the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament to the address on the State of the Nation delivered to Parliament by His Excellency the President on Thursday, 7 June 2012.”

The guidance I am seeking from you, Mr Speaker, now that the Leader of the Opposition has delivered a very good address is, Shall we be accorded an opportunity to thank him?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, in the course of the debate, you can thank the Leader of the Opposition for his response because that is what it is. It is a response to a statement and that is why it is part of the debate on the motion. So, you can have the opportunity to do this.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The guidance I am seeking is still under item number four on the Order Paper. The last phrase there is “Tuesday, 7 June 2012.” When you get to that of the response by the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament to the address on the State of the Nation delivered to Parliament by His Excellency the President on Thursday, 7 June 2012 - these are things, which are being captured in the Hansard. Which of those two days is the correct one? Is it Tuesday or Thursday? The date is the same, but the days are different. This is just to capture the right information in the Hansard. Mr Speaker, I beg your indulgence.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk-at-Table, can we correct that? [Mr Sebunya rose_] Are you contributing on this? Yes, proceed.

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the indulgence. Now that the Leader of the Opposition has responded to the President – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, we are talking about the date. 

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: I thought it was –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was the statement received on a Tuesday or a Thursday?

MR SEBUNYA: It was a Thursday, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that so? Let the record be corrected accordingly. Next item.

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Mr Speaker, I was seeking guidance – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Next item, please.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE DELEGATION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES ON A WORKING VISIT TO MALAYSIA, 3RD – 9TH MARCH 2012

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall the circumstances under which this report had to be brought forward. It arose from the urgent statement raised by the hon. Brig. Charles Angina on the statement on his visit to China. He talked about the condition and circumstances of sexual slavery that Ugandans are being exposed to. It was this statement that made us to bring all these matters forward. We had intended that these reports on this particular item be brought together because it was handled by three different committees – the Committee on Equal Opportunities, the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development. 

There was supposed to be harmonisation in the process so that we handle this specific item on sexual slavery at once. But it now looks like they are full reports and the focus now will be complete reports on the different aspects of the subject. Now that it has been captured this way, I invite the chairperson of the equal opportunities committee to present her report in 15 minutes.

4.45
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES (Ms Anifa Kawooya Bangirana): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Taking into consideration that the Leader of the Opposition took some time, I will try to be as fast as I can. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: 15 minutes.

MS KAWOOYA: I appeal to you honourable members to bear with me in case my speed is too fast. Allow me present a report on the findings by the members on the parliamentary Standing Committee on Equal Opportunities during their working visit to Malaysia from 3rd to 9th March 2012 on the issue of Ugandan women trafficking and sexual labour. 

On return from that trip, the committee made a brief statement to this august House on the issue and promised to present a detailed report that captured areas of interest which were, but not limited to, issues of gender equity and equal opportunities; the extent of compliance by the government of Malaysia in addressing issues of gender disparities; strategies and action plans that the government of Malaysia has in place to address issues of inequalities and marginalisation; and sharing experiences on how public bodies have been able to develop equality schemes. The relevance of the visit was that lessons that would be learnt would assist the committee in pushing the agenda of equal opportunities as mandated under Article 32 of our Constitution. 

I wish to report that the general report points out interesting findings and practical initiatives which the government through the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development would adopt. For example, the committee established that in Malaysia, all people with disabilities are registered into a national database and there is a monthly allowance of $100 for those who earn below $70 per month. There is a special grant of $1000 given to each person with disabilities to start a business. There is a programme in place which provides the youth and people with disabilities with practical skills so that they are employable. Budgets for ministries are vetted by gender focal persons before they are submitted to the Ministry of Finance. The government of Malaysia preserves one percent of the public service jobs for people with disabilities.

It is the committee’s humble prayer that time is availed for this august House, in accordance with our Rules of Procedure, that debate on the full report will be done so that recommendations, findings and other measures could be adopted by this House. This would help the government to address the challenges, ensure equality and equal opportunities especially to the vulnerable groups. I now wish to lay on Table the full report on the visit to Malaysia by my delegation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that as such.

MS BANGIRANA KAWOOYA: Mr Speaker, let me now address myself to the unfortunate circumstances the Ugandan girls were found to be experiencing in Malaysia.

Background

Due to public outcry and testimonies of victims as well as heart-breaking pictures of girls murdered in cold blood that had appeared in the media in February this year, hon. Monicah Amoding, the Female Youth MP, raised the matter on the Floor of this House and the Speaker referred the issue to the Committee on Equal Opportunities to handle.

It is from the above background that a three-member delegation travelled to Malaysia on a fact-finding mission. This delegation comprised none other than hon. Kawooya, the leader of the delegation, hon. Florence Ibi Ekwau, member and hon. Kenneth Lubogo, member.

Summary Findings

The committee established that human-trafficking is an offence against human dignity; it is a crime in which human beings, many of them young girls, children and married or unmarried women, are bought and sold and often sexually abused by violent criminals and drug dealers. This is modern day form of slavery as the victims are always confined, held in bondage, treated as commodities and stripped of their humanity.

These girls, in most cases, are lured into sexual slavery with promises of jobs that offer economic gain, and at times under the disguise of student scholarships, as most of them travel on student tickets. The whole process is very traumatising and heart-breaking, as it was narrated to the delegation. The delegation established that there were detainees who had been convicted and were serving their jail terms; those who were waiting for sentencing and; others who were living in detention camps.

Mr Speaker, there was a claim by the Ugandan Consulate that was published in our media here that there were 600 Ugandan women prostitutes in Malaysia, a claim that was not supported by any statistical data. When the delegation visited Kajang Prison, which is the government’s main prison – the equivalent of Luzira Prison, only 13 detainees, of which two were elderly women above 40 years, were confirmed to be in detention. One of them had been convicted by hanging, six were serving their jail term and six were awaiting sentencing. The delegation established that there were 21 girls at the detention camp who had served their jail sentence and were awaiting deportation. 

An interaction with the first set of girls – because they were released in sets; they were not allowed to come out at once - nine in number, met acute hostility. Even before the delegation could introduce themselves the girls were inquisitive on the intention of the delegation and what course of action would be taken after talking to them. 

The interaction with the second set of girls raised the concern that the intention of the delegation was to gather information about them, broadcast it in the Ugandan media and use their identities in the newspapers, that they were prostitutes in Malaysia, which would anger their relatives.

On analysis of the information given, the delegation realised that their actual identities were hidden as 10 girls said they were students, except one; they gave us different backgrounds and origins. They seemed to have been coached on what to say because whatever they were saying was uniform. When the delegation proposed that the Government of Uganda repatriates them back home - we even proposed that we could come back home with them - seven of them declined on grounds that they had their own tickets, save for four, and they were not willing to be repatriated.

The chief trafficker, commonly referred to as Mama Tycoon, was also in the same detention camp with these girls, but she vehemently declined to meet the delegation, even after having been allowed to come out of the cells, for fear of being identified. This lady insisted that she was not willing to interface with the delegation and it was said that she had hired the services of the best lawyers in Malaysia. We established that she had paid about $100,000 in advance for her case and she said she did not need any assistance from anyone. Because of the long procedures of accessing detainees in the prisons, and due to the short programme, the delegation was not able to interface with the other 21 girls who were in detention camps.

The moment of truth came and it was very emotional. One of the old ladies requested that she interacts with the delegation in camera without the presence of the other girls who looked much younger than her. Close interaction with her revealed beyond reasonable doubt that all the girls who had appeared before us earlier were not students, but prostitutes. According to her, all the girls were exported - they use the word “exported” - to Malaysia by a racket of men and women deeply involved in human trafficking. She further revealed that the traffickers recruit girls to work in the salons, homes and any other cheap labour only to be manipulated on arrival in Malaysia. 

On arrival, their travel documents are confiscated yet they are forced to pay back the cost of travel together with the accommodation costs, which is to a tune of $7,000.

The delegation established that the traffickers are well connected and have got many branches in big cities in Asia. There are branches in Bangkok, Kuala Lumpur, Hong Kong, China and Indonesia, where prostitution as a business is on high demand. Entry into these countries and cities is mostly not restricted.

Mr Speaker, here, I want to report that a person who is being taken, for example, to Kuala Lumpur, which is in Malaysia, has to go through West Africa. From West Africa, she has to walk about 400 kilometres by road to the border. She is going to Asia, but she is in West Africa. So, the process they go through takes not less than 10 days to reach their destinations and by the time they reach, of course, they are already traumatised and exhausted.

The delegation learnt that some of the girls are rounded up either from the streets without relevant documents or are smoked out of the brothels where they go to sell themselves. On arrival, the girls go through a process of initiation and rituals as hon. Angina said. They swear an oath of secrecy and each girl is expected to pay 300 Ringe per night, an equivalent of $100, which is given to her by the client who will have used her for that night. The name they use for their business is referred to the client in that format. The girls have no control over their bodies as any excuse of being worked out is not entertained. This was very disheartening because most of them say, “We are forced to sleep with more than four men.” Why? They have no control over their own bodies.

Whereas the night proceeds go to the traffickers, the girl is expected to sleep with more men during the day, at times more than four, in order to raise more money for her upkeep and other personal essentials. 

Honourable members, sincerely, this is not an easy business. Four men? 

The delegation further found out that after the girls have served their jail term, they are driven to detention camps waiting processing of their travel documents, which is like sentencing them again. Once the documents are in place, the detainees leave the camps straight away to the airport without interacting with communities in Malaysia, regardless of whether they are relatives or not. They are not even allowed to collect any of their personal effects. On inquiring, we were told that these are the rules there; from detention, you are deported straight away.

The delegation further established from the prison records that the chief trafficker, the one referred to as Mama Tycoon, who had taken the girls to Malaysia, was HIV positive. She was on treatment. She was receiving treatment and these unfortunate girls whom she brings are recycled round the same men who were used by her when she had just started her business. This means that by any standards, most of the girls are infected with HIV/AIDS.

The delegation noted that the traffickers did not want these girls to get independent or permanent men. There are those ones who are willing to get married to their boyfriends who are all Nigerians, but the traffickers would not allow this. They guard them jealously, to avoid losing their business because they do not want to go through the same hustle of “exporting” them again. Those who try to flee or escape are treated very harshly to the extent of some of them losing their lives as was reported in the media, and some of the pictures that came out in the media. Extremely, unfortunate. 

The delegation was given contacts of the traffickers - their contact points in Uganda and contacts and buildings in Malaysia. At one stage, we tried to sneak there, but we were warned that we might find these gangsters and they would finish us off. So, we did not reach. This information has been passed over to the relevant authorities and the committee wishes to applaud the efforts of the anti-trafficking Police unit on their recent apprehension of one of the traffickers which -(Interjections)- I am hearing from a colleague that she has escaped. 

One of the detainees was a convicted prisoner charged for drug trafficking and waiting her day of hanging. It was very emotional sharing with her, her experience and her messages to her relatives. She looked relatively old and in her 60s. She had appealed against the sentence of hanging, but chances of being pardoned are very slim. The delegation was made to understand that her case had been brought to the attention of Government through the Uganda Consulate in Malaysia. The committee could not, however, establish what action Government has so far taken in this regard as we interacted with officials from Foreign Affairs. 

Ugandan Consulate in Malaysia

The delegation noted that the consulate was not effective and efficient due to the absence of staff at the station. Colleagues who have been to Malaysia can bear with me; most of the time you find your own way to that country. For example, on asking for the data about the 600 Ugandan girls reported to be in prostitution and the particulars of those in detention, the consulate could not provide any. There wasn’t any record.

An interaction with the girls became tense as earlier said as the girls kept on blaming the consulate officials with a claim that the consulate sends their pictures and other details about them to the Ugandan media referring to them as prostitutes instead of helping them to return home. 

The girls claimed that the consulate staff do not attend court sessions to be updated on what transpires in court. 

Even when they call these officials in advance to inform them about court proceedings, they do not appear. Worse still, after their sentence, the consulate officials are nowhere to be seen and as a result, the girls are taken back to detention camps to await processing of their travel documents. This was what was told to us after a long interaction with them; about five to six hours.

A visit to the office of the consulate with a hope of discussing the findings and an immediate way forward to rescuing these girls, led us to the consulate’s residence and the team was able to discover that the residence of the consulate served as an office.  Here, I want to say that by the time the delegation went, the consulate, her Excellency was on sick leave and she was here in Uganda, but we had interacted with her before we went.

The delegation further established that one Ugandan student was working at the consulate as a driver and at the same time was the one carrying out day-to-day duties and activities of the consulate, rendering the office ineffective. My colleagues will bear me witness here that the gentleman did not have the ethics of diplomacy. 

This, therefore, goes to Government, if there is a will to have a consulate in Malaysia, it is high time Government came up with measures to upgrade the consulate to a mission and appoint competent officers to manage the mission.

The committee went a step further and interacted with officials from Ministry of Foreign Affairs on the issue. In an attempt to find a solution to the problem of women trafficking with his Excellency, Ambassador James Mugume, the Permanent Secretary of Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Ms Bati Kawooya, the Head of the Diaspora division. Issues discussed focussed on: 

i.	Controls in place to curb the vice of human trafficking that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs had in place.

ii.	Whether the ministry has a database of Ugandans living abroad.

iii.	Plans and Strategies that have been put in place to address the issues of sexual labour/slavery and exploitation as well as human trafficking.

iv.	The fate of the women who are now in detention in Malaysia and those trapped in different countries.  

Responses that were given

Mr Speaker, these were the responses the officials gave: 

The ministry does not have tight mechanisms to stop the act, but is trying through an Inter-Ministerial Committee, which again is under the Ministry of Internal Affairs, to come up with some solutions which may include asking the Government of Malaysia to control or refuse liberal or free entry of Ugandan women into Malaysia, and to include strict scrutiny of the travellers’ destiny, sponsors and upkeep costs in terms of finances that they have on themselves while in Malaysia.

The Inter-Ministerial Committee was carrying out an inventory of all cases received with an intention of engaging the missions who issue out visas, travel agents who arrange for their travel, and even the airline carriers, to see how they could work together to curb this vice.

The ministry informed us that they were planning to hold a massive public sensitisation campaign to create awareness in the masses, which will gradually be rolled out to other parts of the country. This one they said that they were carrying out a study in that area. Whatever they meant.

The ministry did not have data on the Ugandans living abroad, but holds annual Diaspora events at the missions to create an opportunity for Ugandan citizens to register voluntarily and to know each other. That is all they had done in that area.  

On the issue of the women who are in detention, the officials said that while they share the pain and they are concerned, there was need to respect the jurisdiction and national laws of those countries. We had to put it to them that the lady who was sentenced to hung was elderly and she was sick and HIV positive.

The committee learnt that there is an organisation known as International Organisation Movement in Malaysia, which had offered to bring back some seven women who had served their sentences some time back, but they declined.

The ministry officials noted that there is need to review the Trafficking in Persons Act that was passed here in 2009 and was assented to by the President to ensure stringent punishment for the traffickers and their accomplices, though they did not spell out areas they wish to see reviewed.

Recommendations

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee wishes to recommend as follows:

Trafficking being one of the world’s promiscuous evils today, Government should employ a comprehensive strategy with emphasis on rescuing victims and helping them restore their dignity. This is as per the requirement of our Constitution.

Government should immediately put in place mechanisms to rescue and repatriate all the victims that are currently in detention camps in Malaysia and in various countries.

Government should increase funding to the ministries of Foreign Affairs and Internal Affairs as well as that of the missions abroad if they are to effectively curb the vice.

Government should enhance its efforts in monitoring and combating sexual labour and human trafficking both domestically and internationally.

Government should establish a Human Trafficking Survivors’ Centre that provides shelter, counselling, health services and vocational training among others to the victims before they are re-integrated back into society. This can be done through the sector line Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.

Government should review the policy on labour export and the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should review the licenses of companies exporting labour on the international market. When you read the petition that was passed over to the Gender Committee, these are some of the issues that they had asked about, because the policy on labour exports at the Ministry of Gender - the way it is carrying it, that is how the vice is continuing to escalate.

Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should carry out media and public campaigns and vigorously sensitise the public on the vice of human trafficking, sexual slavery and forced labour so that it helps other victims.  

Ministry of Foreign Affairs should put in place a Data Registration System of all its citizens at the embassies and missions abroad. You can imagine, even when some of the Members reach those countries, the embassies do not know whether you are in there or not. So, it is very important who is where.

The Trafficking in Persons Act 2009, should be effectively implemented to ensure human rights and social justice to all Ugandan citizens, because that is why it was passed. 

Anti-trafficking Police Unit and Interpol should seriously crack down on the syndicate that facilitates the movement of prospective victims of human trafficking and sexual slavery and bring them to book.

Given that many Ugandans are engaged in different business dealings with Malaysia, it is one of the prospective developed countries for the year 2020, the committee recommends that the consulate be elevated to a mission status handling both Malaysia and Singapore - they are close to each other and the vice is also common in Singapore - and an effective and efficient officer be appointed to immediately take over to oversee this mission.

Conclusion

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee notes with concern the unfortunate circumstances under which the Ugandan girls are living in Malaysia and other countries, in form of modern sexual slavery, and it is our humble prayer that the ministries of Internal Affairs, Foreign Affairs and the missions abroad should closely pay attention to the absurd modern slavery in form of sexual exploitation and human trafficking and put in place stringent measures to check this vice. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, as I have said, it is our wish and prayer that we be given time to discuss other details of the report. I beg to move and I thank you for listening. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. As you can see, she has extracted from the report this specific subject which made this particular report to be brought forward. As a result, we will not debate at the moment; we will receive both reports. I will ask the chairman to make the presentation and then we proceed.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS ON THE WORKING VISIT TO THE EMBASSY OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA IN BEIJING AND THE CONSULATE IN GUANGZHOU, CHINA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, I want you to extract this particular subject and deal with it so that if we are going to do any short debate, it will be related to this subject. You can lay the rest of the report on the Table and we proceed at a different time.    

5.13
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr Alex Byarugaba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable colleagues, I have been given the honour and privilege to make a short presentation on the issue regarding Ugandan prostitutes in China. I would like to lay this report on the Table. 

As indicated and agreed upon earlier on, I would like to, first and foremost, thank members of this august House for having taken off their time, especially those who have had an opportunity to travel to visit our embassies and missions abroad and come up with very important reports and information for this august House. However, I kindly request that in future when you visit those missions, which you must do whenever you visit any country, please be kind enough to share the information with the committee taking charge of that particular sector. I will be very grateful. All the same, I want to thank you very much.

As indicated, I will go to page 2 straightaway because I agreed with the Speaker to only talk about the issue on table.

The sessional Committee on Foreign Affairs, in performing its oversight function, conducted an eight-day official visit to the Embassy of the Republic of Uganda in Beijing and to the Consulate-General in Guangzhou, China. This was from Sunday, 20 May 2012 to Sunday, 27 May 2012. This eight-day working visit was conducted to interface with the two missions on many crosscutting issues as follows - Of course, I will not go into that. 

The delegation was composed of the following members:

•	Hon. Alex Byarugaba, chairperson and leader of delegation; 
•	Hon.  Annet Nyakecho, member; 
•	Hon. Susan Amero, member;
•	Hon. Ssempala Mpuga, member; 
•	Hon. Charles Angina, member;
•	Hon. Emmanuel Dombo and hon. Jack Wamai-Wamanga were co-opted on this delegation. 

I now want to take you to page 10, because the rest is all about foreign affairs issues. I want to take you to page 10 of this report regarding the visit to the Consulate in Guangzhou, China.

Introduction  
Fully aware of the circumstances under which the visit was conducted, and concerning the issues which were raised on the Floor of Parliament concerning the existence of this consulate, the committee is delighted to inform the House that the mission exists. You all recall what had transpired in this august House earlier on - (Interjections) - On page 10, honourable members. 
 
The committee further wishes to inform the House that contrary to what was earlier reported, the mission has premises and does not operate in a hotel. The head of the mission and officers are well accommodated. The mission address is: Consulate-General of the Republic of Uganda, Unit 2812, No.28 Hua Xia Lu, Tianhe District, Guangzhou, People’s Republic of China. The telephone number and the fax are clearly indicated.

Findings 

With the growing business between Uganda and China and the increasing number of Ugandans who travel to China for business, the consulate should have been opened much earlier. Nevertheless, it is already there and you are free to go and get consular services whenever you are in Guangzhou or you have any other problem.

I now take you directly to page 12 on matters affecting Ugandans in Guangzhou. It is also important to note that whereas very many African countries would have loved to have their consulates in Guangzhou, only four have so far managed to be given that privilege and Uganda is one of them. The others have been refused for reasons known to the Chinese Government. I think it is important to note that your country is highly regarded in some of those circles. 

Matters Affecting Ugandans in Guangzhou, China

We were able to meet some Ugandans and we were told about their plight. Whenever someone is arrested with an expired visa, the fine charged, without any due recourse to the law, is automatically US$ 1,000 or 5,000 RMB yuan. The Government should negotiate for the fines to be waived to allow Ugandans who want to return home do so.

We were also told that there is a challenge of HIV/AIDS-related deaths in Guangzhou and whenever somebody dies, the Chinese do not allow bodies to be taken back to their countries. They are cremated, which I think most of our cultures do not agree with. 

As earlier reported by the Beijing mission, the sentence for drug trafficking, which is very prominent among the Ugandan community, is either life imprisonment or death. Eighty-two Ugandans are in these prisons all over China. The list is attached as an appendix. They are not held incommunicado. If anyone of you has relatives or somebody you know, please contact the embassy or the consular-general and we will be able to get in touch with them.

We were able to meet Ugandans who have been living in China but whom I must say were former traffickers. The consulate found time and opportunity, brought them to their side and made them renounce their earlier bad practices. These are their leaders, the leaders of the Ugandans living in Guangzhou: 
 
•	Meddie Kalule Kantoloze, who has lived in Guangzhou since 2008 and works with Kantos International. He is the vice-chairperson of Ugandans living in Guangzhou. He was one of the top traffickers. 

•	Rehema Medina Namutanda, who does any job that comes around. She is the secretary and treasurer of Ugandans living in Guangzhou. That was exactly how they described themselves. 

•	We also met one professional, Ricky Okao. He is a food scientist by profession. He used to own and run a company but he closed it. Currently, he helps Ugandans looking for equipment and machinery in the food science field and other fields. He has been in Guangzhou for the last 10 years and is also known as the “Lord Mayor”. We did not hear anything negative about him. He does very clean business and any of you who wish to do business in Guangzhou can get in touch with this man.

•	Kalule Mastulah, who has been in Guangzhou for six years and works with the BMK Group of companies in Guangzhou. 

•	Finally, we met the famous Ali Mwanje, known as Ali Baba, who has been in Guangzhou for six years and also works for the BMK group of companies in Guangzhou. Most of these people do good work for Ugandans who go there now. These are people you get to and they take you around Guangzhou to help you identify what you want to do as far as business is concerned. 

Honourable colleagues, I will not take you to page 15, and I will skip the rest. What I have given is some sort of background. 

Ugandan Sex Slaves in China (Prostitution)

As there were no reported cases of Ugandan prostitutes in Beijing, the focus in this part of the report will be on Guangzhou. Prostitution by Ugandans is so rampant in Guangzhou that you may not believe that actually one of the major road sections in Guangzhou has been taken over by your brothers and sisters practicing prostitution. They start business from around 5.00 p.m. The whole street is full of Ugandan prostitutes by that time. It was so sad and very shameful; I do not know how to describe the scene that I saw. 

Background

There is a large number of Ugandans living and working in Guangzhou. Some of them are living and working there legally while others are illegal immigrants.

The illegal immigrants either travelled to China using forged documents, other people’s visas and passports under false pretence, or have expired visas. Most of these Ugandans are not officially employed but are engaged in different trade. A number of them are engaged in the shipping industry, some work as guides for Ugandan traders while others work as agents for businessmen and companies based here in Uganda. All that is not bad. 

Prostitution: The Inside Story

The committee was shocked to learn that prostitutes were Uganda’s biggest export to China. The committee was also shocked to learn that most of the Ugandan prostitutes do not engage in the trade willingly but they are duped into it.

There is a cartel of Ugandan “businesswomen” and “businessmen” who lure Ugandan women into China promising them teaching jobs, work as boutique attendants and other low-qualification high-remuneration jobs. The cartel promises the women and girls that they would be paid well and that all their needs would be met. The girls are recruited, helped to get passports, visas and air tickets.

After arrival in China, their passports are confiscated and they are asked to refund the costs associated to their travel by engaging in prostitution. The women, most of them very young, are often required to pay between US$ 3000 and US$ 8000 to purchase their freedom. In this arrangement, the pimps require the women to pay them US$ 100 dollars every night for as long as it takes to clear their debt to the cartel.

The Other Side of the Story

There are also reports of Ugandan prostitutes who are helped to travel to China for “greener pastures”. These Ugandans who are already engaged in the trade travel to China well knowing that they are travelling to work as prostitutes. One of them is called Maama. She receives all those prostitutes. She told us openly that she was already engaged in the trade and she is doing fine. 

The problem with this arrangement is that when they arrive in China, those who helped them to travel confiscate their passports and force them to refund up to US$ 8000 for the help they received. While some may argue that it is not human trafficking if one travels willingly and does the work they expected to do, it is illegal for one’s passport to be confiscated and for them to be forced to pay another person such an amount of money for help received.

Returning Home

Many Ugandans in the trade have demonstrated an interest in returning home. They have many times approached the consulate requesting for assistance to return home. Even without their passports and without any travel documents, they still want to abandon the country and return to Uganda. Unfortunately, the embassy and the consulate in China, and Guangzhou in particular, as is the case with all the other countries where the vice is common, do not have the capacity to help Ugandans who want to return home.

Possible Interventions

1. 	Since the girls and women who are trafficked to do prostitution in China are lured using the promise of jobs and studies abroad, government should crack down and immediately stop the media announcements which make people believe that there are jobs in China. They lure innocent unsuspecting girls into the drug trade and prostitution.

2. 	Since witnesses are available to share their experiences as prostitutes in China, action should be taken against those implicated in these testimonies. On this, we were told to go a little bit slow because the Consular-General was still trying to gain their confidence so that more information could be revealed, especially on people who do it here. We asked them about their names and these people were so cheeky about it; they would only mention one name - Isaac, Joseph, Maaso-ana. You could hardly trace such people. 

3. 	Embassies in China and countries where the vice is rampant should be equipped and funded to fight the vice and take action against the perpetuators.

4. 	The matter of passports being used to illegally take sex slaves out of Uganda arose. The committee recommends that passports should not be issued to third parties or brokers. Further, biometric data should be captured before passports are issued as this will help reduce the number of people who travel using false documents. We were wondering why biometric data is taken when you want to get a driving licence and it is not a requirement when you want a very important travel document.

5. 	While prostitution is illegal in Uganda, the prostitutes continue to parade themselves on the streets of Kampala and to operate in several areas around Kampala. The committee recommends that the vice should first be tackled from here before interventions are extended to other countries. (Applause)

Observations and Recommendations

The committee observed that there is little action being taken by Government to address the issue of drugs and human trafficking, which has resulted in Ugandans being imprisoned in China while others are enslaved sexually. You saw the list of 84 known prisoners, and there are those who are not known. They are our brothers and sisters in Chinese prisons. 

The committee therefore recommends that the investigative bodies of Government take an interest in the drug trade and human trafficking. Investigations should be carried out immediately, culprits apprehended and deterrent sentences passed on to them. 

Honourable members, I wish to end here. The rest is the nitty-gritty about foreign affairs issues. As you had earlier on indicated, time will be made available for me to lay more reports on foreign affairs on the Table. I do wish to move and I thank you. (Applause)
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had intimated at the beginning that we would have to close by 6 o’clock to allow our Muslim colleagues go and break their fast. Secondly, we have rearranged matters of public importance to come towards the end of each sitting rather than at the beginning, and I have two members who would like to raise some urgent matters. So can we engage in 15 minutes and contribute on this particular issue? Hon. Wamanga-Wamai, you were part of the people that travelled; why would you want to contribute? Please, let the others first talk since you were part of the people that travelled. Two minutes each.

5.34
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Mr Speaker, I would beg for your indulgence –
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Two minutes.
 
MR OKUPA: I am so disappointed that nothing has been done to sort this problem. When I was saying that I needed some time, it is because this problem started in 2008. We started raising this matter in 2008 in this House but I am so disappointed that up to today, no serious action has been taken by the central government to address this matter.
 
I stated here that –(Interjection) - I do not need your information, honourable minister. You will respond, do not panic! Since that time, members have been raising that matter. On 8th February this year, we again raised this matter and that is when your office directed an investigation into this matter. It was said that by March a report would have come out. 

However, there were issues that the ministry was supposed to deal with, one of which was to secure the 16 women who were rescued by Lt Col Lockwood from the US Army in Iraq because they were being harassed, even here in Uganda. Up to today, I am in touch with these women and they are still being harassed and followed by Lt Col Mudoola and this lady called Kanyike of the Uganda Veterans Development Limited, a company that is registered under the ministry.
 
The Minister for Internal Affairs at that time committed himself to protect these ladies but up to today, they are being harassed and looked for and so they are hiding. That is why I am saying that Government has failed to help. Are these not Ugandans? This Lt Col Lockwood flew here from Iraq wanting to make a statement, but they dodged him and he flew back without making a statement. His intention was to ensure that the remaining 130 women in Iraq are brought back, but up to today, no single person has been brought back. This is why I am very annoyed with the Ministry for Gender. So when the minister jumps up and says that he wants to give information; what information are you going to give? We are so hurt that our sisters and mothers are being hurt and raped and you are keeping quiet. 

People in the US called me when I raised this matter to go for training on this issue of human trafficking. If the foreign governments are so interested, what are we doing? Why are we in Government? You have heard what hon. Hanifa Kawooya has told us about what our sisters are undergoing in Kuala Lumpur and what Brig. Angina raised here about why women are suffering in Guangzhou, China. What are you saying? 

Can we please rise up to the occasion and raise these issues? Can someone tell us today why there are 130 women languishing in Iraq being raped and you are keeping quiet? (Interruption) 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: I thank you very much, colleague. Mr Speaker and colleagues, the issue of Ugandans abroad is a very serious one. Uganda opened a consulate in Guangzhou not to even promote trade but to offer consular services. The trade between China and Uganda is seven to three in favour of China. The whole purpose of opening a consulate – This work could have been done by an honorary consulate instead of opening a consular-general. The consulate in Guangzhou opened –
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Information?
 
MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Yes, I am giving him information concerning the prostitutes and what our mission in Guangzhou is doing. The mission opened in November last year, and you will recall that I raised the issue on this Floor that the money had been sent and the mission was opened in 2010. So, this should be noted. 

Our Consul-General and consulate should help Ugandans to come back to this country by issuing them with travel documents because their passports have expired and they can no longer show those passports because–
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Wamanga-Wamai, that is no longer information. Let us not violate the rules. 

MR OKUPA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. There are even members in this House here who have lost money to this company called the Uganda Veterans Development Ltd, and a point in case is Col Mugenyi. This lady called Kanyike took money from the wife of Col Mugenyi saying that she was going to take his voters to get jobs but they never took people. So, members of this House are victims. The honourable member was telling me here that it is now even a problem to him in the constituency because this company took money, registered boys whom they brought here and kept and then abandoned them after they had paid money. They “ate” their money.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okupa, we do not have Col Mugenyi in this House.
 
MR OKUPA: Col Mwesigye. I am sorry. I wish he was here. So when we are talking about this issue, we are talking about Ugandans. An attack on a Ugandan wherever he or she is, should be an attack on Uganda, and we must all rise up to defend, protect and bring them back home -(Applause)- irrespective of how they went out there. If they arrest any criminal here who is an American, the Americans will first want that American back home and then they will deal with him back at home, but here we are. 

This lady called Kanyike used to work in State House. That is where she used to work. She is one of those people who are now busy defrauding people in this country. Please, can you help us and have shame and protect the Ugandans. This company should have been deregistered. The ministry pretended to suspend the licence of this company but they reinstated it. Why? There is this gentleman who is the head of the labour export unit in the ministry –
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I said two minutes. Is somebody timing his two minutes?
 
MR OKUPA: I am just concluding, Mr Speaker. A gentleman called Milton Turyasiima is the head of labour export in the ministry. When contacted, he said that these companies are vetted by internal security. Are they really vetted? How are they doing this business if they are vetted? Did they carry out due diligence? 

It is good that this matter is with the Committee on Gender, and I want to appeal to hon. Nokrach to speed up the process because there are so many interested parties. We want to see these sisters and mothers of ours come back home safely. Let them come and die here other than dying out there. I thank you, Mr Speaker.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I said two minutes for each member. I do not think this was timed. I do not know who made the mistake. 

5.42
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the two committees for the reports that they brought to the House today. I have two issues. 

Firstly, the fact is that a number of these women suffering out there in China, Malaysia, want to return home. From the accounts of the foreign affairs committee on page 16, they actually want to come home. The constraint that they have is how to come home in as far as travel documents are concerned. I would like to ask Government, if this is really a caring Government, why our consulates in these two countries cannot provide a simple travel document for these girls to return home. Do you really care for the citizens of this country? 

Both reports state that you even do not know how many of your people are out there and yet you are eating money that was supposed to be used for registration of citizens of this country. Projects that should bring this information on the table are being mismanaged. I think you need to wake up. You have gone to sleep long enough. The front bench needs to wake up.

Secondly, I would like to even strengthen this using the report presented by my sister, Anifa Kawooya. On page 11, she reveals that there was a meeting between the committee and some staff. (Member timed out) 

5.45
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is unfortunate that I am not a commissioner so I may not be allowed even two minutes, but a commissioner was able to take 10 minutes of our 15 minutes. 

Mr Speaker, UWOPA, which is an association that brings together all the women in this Parliament, was the one that pushed for a Private Members’ Bill to stop trafficking in persons, and it was passed overwhelmingly in the last Parliament. We were aware at that time that women and children were the commodities that are being used for trafficking. We women have been very concerned that not only are our fellow women being used as commercial property but also our children. 

Today, in the Ninth Parliament, so many years after we passed that Bill, we have in this Parliament this kind of report, where on page 15 I am being told as a Member of Uganda Parliament that prostitution is the highest export to China. How did you value that prostitution? Is it by counting the heads of the prostitutes? It is a shame to me and to my generation and the generations after me that we, women of Uganda, have become the hottest export commodity in terms of sexuality. Really, how can I -(Member timed out.)

5.47
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the committees for the work well done in visiting these countries and for the good reports. I really feel very disappointed with what we have heard from this report, that our children, our girls, are being forced into sex. It is unfortunate, and I believe Government needs to take immediate action because it is not fair. It is against somebody’s dignity because people have a right to choose to have sex or not to have sex. 

Being deceived that you are going to get jobs and work and after reaching there you are forced into sex is very unfortunate. I believe that if the government cared, it would have taken some steps a long time ago because this is too much. I say this because I remember in my Senior 4, when I was going to do my last exam, somebody attempted to rape me. So, I say this from experience - (Interjections) - Government has delayed to help these girls. They must be suffering a lot. It does not call for muttering; it is okay, do not mind. 

I urge the government to act very fast and do something about this because it is a serious issue. Mr Speaker, I also want to urge the government to try and improve these embassies. (Member timed out)

MS AOL: Mr Speaker, this is something that touches many of us very much. I would rather have a few people speak but they are given ample time to express themselves. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal was still raising issues of UWOPA; UWOPA brought a Bill here and it is now an Act which is not even being popularised. So, it is very important that a few people contribute but let them contribute meaningfully. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, those who stand to speak for two minutes have accepted the conditions. This debate cannot be closed today, we will have to continue at an appropriate time but I have to close at 6.00 p.m. That is my target. So, I have to allow the honourable members with urgent matters to raise them before I close at 6.00 p.m.

5.50
MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I also want to thank the two committees for their detailed reports. The two countries, Malaysia and China, are an indicator of what is happening in other countries. Our neighbouring country, Sudan, is taking our young girls, even at a very young age of 14 years, and they are also there suffering. 

Mr Speaker, I think we should look at the cause and treat the cause. We should stop looking at and treating the symptoms. I want to urge the government to vocationalise education in order to equip our girls and women with skills such that when they come out of school, or when they drop out at any level, whether primary or secondary, they should have some basic skills to look after themselves and their children. Because of the challenges in the education system, most of our girls only look at commercial sex as the only way of earning a living. As a result, we have had unwanted pregnancies and abortion. We have lost many of our children because of involving themselves in commercial sex. 

Mr Speaker, in this budget which we passed, there was money for students’ loans. Some of our girls and women involve in commercial sex as a way of looking for school fees. Therefore, maybe if this students’ loan scheme becomes effective, some of our girls will not continue being victims of such circumstances. (Member timed out)

5.53
MR RICHARD TODWONG (NRM, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I pray that the minister for national guidance is listening to us because we all feel touched. Prostitution, witchcraft, corruption and drug trafficking are things that we feel so concerned about as Ugandans, but allow me concentrate on prostitution. 

We cannot, we shall not and we might not constantly deliberate or pass policies to prevent or stop prostitution. I want to ask this question: Is there anyone amongst us who is surprised why there is a drastic increase in the rate of HIV/AIDS infections in Uganda? This could be an explanation. As we see Ugandans going out of the country - my sister talked about Juba, the capital of Southern Sudan, a place I know so well -you will find our ladies doing tomato selling or working as petty traders during the day, but in the evening they are doing something else.

This is about morality. Can we legislate over morality? Where are our national values? How do we handle this as a country? It is a national shame, Mr Speaker. We need to have time and discuss this a little deeper. Sex education cannot be legislated and concluded. It touches on the family morals, values and cultural issues and religious norms. It is a cross-cutting issue. 

When you hear that Ugandans are exporting sex, when you hear that our girls outside Uganda have been turned into sexual slaves - Even nationally here; leave this Chamber - it is already 6.00p.m - and drive along the streets, even at the gate of Parliament, you will just begin seeing girls with short skirts. What is happening to this country? (Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this debate will continue tomorrow over this same subject. For now I would like to adjourn the business on the Order Paper to allow the hon. Michael Mawanda and the honourable member for Adjumani to raise their issues of national importance quickly before I adjourn the House.

5.55
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, you will recall that during the last session I raised the issue of Uganda’s candidature for the post of General Secretary for OIC. I recall you directed that the Minister of Foreign Affairs and that of finance bring to this House an updated report in respect of Uganda’s candidature.

Up to now, neither of the ministers has come to this House to update us on the status of Uganda’s candidature in regard to this issue. So, Mr Speaker, I now request that you direct these two ministers to come to this House and report on the status of Uganda’s candidature in that regard. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The OIC in full is the Organisation of Islamic Countries. It is an organisation to which Uganda is party. What is happening, because we should have taken the secretary generalship this term? What is happening is the issue, and a question was raised but up to now there has been no response given to the House? Honourable minister from foreign affairs, do you have something to tell the House?

5.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR REGIONAL COOPERATION (Mr Asuman Kiyingi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank hon. Michael Mawanda for raising that important question.

I would like to say that Uganda’s candidature to the Organisation of Islamic Countries is a matter that Government of Uganda is taking very seriously. As a matter of fact, it was a decision of Cabinet to front one of our own, the hon. Isaac Isanga Musumba, as Uganda’s candidate for that position.

We have started the campaigns. We have written to different heads of state. However, we have budgetary constraints which we are addressing. The elections are not immediate; they will be held next year. Yes, we have hardly a year to go but we are taking all the necessary measures to carry out an effective campaign. Everything staying constant and God willing, we shall secure that job for Uganda. I thank you.

5.58
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. I rise on the issue of mistreatment of some of the Ugandans who go to Southern Sudan either to trade or search for employment. The mistreatment is characterised by harassment, torture, and some people have even lost their lives. In that regard, I wish to get an explanation from the responsible minister as to why our people are harassed, tortured and sometimes lose their lives. 

Two, why is there over taxation against Ugandan traders? More importantly, allow me to say that Ugandans have identified Southern Sudan as an employment centre but it is now very difficult for these Ugandans to get employed there, let alone retain their employment. I also would like to seek an explanation on what we plan to do to cause a harmonious stay for our people in Southern Sudan. 

Lastly, Mr Speaker and the honourable members, we have Sudanese refugees coming to Uganda. Over 1000 of them have already registered in Adjumani. How are we going to stop people from retaliating against these Sudanese based on the bitter experience by our people who meet bad situations in Southern Sudan? Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, a substantial petition on that matter was presented to this House and it is still before a committee. I would like to ask you to take any other additional information that you have to that committee. That will help the committee to present a more enriched report. Giving an explanation now would be pre-empting what will come from the committee.

Honourable members, the whips are again reminded that there will be a meeting tomorrow on structuring how to handle debate on the State of the Nation Address. The time is 10 O’clock and the venue is the Deputy Speaker’s Boardroom. Please, whips, or your representatives, come and we discuss this matter. Yes, we have had a preliminary meeting but please come and we finalise tomorrow. House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 6.00 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 25 July at 2.00 p.m.)

