Tuesday, 28 July 2015

Parliament met at 10.28 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. We had agreed to start at 10.00 a.m. but there have been some consultations relating to some of the items on the Order Paper that caused the delay. 

Honourable members, you will recall that on Thursday, I informed you that debate would start today on the motion for counties and Article 179 but it has come to my notice that the committee is not ready. They will be ready by this afternoon, in which case we will not be able to put it on the Order Paper but debate will be taking place on the motion for creation of new counties tomorrow; that is why it is not on the Order Paper. The rest of the items on the Order Paper will remain as they are and we will proceed with them as such. 

Again, I urge the whips to do the needful so that we have the necessary numbers to handle this matter. Thank you.

10.31 
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a motion for a resolution of Parliament of Uganda and it is being moved under the privilege, it is a motion without notice and –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, we do not have a motion. Are you seeking leave of the House or something like that?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. I am seeking for leave to present a motion and this is in respect to the privileges -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are seeking for leave of Parliament to present a motion without notice?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Yes, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Based on the privilege rule, Mr Speaker, and it is provided for under Rule 50(1)(a) of our Rules of Procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not know the substance of your motion but when you move a matter under the privilege rule, I will have to direct it to the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges to handle and then report to the House. That will be the challenge.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion without notice and it is in that respect that I seek your indulgence.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, can we agree that the member can move a motion without notice? Let us agree on that and then at an appropriate time on the Order Paper, we will reflect that as a motion to be moved appropriately when the time comes. If it is the very next one then we will move to it but if it is not, the Order Paper will be amended accordingly to accommodate this motion without notice.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE TOBACCO CONTROL BILL, 2014

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you will recall that when we reached Clause 15 we had a discussion and there were some challenges with the way we were proceeding and there were delays that required consultations. Indeed we had asked the concerned members and the mover of the Bill and the ministers to try and harmonise and come back with a harmonised position so that we can see how to progress with this Bill. 

We did that before and when the matter came back there were issues raised from the Member for Budadiri West that the due consultations had not been done. Therefore, I would like now to ask him to report to us if the necessary consultations were done.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. We held a meeting as you directed on Friday and we harmonised our position only that I have not got the minutes of the agreed positions. I hope those who worked on it have not adjusted contrary to what we had agreed but we met.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do we have a record of the agreements that were recorded and was it served to the members who were party to the meeting?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Maybe before the minister comes, my brother Fox Odoi-Oywelowo has just given me the list of those who attended, I do not know if he has gone through the minutes. We were 17 including hon. David Bahati as our Chairperson and our secretary was the mover of the motion and that is where my worry is. Hon. Rosemary -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You should have been the secretary then.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We wanted to give an independent member but we believe she has captured everything rightly. Mr Chairman, that is what I can say but hon. Fox Odoi-Oywelowo was there; he was not invited but eventually came.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. It is true that we met 17 members of the committee and harmonised. We scrutinised clause by clause of the Bill and we are now ready to proceed. Our attorney was hon. Fox Odoi-Oywelowo and he has gone through all the legal issues that we discussed and we are ready to report and have a report that we can lay on the Table.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  And it was not as duly submitted to the chairperson of this meeting?

MR BAHATI: I was the chairperson of the meeting - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, the chairperson of this meeting –

MR BAHATI: Oh, to the chairperson of this meeting? We sent a copy, Mr Chairman, to the Clerk to Parliament; we had hoped that they would bring a copy to you but we have another copy here.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, so it goes back to 14 also? Can we go back to clause 14(2) since we are at committee stage so we can move together?

Clause 14

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We had taken a decision on this but since we are still at committee stage, we can handle it again.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. On clause 14(2), we agreed to retain 65 per cent graphic health warning on the principal display area – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: To retain from where?

DR BITEKYEREZO: To adjust; we had wanted to substitute “75” with “60” per cent but we agreed in the meeting that we should now substitute “75” per cent with “65” per cent.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Was that the agreement, members?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, Mr Chairman, that is the agreement.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I now put the question to that amendment? I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 15

DR BITEKYEREZO: It was on the sale and display of tobacco and tobacco products. In Clause 15(1) (a), to delete the words “tobacco or” appearing in line two of the provision. The justification was to restrict the application of the provision to tobacco products.

And then in Clause 15(2), we wanted to replace the provision as follows: “(2)A person shall not import, manufacture, distribute, process, sell, offer for sale, or bring into the country – 
(a) 	an electronic nicotine delivery system, including the electronic vaporisation device or cartridges with nicotine- containing liquid or other substances to be vaporised;
(b) 	a water pipe tobacco delivery system, including the water pipe device or the water-pipe tobacco product or other substances to be used in the water-pipe delivery system;
(c) 	a smokeless or flavoured tobacco product.”

The justification is that due to the increasing health effects of a newly engineered flavoured tobacco product through a water pipe - shisha – that is scientifically proved to be even more dangerous than cigarette consumption, there is need to ban the importation, manufacture, distribution, possession and sell of water pipe tobacco delivery system, and all flavoured tobacco products.

In Clause 15(3), we agreed to maintain the provision as it is in the Bill and insert the word “prominently” between the words “not” and “display”.

Then in clause 14(4)(c), to delete the entire paragraph.

The justification is that a ban on duty free sale of tobacco products which are mostly for export only would have little or no impact on reducing tobacco consumption in Uganda.

In clause 16(5), to re-phrase the provision to read as follows: “A person shall not import, manufacture, distribute, sell or offer for sale a unit packet of tobacco products unless the packet is intact and contains at least 20 sticks of cigarettes or 20 sticks of cigarillos or 20 sticks of any other tobacco product or 100 grams of a tobacco product.”

The justification is that the insertion of the words “at least” is to ensure that the quantity of 20 sticks of cigarettes described is the minimum. We are also trying to discourage the young people from buying cigarettes. 

The deletion of the word “tobacco” is to restrict the application of the provision to tobacco products.

In clause 15(7), substitute “one hundred currency” points with the term of imprisonment.

For clause 15(9), substitute for the word “shall” appearing in line – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, in clause 15(7), what are you substituting?

DR BITEKYEREZO: We are substituting “one hundred” currency points with “twenty four currency” points.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay.

DR BITEKYEREZO: The justification is to make currency points commensurate with the term of imprisonment.

Clause 15(9), substitute for the word “shall”, appearing in line two with the word “may”. The justification is to allow the judicial officer to use his or her discretion in applying the provision.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay, honourable members? I only need to confirm in sub clause (2) – the original word in the Bill was “possess” and I heard you read “process” and yet there is “manufacture”. I do not know whether you want to say “manufacture and process” or was it the issue of the word “possess”? Is it to process or possess?

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, it is the word “possess”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But you read “process”. Okay, the word in sub clause (2) therefore is “possess” and not “process” as earlier on said. Yes, hon. Nandala-Mafabi?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, all those apart from (3) – what we took and I will read verbatim: “Tobacco products at points of sale must not be prominently displayed in such a manner as to be visible from the outside or handled before purchase provided that the point of sale may designate a specific area which can only be accessed by persons above the age of 21, where tobacco products may be displayed without being visible from outside.”

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think the agreement was that they will be displayed but not prominently; then the details will come out in the regulations. We didn’t go into those details of age and so forth but we agreed that it will be displayed but not prominently then the details would come later in the regulations.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Sub clause (3) says, “A person shall not prominently display….” The word which has been inserted is “prominently”. Would that take care of the rest of the things?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It will be the assistant Attorney-General to advise. (Laughter)

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, first the member for Budadiri has no authority under the law to appoint an Attorney-General but I am an attorney, anyway. (Laughter) I think the minister has captured the argument and it covers the concerns that we raised at that meeting. Therefore, I advise the Member for Budadiri West to drop his view.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The chairperson of the committee read clause 15(4)(c) as 14 – I would like to take note of that.

Then also in clause 15(5), there is no direct link between when you say “at least” and you are creating the number of sticks that must be bought. It is like a restraint of trade because you will realise that many mature people who are of smoking-age have no money; they can go and buy according to their buying capacity. However, if you put a limit that you have to buy from this, it will in a way discourage trade.

Therefore, I do not see a direct link between buying and the age because it appears that where the committee chairman grew up from, the young people used not to have money but these days in Kampala, you have young people who have got money whereas there are older people who do not have money. Yet the majority of the smokers are actually those – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can we deal with this? Is it about one stick or something?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The intention of that provision is that we want to discourage children from being able to buy cigarettes. Like now we do have a challenge with alcohol because they package it in very small sachets and the information we are receiving is that children in primary school can afford alcohol and they even carry these sachets in their school bags. 

The intention here is to make the packet for at least 20 sticks and that will be a little bit costly for the small children so that it is the smoking adults who can be able to afford the cigarettes. That is the reason behind this because we do not want to just say “sticks” where children can also afford to buy them.

MR SSEWUNGU: I thank the minister and the chairperson. That limitation is not bad and I will give you a scenario. My father owned a shop which sold cigarette sticks. What is happening in the villages is that they send children to buy the sticks from the shop. However, the good shopkeeper will wrap the stick.

Secondly, most of these smokers in the villages even share one stick. Others buy a stick and smoke half of it and keep the rest for the afternoon because they cannot afford. Therefore, you are limiting something that is very difficult. 

What provision have we put into the law that will stop children from carrying cigarettes for their parents from the shops because most of these smokers have children whom they send? However, there are procedures in some good shops where the shopkeepers wrap them in paper.

I am giving you information as I conclude. So when you limit me from buying one stick, how can you stop me from buying half a kilogramme of beans because I do not have money? 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Well, our work as Members of Parliament is to legislate and the enforcement and implementation of the law will be done by others. However, we have provided an age below which we shall not allow cigarettes to be sold to. If there are people ready to break the law, then that is a different issue but ours is to make a provision in the law and we are saying that we allow packets that should contain at least 20 units to discourage and make it hard for children to be able to afford cigarettes.

On the issue of implementation, we have provided for how enforcement will be done in the law.

MR NZOGHU: I thank you, Mr Chairman. The clarification that I would like the minister to give to the House is whether a packet of 20 sticks will limit children from buying. I do not know whether the minister has put into consideration the children from different environments. For example, children from rich families can actually buy the sticks in boxes. Yes, there are children from Kololo and Muyenga who can. Therefore, which children are we talking about? There are also children from Kasese who can afford to buy more than a packet.

Mr Chairman, I think that restricting it to only 20 sticks may not work because there are children from well-off families and can buy as many sticks as they can. Therefore, the minister should actually look for an alternative that can handle this situation.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Please just hold on. Do the cigarettes include cigars? Some of these cigars are packed in threes and fours by their own design. Does this also cover the cigars when you say packs of 20 because they do not come in 20s?   

DR BARYOMUNSI: Once we pass this, this is going to compel the manufacturers to always put at least 20 sticks regardless of whether they are cigarettes, cigars or any other tobacco product that is processed. The minimum will have to be 20 in that packet – (Interjections) – but can you clarify as you suggest? What are you suggesting? 	(Laughter)

MR SSEWUNGU: I thank you – I am on the Floor. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What is going on here?

MR OLANYA: I thank you. I really feel talking of buying more than 20 sticks is not very logical because back in school, we used to contribute money to buy certain things. A situation will come when pupils will sit and contribute money to the sticks. The best that I think we can do is to remove the 20 sticks and we get the best alternative.   

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, at the level we are, there is no clarification required but only proposals needed so that we move forward.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Mr Chairman, I would like to share with the members that the manufacturers should have an intact packet of cigarettes such that we do not say that we have one, three or five sticks in a packet. It should not matter whether it is a packet of 20 sticks as long as it is sealed. Therefore, it is upon whoever is inconvenienced to contribute money to buy the packet of cigarettes rather than saying –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Procedure. 

MR SSEWUNGU: I thank you, Mr Chairman. I see a situation where the movers of this Bill do not have enough information on how cigarettes are sold. Secondly, it is not only about manufacturers like BAT and the other big companies but there are also local companies - the Ssewungu-based style of companies that make their sticks out of tobacco and sell in the village.

My procedural issue is: Are we procedurally moving well with these people handling only registered companies and leaving out the others that sell local tobacco made out of taaba and wrapped in leaves? How are you going to monitor all these people by putting such a law – they sell in both bundles and per stick and you are saying manufacturers. How will you arrest my people in Kalungu and yet they are making money? Dr Baryomunsi knows this because he is from a tobacco growing district.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is not a procedural issue.

MR SSEWUNGU: Procedurally, are we moving well?  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, that is not a procedural point.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Chairman, I think that hon. Ssewungu should read the Bill and look at the definition of a tobacco product. You heard the committee chairperson remove the word “tobacco” from those provisions. Therefore, those local people in Kalungu who just wrap raw tobacco into leaves are not covered here because we are talking of processed tobacco. 

When you read the definition of processed tobacco in the Bill, it refers to the manufacturing and packaging where they must at least place 20 sticks or units into a packet that must be intact. I do not see a problem. Yes, people may go around and try to defeat it but it will be discouraging to those who easily buy cigarettes especially the children and youth.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: On what point does the honourable member from Adjumani rise? Amendment? Yes.

MS ABABIKU: I thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to propose that that part be withdrawn because based on what I have listened to carefully, the essence of putting the 20 units relating it to the children is to ensure that the children are not used to carry these products or buy them. Therefore, I propose that we insert that, “Children below 18 be barred”. If it is already there then why bring the issues of the age and narrowing the issue of the 20 units to children?

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, that particular clause as it stands even with that amendment of inserting “prominently”, is very difficult to enforce. This is a clause that allows display and also disallows it. It bans display in part one and then says, “Momentarily at the time of sale or transaction” Now at what stage, if you found a tobacco product on display, the person displaying it will say, “I have just put it there momentarily because somebody is about to buy”. Then who is going to determine the prominence of display as proposed in the amendment of the chairperson that a person shall not “prominently display”. Who is going to determine the prominence of display? In my opinion, I would rather have that particular clause deleted because I don’t see how we shall enforce determining the prominence.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Epetait, you could help us because we are on sub clause (5); we cannot have too many discussions on too many things at the same time. We will not take decisions.

Honourable members and those who are moving this Bill, suppose you stop at “packet is intact” and you leave it there instead 20 sticks? There are variations in these things. If you stop at the product unless the “packet is intact” and stop there -

MR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, we concede on leaving “the packet intact”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What will it read now? “A person shall not import, manufacture, distribute, sell, or offer for sale a unit packet of a tobacco product unless the packet is intact.” Is that okay? I now put the question to that. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Was the member for Ngora raising an issue which we have taken a decision on?  Yes Ngora what were you raising?

DR EPETAIT: Well, Mr Chairman, in respect of what was – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The issue was, “shall not prominently display”. I think it is a factual situation - prominently display - if they catch you, it will be a matter for interrogation by the courts. If they find you and they determine that actually it is prominent then you take the fault. In other words, it is not going to be the MP for Ngora to come and say now this is the one. (Laughter)

Can I put the question to this, members? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 16

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, when we had a meeting we agreed to maintain the provision as in the Bill and we also agreed on the principal to protect minors from the health problems of exposure to tobacco and we agreed to keep the age of 21 years defined in the interpretation.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 16 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, on clause 17, regulation of tobacco products, 17(1) to insert the words, “or other disclosure” between the words “emissions” and “requirements.” The justification is to broaden the provision.

Then clause 17(2) to delete the entire provision. The justification is to avoid unnecessary repetition.

In clause 17(3) substitute “one hundred” currency points with “twenty four” currency points. The justification is to make currency points commensurate with the term of imprisonment.

Clause 17(4) to substitute word, “may” appearing in line two with the word “shall”. The justification is to ensure the application of the provision is made mandatory. 

Clause 17(4) (c) substitute the words “six months” with the words “one year”. The justification is to make the provision more deterrent.

Clause 17(5) substitute the word “shall” appearing in line two with the word “may”. The justification is to allow the judicial officer use his or her discretion in applying the provision.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay?

MR OBOTH: I agree with most of the proposed amendments except the one that interferes with the sentencing powers of court in sub clause (4) where a person convicted under this section is a corporate entity, the court – the committee is proposing “shall”. In addition, you have to know that this is an additional sentencing. If you feel that this is the appropriate punishment then put it in the previous section or clause so that it becomes the whole punishment for this.

In sentencing, you cannot usurp the discretionary powers of court and then say “shall” after convicting and sentencing and then you say, “in addition you shall…” again add this.

Mr Chairman, I am finding difficulty unless I am helped. I propose to retain the word “may” in the Bill.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The man is a medical doctor; he wants a surgical detail. I now put the question to the amendment as proposed by the chairperson of the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 18

MR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, we agreed in our meeting to delete 18(2) and 18(3) and we agreed to draft 18(4) to read as follows: “Records and documents related to interactions, communications and contracts held between the government on tobacco industry shall be transparent, documented and open to the public.”

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, what the chairman has raised is right but also we said they must be kept in accordance with keeping of government records. The reason is, if you are saying “open and transparent”, for which period? The government has a record that for documents to be archived they must be there for a period of seven years and then you remove and put them in the archives. Therefore, we would like to put the words, “It shall be transparently documented and open to the public and kept by government according to the law relating to records.”

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, I agree with what hon. Nandala-Mafabi has said.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, that is okay but it is superfluous. There is a separate law which provides for how Government records are kept. You don’t need to repeat it here. Once it is a government document, there is a law that governs how it should be kept.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But is it declared here that it is a Government record?

MR RUKUTANA: As long as it is a government document, there is a separate law that stipulates how government documents are kept so it would be superfluous to put it here.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What the member is saying is that there is no reference to this being a Government record. Is there reference to it being a Government record, in which case it would fall within the -

MR RUKUTANA: Because it is to say, contract signed between Government and the tobacco industry etcetera.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if you look here, one would suppose that it means the industry or the government because these are the records, if you know where it is coming from. They are saying, the tobacco industry company and of course the sellers, may submit records and it means that they will also keep the records. In this regard, we need the Attorney General to read this very carefully. It states, between Government and the tobacco industries. They have not specified who keeps them, unless we come up and say, the records may be kept by Government and we specify this.

Mr Chairman, as I look through this, there is nobody who is responsible. Are you telling us that it is the tobacco industry or Government?

MS BETTY AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think the title of this subsection is, “Duty of Government” and if you read carefully, (1) states, “In the implementation of this Act and of any public health policy related to tobacco control, it shall be the duty of Government to….” Therefore, anything which falls in this is already, by reference, Government duty. Therefore, I would request my colleague to concede.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, having heard from the lawyer from Oyam, I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Can I put the question to the amendment?

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, in sub clause (4) entitled, “Records and documents”, there is a small typographic error but it would read, “Records and documents related to interactions, communications … shall be forwarded to the committee by the authorised…” I am wondering, to which committee because -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, you are reading something else. They have proposed to delete that and substitute it with what the chairman has just read: “Records and documents related to interactions, communications and contracts held between the government and tobacco industry shall be transparently documented and opened to the public.” Can you read it as there are a lot of issues with the text?

DR BITEKYEREZO: We said, “Records and documents related to interactions, communications and contracts held between the government and tobacco industry shall be transparently documented and open to the public.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is it “contact” or “contracts”? Yes that is what I asked.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, the word is “contacts.”

DR BITEKYEREZO: “Contacts”, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, it is “contacts” not “contracts”. Can I put the question to that amendment? I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 19

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, we agreed to maintain the provision as in the Bill and delete the word “strictly” appearing in the fourth line of the Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, there is a proposal to delete the word “strictly” in line four on top of page 27. I put the question to that amendment.

MR OBOTH: May I benefit from the proposed amendment as to why they are removing the word “strictly”? In my limited thinking, I thought “strictly” there was emphatic in the drafting and you are going to make it more fluid for Government. Why are you removing the word “strictly” when actually, this is, in my limited knowledge, better drafting for emphasis? 

Before I am taught by the Chairman of the Board of Bugisu Cooperative Union, let me -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that person in the House here? (Laughter) This place is restricted to Members of Parliament. 

MR OBOTH: Who is also a Member of Parliament from Budadiri. It is stated, “… interact with the tobacco industry except where it is strictly necessary.” The words “except” and “necessary” would be the driving force to have the word “strictly” there. However, I wanted to benefit from the rationale of removing this word. I was proposing and I still propose the retention of the word “strictly” as it is for emphasis.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Mr Chairman, would you like to withdraw that amendment and we proceed?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the reason for using “strictly” was that BAT should not be able to meet Government but should be strictly for that. I want to read from the text, which says, “Enforcement shall not interact with the tobacco industry except where it is necessary.” We are trying to remove the word “strictly” because if you leave the word there, you are saying that you cannot interact unless it is basically for that item.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment to delete the word “strictly” in clause 19.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 19 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, we agreed to keep the provision in 20(b) as it is in the Bill and include the phrase “For avoidance of doubt” at the beginning of 20. We also agreed -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What is the justification? Why are you avoiding doubt there?

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, when we were seated with the lawyers, they have those words - I do not know how they use them every day - “without reasonable doubt” and they say it is for purposes of making sure that their language flows the way they want it. That is the argument for leaving the words “reasonable doubt” there.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In other words, you do not believe in it? (Laughter) Does “for the avoidance of doubt” import doubt? Does this clause import doubt? Attorney General, how do you start with “for the avoidance of doubt”? For the avoidance of doubt means you have made some statements before and now you want to clarify. Do you now want to avoid doubt before you have said anything?

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think the chairman should quickly concede on this one because as you have rightly guided, it is not the normal way of writing these provisions. Therefore, I beg that the chairman saves Parliament’s time and concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Attorney-General, they are saying, immediately after clause 20, “For the avoidance of doubt, a person ….” How does it come for the avoidance of doubt?

MR RUKUTANA: If the quarrel is on starting -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There is no quarrel here, honourable member. (Laughter)

MR RUKUTANA: If the discontent is on starting the paragraph with the words “for the avoidance of doubt”, I do not see any problem. It has happened very many times.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What has happened very many times?

MR RUKUTANA: Starting a phrase with the words, “for the avoidance of doubt” and continuing.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Even where it is not necessary?

MR RUKUTANA: No, only where it is necessary.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is it necessary in this case, learned Attorney-General?

MR RUKUTANA: Let me direct my mind to it now.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, the phrasing of “avoidance of doubt” was a consensus builder in the debate we had in the committee. However, there was no strong commitment to this. I think the Attorney-General can give us more details on this.

MR OYWELOWO-ODOI: Mr Chairman, to the best of my recollection, “for the avoidance of doubt” should have been introduced by other people not the Attorney-General. I request that we drop it.

MR RUKUTANA: Having directed my mind to it, I do not think that it is necessary to put it here. (Laughter) That is my considered -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Learned opinion?

MR RUKUTANA: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 20 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, we agreed to the original provision as in the Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 21 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, we agreed to maintain the provision as it is in the Bill.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I think there was a recording problem here. This clause deals with staff and one of the things we discussed was that even staff can make mistakes, intentionally or recklessly. Therefore, we also have to punish them as we are trying to punish the industry. This is in relation to conflict of interest and bribery. 

I think one of the things that came up clearly was that the staff must be imprisoned –like we stipulated in the Auditor-General’s Act – for not less than five years.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Which particular clause are you talking about?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Clause 23(7) on the amendment, which came up on staff. It says, “A staff will be warned or cautioned, demoted, suspended or dismissed.” Mr Chairman, we are dealing with an industry, which has big monies. If you caution somebody who has stolen Shs 1 billion, it does not make sense. Therefore, what we had said was, “A staff held under this Act should be fined not less 240 currency points and imprisoned for a period of not less than five years or both.” That is what we had agreed on.

The other point that we agreed upon was that this clause is in relation to bribery and soliciting or taking a bribe.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, I agree with hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s submission.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there is an amendment proposed in clause 23(7)(f) to change the currency points from one hundred currency points to what currency points?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: To 240 currency points and imprisonment to a term not less than five years.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: From one hundred currency points to 240 currency points and imprisonment to a term of not less than five years or both. Is that correct? That is the amendment.

MR NIWAGABA: There is also a problem with the wording under sub-clause (7). There are various sentences, which seem to be ranked in the same manner, “caution, demotion, suspension and dismissal.” We may have to rephrase by removing the word “shall” and substitute it with the word “may”. 

In addition, some of these other administrative sanctions such as “demotion, suspension, dismissal and an order to vacate” may be brought under sub-clause (8) to state, “In addition to the penalties….” This is because they are not penalties but administrative sanctions. As such, they should be covered under sub-clause (8) as additional orders.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, this is the preliminary assessment before a sentence is made. When a case is brought, what options are available instantly to the adjudicating person? He can be warned, demoted, suspended or dismissed and in (f), made to pay those things or sent to prison. It is a first instance; it is not in addition. The “shall” in the opening paragraph of sub-clause (7) is qualified by the “or” at the end of (e). That makes it discretionary.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, even grammatically, if you say “shall” you are making whatever follows mandatory. You cannot say “shall” and give options. When you say “shall” the courts are obliged. However, when you say “shall” and say “warned”, “demoted”, “suspended”, “dismissed” -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Or?

MR RUKUTANA: Therefore, I agree with hon. Niwagaba that the word should be “may” so that it is in the discretion of the court to impose either of these.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I agree with hon. Niwagaba and the Deputy Attorney-General. This is because we are saying that the person must be punished. In addition to being punished, maybe with (f), the remaining shall apply. I think we need to remove (a) - In fact, we may have to delete (a),(b),(c),(d) and (e). 

In any case, if you have punished him or her with currency points, in addition to that, he or she must be dismissed. This is because we need to make it very tough so that the staff cannot do it. Supposing he has money and pays, do you give him a job to go and steal another Shs 1 billion? That is why I would like to propose that we delete (a),(b),(c),(d) and (e). If we want to apply it, we can say “in addition” under sub-clause (8).

Mr Chairman, I would also like to make an additional amendment to change the headnote to, “Prevention and Management of conflict of interest and bribery”. The justification is that although we are saying that these people may solicit bribes, I do not see “bribery” reflected anywhere in the headnote.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there seems to be a point here; (a),(b),(c),(d) and (e) are administrative issues while (f) is by court order. However, it looks like it is being given to one institution. Is there a possibility of splitting it without causing any problems so that the matter of court remains as a stand-alone and administrative measures are also put separately? Can somebody work that out properly while we proceed with the others?

MR OBOTH: If that is the proposal then we could bring (f) just before (a) and it would read, “A person who contravenes this section commits an offence and shall be made to pay a fine of not less than one hundred currency points or imprisonment for a term not less than one year or both” taking into consideration that sub-clause (8) is also giving additional penalties.

Mr Chairman, you rightly guided that the rest would be administrative.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Do we need to provide for those administrative alternatives in the law itself or those would be in the staff manuals? 

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, we should add it and then (a), (b), (c), (d) and (e) would be deleted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay, Members? Is it clearer now?

MS BETTY AMONGI: Mr Chairman, the honourable member read 100 currency points but earlier, there was an amendment of 240 currency points -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: 240 currency points and five years. That is the correction. 

MR RUKUTANA: Well, I still have a problem with sub-clause (7), “A person who contravenes this section…” When you say, “commits an offence”, it necessarily means that, that is an actionable offence. Offence can only refer to a criminal offence but if you are saying these are administrative –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: They have proposed to take out (a), (b), (c), (d) and (e) so that it is only (f) that now becomes the operating provision.

MR RUKUTANA: If those are taken out and we remain with (f) then that would be okay.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is what they proposed. Can I put the question to that amendment now?  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, we are talking of only conflict of interest but we should say, “Prevention and management of conflict of interest and bribery.” The justification is that in case it is not a case of conflict but bribery, this is also taken care of.

Mr Chairman, if that is agreed, we should move before (7) to put a sub-clause (7), which will become a new (7) to read, “solicits or gets a bribe to influence his or her actions”. You are right, hon. Attorney-General.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Wouldn’t that take it out of the context of this clause? 

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, hon. Nandala-Mafabi is trying to create another offence and we might have a problem. Whereas I understand and appreciate his concerns, I think bribery allegations -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable, let me recognise- I see children moving. In the public gallery this morning, we have pupils and teachers from Vincent Alex Boarding School, Mukono. They are represented by hon. Nambooze and hon. Kusasira. They are here to observe the proceedings, please join me in welcoming them. Thank you.

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, I was saying that we could advise hon. Nandala-Mafabi to be comforted that there other legislations, which could take care of the bribery allegations or offences. However, this one is about prevention and management of conflict of interest. I think it is clearly cut out but if we bring in the bribery, we would distort the whole Bill and we shall not be able to conform to other legislations that are dealing with bribery.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay now, Members? Can I put the question to this? I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed.)

Clause 23, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 24, agreed to.

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, on clause 26 about places where authorised officer may enter, in 26(1) (a) we propose to insert the words “subject to section 28(1)” at the beginning of the provision.

The justification is to ensure that before a search is carried, the authorised officer should first obtain search a warrant. In addition, in clause 26(1)(a) we delete the word “tobacco” appearing at the beginning of the paragraph. The justification is for consistency with the object of the Bill. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay, Members?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Chairman, to the best of my recollection, we did not agree that way because we said, why would you, for instance ask a Police officer - If there is a crime being committed somewhere, would the police officer have to get a search warrant to be allowed to enter the premises and correct the wrongs? My colleague should remind me, but I do not think we agreed that way.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: When can somebody arrest? There are three instances: When somebody is found committing or is about to commit or has committed. When he is about to commit, how do you go and get a warrant? When he is committing, how do you first run for a warrant? When he has committed, possibly you can run for a warrant.

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I remember that we recently passed the Anti-Money Laundering Bill into an Act of Parliament and it had the same provision therein where a Police officer is mandated to enter premises without necessarily having a search warrant. I believe that in this case, it may also be right to mandate a Police officer to carry out a search without a search warrant.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, for purposes of moving in harmony, I would concede to hon. Ssasaga’s -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, for the purpose of a good law -

DR BITEKYEREZO: Yes, I have accepted that a police officer can go in without necessarily having a search warrant.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is there now no amendment in clause 26? I put the question that clause 26 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 27

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, in clause 27(1)(b), “Inspection powers of authorised officers”, we request to delete the word “tobacco” appearing in line 3 of paragraph (b) and wherever the word appears under clause 27.

The justification is for consistency with the object of the Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear, Members? I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 27, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 28

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, on clause 28(1) we propose to delete the words “Judge of the High Court” appearing in lines 1 and 2 and the word “Judge” in line 5.

The justification is to ensure that such warrants are issued by the Magistrate Courts and not both the High Court and the Magistrate Courts. 

The justification is to ensure that such warrants are issued by the Magistrate Courts and not both the High Court and the Magistrate Courts. 

In clause 28(1) (b), we propose to delete the entire paragraph. 
The justification is, following the amendment made to clause 26(1), the provision becomes redundant. 

In clause 28(2), we propose to delete the entire sub-clause. 
The justification is to avoid inconsistencies with clause 26(1), which leaves time for the search open. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, since we have maintained clause 26, I think clause 28(1)(b) and clause 28 (2) remain. 

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, I wanted to know from the chairman of the committee why he is removing the judge. High Court has original jurisdiction. What is hurting here is that you provide for the magistrate or a judge. The choice is upon the applicant. There are several other things that would determine the jurisdiction of court. Would you want to give me the prognosis of your suggestion? 

DR BITEKYEREZO: I thank you so much. Mr Chairman, when we were interacting with people, we found out that very many places do not have judges. It is the magistrates running the courts so if you have to go to Mbale to look for a judge when you are in Sironko, it may become a problem. Therefore, we wanted to leave it to magistrates -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But it is magistrate or judge. The provision is leaving both options available. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, again for purposes of making my brother very happy, let me concede to have a magistrate or a judge. 

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, I have a big problem regarding what we have already passed when you read clause 28. Clause 28 provides powers to issue warrants but in what we passed, which was on inspection powers of authorised officers, somebody enters, inspects and confiscates and under (2), destroys. Without a search warrant or going through due process, this would subject -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Which clause? 

MR RUKUTANA: I am reading what we passed and clause 28 together. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Where are you reading that particular one from?  

MR RUKUTANA: I propose that we maintain clause 28 but the power to confiscate should be transferred and put under clause 28; so that it is only when somebody has entered with a warrant that he can confiscate and also in (2), destroy the tobacco. We should restrict only what we passed to inspection. 

This is because 27, which we passed says, “Inspection powers of authorised officers.” Inspection should be limited only to inspection. However, when you come to confiscate and in sub-clause (2) to destroy, that goes beyond the ambit of inspection. Those two aspects should only be done where somebody has entered with a warrant. If we do not do that, we are in big problems. 

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Deputy Attorney-General. I hope that you looked at clause 27(2), which tags it to other legislation. Unless we know what the National Environmental Management Authority Act cap 153 is prescribing and whether it is giving the right to be heard and the due process under that, I thought it would handle the fears. You are raising a very fundamental issue but when I saw this, maybe we may need to consult the NEMA Act because it is not absolute power that you get and destroy. It is tagging it to the NEMA Act cap 153. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, what is being tagged to the NEMA Act is the process of destruction not the process of seizure or confiscation. 

MS BETTY AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to know whether the qualification under (f) which indicates that it should be done in conformity to the provisions of this Act would satisfy the minister. This is because here it says, “confiscate or destroy a tobacco or tobacco product or item that does not conform to the provisions of this Act.”

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, I would have no problem if the act of confiscation is removed from Article 27 and put where the officer has entered with a warrant. The power to confiscate and 27(2); the power to destroy, should only be limited to where - (Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Clarification, honourable minister. If you do not give the inspector the powers to confiscate, he has no reason to enter these premises in the first place. 

In addition, your worry should be, if I confiscate, what do I do with the products? Your worry should be on the destruction but they are also saying that, that destruction must be in conformity with the provisions of the National Environmental Management Authority Act. That means that the inspector has a heavy burden of duty to ensure that whatever he or she does is in compliance with the law. 

Even then, that does not oust the right of an aggrieved party, who is the owner of the tobacco product, to apply to court under Article 42 of the Constitution for judicial review of the actions and the like. 

I believe these provisions are okay, if you agree with me as an Attorney-General of this other side. (Laughter) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I have no problem with confiscation. My problem is with destruction. You can get overzealous Police officers who, due to the fact that he has powers to destruct, will say, “I confiscated and destroyed.” The destruction must follow the procedure. 

Despite the fact that we are talking of NEMA, at what time is this product destroyed yet we have agreed that it must follow NEMA procedures? We must put a clause to make sure that - He can confiscate and destroy a wrong thing or sell it. We must find a way of dealing with destruction. Hon. Oboth, give me the advice. 

MR OBOTH: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. The confiscation in (f) is purely to safeguard. You are even securing evidence. You cannot get evidence from the premises if you are not able to confiscate. The confiscation is not for destruction. That is why - (Interjection) - yes, it is the option. Those are two options: You confiscate and the destruction is taken care of under (2) as the other “Attorney-General” proposed and I stated that. You cannot have an officer going into a premise to only inspect and see a wrong, a package or something that is of contravention of the law and then you say that you will go and just report.

In any case, the Member from Oyam South said that the same section does note that, all items that do not conform to the provision of this Act - I think the provision of this Act is not ending at 27(f), it continues to the end. Attorney-General I think – (Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much hon. Oboth-Oboth. Mr Chairman, if you read 27, it says: “in carrying out an inspection or investigation in accordance with the provisions of this Act, an authorised officer may - destroy”. 

Assuming I am already an authorised officer; how am I expected to destroy the cigarettes? I may get the cigarettes under your bed and I want to destroy them. What if I burn other things and then go and sell these cigarettes?

There must be a clear way to destroy them after confiscation; you must prescribe what should happen. When you confiscate the items, you must follow the due course of the law and then after that, you can destroy them. 

There should also be a person who should determine that these are wrong items and must be destroyed. This is because you may be dealing with an overzealous officer – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Please propose 

MR NANDALA MAFABI: I would like to propose that destruction should be after due process has been completed.

MR RUKUTANA: I propose that we remove sub-clause 27(f) and sub-clause (2) to create a separate sub-clause which should be “Powers to confiscate or destroy”. Even then, those powers should come after Clause 28. In other words, we create another sub-clause 28(b) or we substitute Clause 29, so that, as hon. Nandala said, destruction should only be after the due process is completed.

This is so because you do not give the police officer unlimited powers to enter and search –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is an authorised officer not a policeman.

MR RUKUTANA: Okay, an authorised officer. No, there must be a process otherwise we shall subject Government to a lot of litigations. Somebody will wake up and say that the items that were destroyed were not those prohibited under the law.

There must be a due process before destruction. I therefore would like to propose that after Clause 28, we create another sub-clause to the effect that, upon carrying out an inspection or investigation, if the authorised officer discovers that – well, it can be phrased in some other way but it would be neater doing it that way than just leaving it here, especially where article 27 is only in respect of inspection powers; “Inspection powers of an authorised officer”. Inspection should be restricted to that. When you read a,b,c,d and e, you will see that all those are aspects of inspection. He has inspected, but so what? We should then create another section providing for what happens after inspection; asking for a court order to destroy those items.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let me do this, members: destruction – this is 2: destruction of tobacco or tobacco products or items referred to in sub-clause 1(f) shall be carried out by order of court and in conformity with the standard or environmentally friendly methods prescribed under the NEEMA Act.

MR RUKUTANA: That would be okay as long as you amend 27(f) and remove “or destroy”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, you are qualifying the destruction in 2; the destruction referred to there is by court order and it reads: “It shall be carried out by order of court and in conformity with the standards or environmentally friendly methods prescribed under the NEEMA Act.”

MR OTADA: Mr Chairman, I intend to agree with the Attorney-General that in sub-clause (f), we delete “destroy” and have it read that “in carrying out an inspection or investigation in accordance with the provisions of this Act, an authorised officer may confiscate tobacco or tobacco products or items that do not conform to the provisions of this Act.”  We delete “destroy”

If I inspect, then what; if I cannot confiscate, what will I have done in the course of my inspection. I therefore think that the confiscation should be allowed – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable, there is also sub-clause 2, which is running from (f) and is qualifying the power to destroy. How do you carry out the destruction? You cannot go to destruction before you have given the powers to destroy.

MR OTADA: I think that is what we are all saying but in (f), we should remove “destroy” –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, you cannot, because (f) is what is giving the authority to destroy. You are now qualifying the process in 2. If we remove it from (f) then what will happen to 2? We should just delete 2. – 

MR OTADA: Mr Chairman, maybe we need to think through that.

DR BARYOMUNSI: I think it is very clear Mr Chairman that this authorising officer will do the inspection and may confiscate but also he has powers to order for destruction.

However, we are now saying that he must get a court order to have the destruction done. I think this puts checks and balances and the authorised officer will not abuse that power to just destroying the item. I do not see where the problem is. We should just move.

MR MWIRU: Mr Chairman, I am of the humble view that the officer should have the powers to destroy within seven days. It is the person who is to carry out the destruction that should get the court order.

The experience we got when we were dealing with the destruction of immature fish - it has actually made the process of fighting that vice so difficult. Immature fish which everybody can see, when they go to court to secure an order, sometimes they fail to get it; and the vice continues.

I am therefore of the humble view that the duty should be bestowed on someone who so wishes to stop the destruction that should go to court to seek for the court order.

We should say that it should be done within seven days so that we can demonstrate to the magistrate or to court that within this period, I am under imminent danger. My goods are going to be destroyed. Otherwise, we are going to impose a duty which will be abused. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is another point.

MR RUKUTANA: If that be the case, since the manner of destruction is provided for as guided by the Chairperson, then let us not say “confiscate or”, let us say that “confiscate and” (Interjections) – Yes. When you say “or”, you are saying that he can confiscate but as an alternative to confiscating, you are putting “destroying”. However, when you confiscate, what do you do next?

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Chair. I would like to know why the Attorney–General is making it very difficult that, the duty to confiscate would imply that whatever is confiscated must be destroyed. The inspector may need judgment on what he needs to confiscate. The implication of this provision does not necessarily mean that whatever is confiscated has to be destroyed. However, the power to destroy should be given independently as it is in (f) and I think - (Interruption) - I take the information from the Northern part of West Budama – (Interruption). 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: I thank you, Mr Chairman. Hon. Jacob, The Attorney-General has a point. If you look at (f); the products we are taking about are identified. They are tobacco or tobacco products or items that do not conform to the provisions of this act. If they do not conform to the provisions of this act, what else do you do with them and how else do you want them to be handled? Automatically, they must be destroyed. After confiscation, the next logical consequence is confiscation and destruction.

MR OBOTH: If I knew that was the information coming - (Interruption) 

MR NIWAGABA: Can I give you very good information – (Laughter)-so that we move forward. Thank you, my colleague Hon. Oboth-Oboth. I think the problem we have was in the drafting. When you go forward from clause 34 up to 39, the procedure of confiscation which is now termed as seizure, storage, removal and how the products are dealt with are covered. 

I would propose that we stand over this particular sub-clause and re-capture it in clauses 34 to 39 because that is where the procedure of seizure or storage of seized products is. If any aggrieved person goes to court and challenges the seizure and the like, the destruction can come too:

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, so we -

MR OBOTH: I would yield to my uncle’s information and the additional information from Hon. Niwagaba. However, I emphasise that you cannot marry the two by saying, “confiscate and destroy”. That would be very irregular -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We stand over clause 27? Sorry, we already passed 27. We will come back if there is need for that. We are in clause 28. Is there a matter with Clause 28?

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Chair. I am seeing the issue of dwelling places or premises. I was wondering what happens if these are in a container because (3) is defining – “for purpose of this section a dwelling place shall be a building or other place in which people live”, yet you can have someone who is importing from a container and you want a warrant for that purpose. How do we handle that -(Interjection)– no, a container is not a premise according the way it is defined under (3) 

I think Hon. Oboth-Oboth is trying to assist me to include a vessel or a container. We need to be broader in these ware houses – (Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Honourable colleague, the clause talks of a dwelling place or premise. Now, what is defined is only a dwelling place but the premise is not defined. Live it and interpreter it “Ejusdum generis” – (Interjection) - meaning that any other premise can be a premise. You do not need to define a premise. If it is a container or a vessel, it would be defined under premise and the like.

DR BAROYOMUNSI: Mr Chair, I would like to draw the attention of Hon. Amongi to clause 26, places where authorised officers may enter; first of all, it says, “for the purpose of ensuring compliance with this Act, an authorised officer may at any time enter any place of premise -”. All those other places including containers are accommodated in clause 26. The authorised officers can enter anywhere in addition to premises and dwellings.

MR NZOGHU: Mr Chairman, I have issue on clause 28(2) on time of entry to the premise. The time stated here is unrealistic because the earth moves and when the earth moves, it also determines the location of the sun. By 6 O’clock in the morning, depending on the location of the sun, you realise some darkness especially if it is in the extreme North - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There is a proposal from the committee to delete it. What is the final quotation on this now?

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Chair, we had deleted that to say “any time”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is clause 28 okay now? Can I put the question to clause 28 with the amendments as proposed by the Chair of the committee? Okay, I put the question.
	
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 28, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 29 agreed to.

Clause 30 agreed to.

Clause 31

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chair, on clause 32 on certificate of analysis, we propose to delete the word “tobacco” appearing in line one of the provision. Justification: It is a consequential amendment

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that amendment 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 31, as amended agreed to.

Clause 32

MR NANDALA–MAFABI: Mr Chairman, these are people who have now entered the premise. When we had a meeting, we agreed to have clause 32 merged with clause 33. I had hoped that the Chair would get up to propose the merger because we wanted to create 32 (a, b, and c) to deal with obstruction that anybody who obstructs –

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, I would like to bring it to the attention of hon. Nandala that we agreed on clause 33 to merge sub-clause 1 and sub-clause 2 to read as follows: “A person shall not obstruct an authorised officer in his or her duties or knowingly make a false or misleading statement to an authorised officer”; that is clause 33.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 32 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 33

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, we proposed and agreed to merge sub-clause 1 and 2 of 33 as follows: “A person shall not obstruct an authorised officer in his or her duties, or knowingly make a false or misleading statement to an authorised officer”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is the amendment proposed. I put the question that the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 33, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 34

DR BITEKYEREZO: On seizure, we propose to delete the word “tobacco” appearing in line 1 of the provision: justification, it is a consequential amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 34, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 35

DR BITEKYEREZO: On clause 35, Mr Chairman, we propose to delete the word “tobacco” appearing in line 1 of the provision. Justification; it is a consequential amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 35, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 36

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, on clause 36, and that is interference with a seized product or item. We propose to delete the word “tobacco” appearing in line 2 of the provision. Again it is a consequential amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 36, as amended, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we need to participate in this process.

Clause 37

DR BITEKYEREZO: On clause 37, in the situation of seized product or item. We propose to delete the word “tobacco” appearing in line 1 of the provisions. Justification: again it is a consequential amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 37, as amended, agreed to.


Clause 38

DR BITEKYEREZO: On clause 38 that is order of restoration, we propose to delete the word “tobacco” appearing in line one of the provision, and wherever the same word appears under the provision. Justification: once again, it is a consequential amendment.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, assuming you have asked for order of restoration, and court makes a decision that you cannot get it. I think this is a time where the court should issue instructions on how to deal with the product. We need to put (c) the court may order - like 27(2) if you do not mind, Mr Chairman.

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, I would like to propose further amendment to clause 38 by including before “high”: “the Magistrate or High Court may order -”.

Just to be in uniformity with the other provision that gives powers, or makes the Magistrate’s courts accessible to other court users in other remote areas like Bududa, Budadiri or Omoro.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There is a request to review- you have heard the amendment from hon. Oboth-Oboth, to include the jurisdiction of the magistrate’s court.

However, there is also a point made by hon. Nandala-Mafabi, in relation to bringing the destruction order under here, in which case if you include it- that is under “order for restoration”- you will need to include destruction or restoration or something like that.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman that should fall under clause 39

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Under forfeiture? Okay, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, can that come under clause 39, the next clause?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I agree.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I take care of the amendments proposed by hon. Oboth-Oboth to include the jurisdiction of the magistrate on this clause?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if we do so, then hon. Oboth-Oboth may have to think about clause 37, because we have just passed it about apply to the High Court. It should apply to the Chief Magistrate’s Court. If we are going to do 38, we might think about recommitting 37.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Because this is for order of restoration. It is a specific kind of order.

MR OBOTH: With that guidance, I beg to drop my proposed amendment; we leave “High Court” – (Interruption) - I am the one who proposed the amendment, and I am the one dropping it. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, hon. Oboth-Oboth is from Tororo, Tororo has a High Court. But for us in Bududa, there is no High Court - (Interruption) - yes because you are legislating for your people; I am also speaking for mine.

Mr Chairman, let us put Magistrates Court here. However, I would like to put the committee on notice that I will recommit Clause 37 to increase-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, we have not taken - propose we cannot go back to 37 we are still at the committee stage.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I would like to propose that 37 should state: “apply to the Magistrates Court or the High Court for an order of restoration”. The justification is to take care of Bududa, Sironko and Omoro.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do you want that listed in the Bill? (Laughter) That is the proposal, we are still at committee stage, we have not yet reported to the whole House on these clauses we have passed. We can review 37 in the terms that have been proposed by the Member for Budadiri West.

Can we do that now; hon. Nandala-Mafabi proposes to give jurisdictions to the Magistrates Court to deal with that matter. Court is not defined, so it is okay. I put the question to that amendment

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 37, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 38

DR BITEKYEREZO: We propose to delete the word “tobacco” appearing in that line of the provision and wherever the same word appears under the provisions.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There is a proposal to insert - give jurisdiction to the Magistrates Court there also, which was proposed by - can somebody propose that since it was withdrawn? In view of what was passed in clause 37, I think that becomes-

MS AMONGI: Mr Chairman, in conformity with the other provision to cater for rural areas, I move that we insert between the words “the” and “High Court”, the words, “Magistrate” or “the”. To read: “the Magistrate or the High Court”, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 38, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 39

DR BITEKYEREZO: On clause 39, we propose to delete the word “tobacco” appearing at the beginning of the provision and wherever the word appears, under the same provision. Justification; it is a consequential amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We are looking for amendments in clause 39 -

MR OTADA: Mr Chairman, I have a problem with giving the minister the powers to order for destruction, because there is a court precedent that has not yet been challenged in the recent ruling, where the requirement for a minister to order for the release of an insane person in custody has been– (Interjection) - I take that correction, mentally challenged, has been held to be a practice in pursuit of ousting the jurisdiction of court.

I think this House must be in conformity with precedents that are alive and well with that. Therefore, the powers of the minister to order for the destruction should not be accepted. For its drafting, I do not have it off-the-cuff now; we could agree on how we draft that.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We entirely agree with the proposal by hon. Otada and in our view, we think that we leave this to the committee or the court - either of the two to decide because the minister –(Interjection)– the court, it could be the Magistrates Court – (Interjections) - no those are details that I cannot tell now, but we agreed that it should not be the minister; that is the position.

MR OBOTH: I would like to help my sister the minister that this provision is actually taking care of a situation where no application has been made to court or where an application has been made but on the hearing of such application, no order for restoration is made. Therefore, this is the provision that takes care of special circumstances - or a person has been convicted of an offence under this Act in respect of which tobacco or tobacco product has been ceased.

Therefore there will be need to help the situation in this case where no application has been made for restoration or where the application has been made but no order for restoration is made. You cannot go back to court again. You need an administrative action and the Attorney-General is rising to agree with me on this – (Interruption)

MR RUKUTANA: Additionally, Mr Chairman, this refers to a product which has already been forfeited to the government and now we are deciding on what the government should do with it. Therefore there would not be any harm in the minister making an order for destruction.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, even if nobody has made an application to have his things restored, the Minister of Health has a big interest. Who is the custodian of Government assets? It is not the Minister of Health; it is the Minister of Finance. Therefore, you say the Minister of Health is the one to destroy or dispose of, he can wait for 15 days and immediately says “sell” and he does not sell all. No audit exercise, he just sells the few or claim that “I am still suspicious of these people”.

Mr Chairman, once ownership of something turns to the state, it must go to Government stores. And at Government stores, the procedure then will follow either destruction or disposal. Therefore, I would like to make a proposal that the moment – (Interjections) - of course court will make a decision on the direction to take. We have to delete (c) and (d).

However, where nobody has made an application under clause 37, the minister responsible for finance will now take charge. I am sure the Attorney-General is aware of that because he was there and was taking charge.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can you tie it to the Law or something?

DR BARYOMUNSI: I would like to seek clarification. He seems to have doubts in the Minister of Health; why do you think the one of finance will comply and not the one of health? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the one of finance will comply because he will receive the assets; acknowledge them using the audit trail in accounts and then he will destroy them. However, if you give them to the Minister of Health, he is going to be very powerful; gets the stuff, destroys two boxes and the rest is shelved. (Laughter) I would like to agree with my sister hon. Opendi who said that we remove that from the ministry because they are the ones who have-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is there a provision of the law that states what you have just said about the Minister of Finance? If it is there, then we just cross reference to that law. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, all the assets of Government are invested in the Secretary to Treasury and that means-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is it a confiscated item or assets of the government? 

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, here, in this Bill, minister is defined as Minister of Health and when we say “the product forfeited to Government”, it is in implementation of this Act. Therefore, finance has nothing to do with it. It could only make sense if it was something forfeited as property. However it is forfeited because of breach of provisions of this Act.

Therefore, the minister responsible for the implementation of the Act is the one to take possession and to decide on the fate of the forfeited goods.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I put the question to this clause now since there is no amendment? Oh there is an amendment on tobacco.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Mr Chairman, we have a Tobacco Control Committee that we composed of different stakeholders including members from the Ministry of Finance and health; why cannot we give this responsibility to the Tobacco Control Committee?

MR OBOTH: If one person is being suspected by hon. Nandala-Mafabi, now we get to the crowd where committees are involved and several other members of the committee; the suspicion would be more on due to the number of people there. 

However in this case, is it because the ministers of health are involved in this thing that they are saying so? Bringing a committee – a committee is below the minister. The minister gives policy directives or directions to the committee. We should leave this; the minister should be the minister responsible for health to give the directions on what to be done with this not involving a committee. 

However –(Interjection) - do you want to give me information? This is administrative; committees are not for administrative work of the ministry, unless the ministers are telling us something which they do not want to mention – (Interruption)

MS OPENDI: Mr Chairman, having heard from my brother hon. Oboth-Oboth, I think let us go with the position in the Bill and move on. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: okay. Have we adopted the amendment on the deletion of tobacco? Have we?

Clause 39 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: And the amendment in relation to the deletion of the word tobacco. Okay? I put the question that clause 39 as amended now stands part of the Bill? 

(Clause 39, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 40

BR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman-
	
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: before?  But honourable members –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am not on clause 39. I think before clause 40, we need to insert a new clause to deal with destruction, which has been moved by the Attorney-General and I am sure he will be happy because there will be destruction; how do we go about it? 

I would like to propose that we insert a new clause whichever the number you will give it, if the Attorney-General agrees with me; “destruction of tobacco or tobacco products or items shall be carried out after the court order in conformity with the standards or environmental friendly methods prescribed under the National Environment Act cap 153.” 

The justification is that we do not want people to get up and destroy things without following the due process.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, what the Member is proposing is in clause 27. Is the destruction we are talking about of general application or is it only in relation to what appears in clause 27? If it is of general application, then we can put there a separate clause under a different part of the Bill but if it is relating to this one of the inspector, the inspection powers of the authorised officer, then it should be tied down to that section. That is the only way it can make sense.

Any confiscation and destruction anticipated under that clause should have its own separate procedure to take care of that particular incident. It cannot apply generally.

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. What you are saying is very right; it cannot apply generally because when you look at a situation where an authorised officer gets small children, maybe, in a classroom who have contributed to buy a packet of cigarettes and when it comes to his knowledge, he comes to arrest this packet of cigarettes; it will not require a court order to go to court to first secure the order to come and destroy these packets of cigarettes, which the children are smoking. 

I think it cannot apply to the general application. It should be tied to a specific application for that matter.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Learned Attorney-General, can we take care of this provision in clause 27(2) by inserting a court process; then, take care of that clause because that is meant for that clause. You want to avoid the abuse of the inspector who will authorise an officer who is carrying out inspections, comes and picks products and just destroys without a process.

MR RUKUTANA: I thought I would agree with hon. Nandala-Mafabi that if there is to be destruction by an inspector under whatever circumstances, it should be pursuant to a court order. However, the idea brought by the honourable member for Budadiri East that somebody has confiscated a packet of cigarettes from some students in class, that person would not require a court order. Well, he may confiscate. It is safer to go by what hon. Nandala-Mafabi has suggested and transplant clause 27(2) to be clause 39 so that all destruction by any inspector should be pursuant to a court order as provided for.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What will happen to clause 27(1) (f)? Do you want to delete it?

MR RUKUTANA: I had proposed that we only limit it to confiscation.

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to get the picture of how the process of getting a court order is initiated. Who initiates this court order? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The person who wants to destroy. Learned Attorney-General, you will need to finish this up. Let us process this, honourable members; then we will come to that.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. You had guided the learned Attorney-General well and I only rise to plead with him to take your advice seriously. First, that we retain (f) where it is because it is only subsection (f) that gives the power to confiscate and destroy.

Secondly, it is the process for the confiscation and destruction and you had graciously redrafted sub clause 2 to include the requirements that an order of court must be obtained for this destruction to be effected. That would take care of his concerns, which were the inclusion of due process before destruction. I still plead, Learned Attorney-General, that we go with the guidance of the Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the way this law has been drafted is that all the provisions are self-contained where there is a matter for requiring any action to be taken; it is provided for within that clause. 

In clause 27, there was a process anticipated for destruction of an item that is discovered upon inspection. That is why clause 2 is saying “destruction of tobacco or tobacco products or item referred to in sub clause (1)(f).” It is specific and sub clause (1)(f) is about confiscate or destroy; it is very specific.

The only thing that we needed to do there is to include a process of subsection (1) (f) “...shall be carried out by a court order and in conformity with the standards or environmentally friendly method prescribed under the National Environment Act Caps 153.” If you lift it and create a new subsection, it is as if there are other destructions anticipated, which is not there. It will now be a clause of general application to other destructions, which are not there.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I would like to move that under clause 27 (2) is where we amend by inserting – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can we call that clause again. Maybe, we first go because what we wanted to do is to create a new sub clause. Can we go through the process, then, we come and reopen clause 27 and finish it. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if that is the case, I can make my new sub clause stand because since things are standing on their own, then, when we come back, we can maybe delete sub clause (2) (f).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That one, I have not followed. Let us deal with clause 40, 41 and come back to clause 27 and see if we can make it clearer.

Clause 40

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, on clause 40, we propose to delete the entire provision. The justification is to avoid un-necessary repetition since the same offenses are already provided for in the Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal is to delete clause 40. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 41

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, in clause 41, we agreed to do away with the option of fines in terms of currency points. The justification is that when you put money, people will make mistakes knowing that they will pay. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You only leave the imprisonment term?

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, that sounds like a Hitler proposal, who would be a sadist to see one single aspect of punishment. This law would actually be challenged if we left it that way. Any law that restricts the power of the other arm of Government would not be a fair law. This is my understanding. 

We have made several legislations here, is this one the most important law for us to say, “No fine, only jail”? I wish it was applying to all of us who are making this law. [Ms Opendi: “Yes.”]- I am hearing “Yes” from hon. Sarah Opendi. I do not know what she means by “Yes” but the option of a fine and imprisonment should be retained in our legislation. That is my proposal.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It should also be up to the court to take it away. Attorney-General, should they remove the option of a fine from a capital offence or the penal provision?

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: No. The discretion of court should be maintained so that the court will decide whether to fine or to imprison or to impose both. As submitted by the honourable member, grave as it may be this is not the gravest offence we have ever worked on.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. I now put the question that clause 41 stands part of the Bill.

(Question out and agreed to.)

Clause 41, agreed to.

Clause 42

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, under clause 42(1) (b) (i), we agreed to change the phrase “not exceeding” to “not less than”. In the same clause, 42(1) (b) (ii), we agreed to raise the minimum sentence to two years.

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairman, I actually have a problem with dissecting the offence of making false or misleading statements and including under clause 42(1)(b)(ii) the wordings, “knowingly or recklessly”. It is as if any false or misleading statement is not made knowingly and recklessly. So, to me, we would rather delete clause 42(1)(b)(i) and only maintain the fine as stipulated under clause 42(1)(b)(ii).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The whole of sub clause (1)? 

MR NIWAGABA: Yes; clause 42 (1) (b) (i). 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is the fine. 

MR NIWAGABA: Yes, a fine. The whole clause tends to make a distinction between a false or misleading statement and a false or misleading statement made knowingly or recklessly. The ingredients of a false or misleading statement include knowledge – the intention to make the statement when you are aware that it is false or misleading. So, we do not have to dissect it into (i) and (ii). Let us maintain only (ii).

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, let me concede to the Attorney-General of the “no man’s land”. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: For the purposes of our Hansard, you need to make reference to known places in this House. (Laughter)

Can I put the question to this? (Mr Nzoghu rose_) There is a proposal; if you have a counter proposal, proceed. The time for clarification went long time ago. Is it clear?

DR BARYOMUNSI: It is clear, Mr Chairman. However, I would like to suggest that we maintain the currency points and fines captured in clause 42(1) (b) (ii) so that it is a deterrent. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In other words, you are merging (i) and (ii) to become one? Is that okay, Ndorwa?

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairman, (i) was even a stand-alone providing for only a fine without an option of imprisonment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So a merger of (i) and (ii) would bring out the issue more clearly. Paragraphs (i) and (ii) are accordingly merged so that we have only one sentence on currency points, fine or imprisonment. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 42, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 43

DR BITEKYEREZO: Under clause 43(4), we agreed to replace words “five years” with the words “seven years” in the second line.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There is a proposal in clause 43(4) for five years to be changed to seven years. Is that correct? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, we had agreed to seven years - that is true. However, this secretariat is a government entity and government knows how they keep records. If you say seven years, immediately after seven years they will destroy them. We must follow the government procedure of keeping records. 

Therefore, I plead with the committee chair that the secretariat should maintain the reports in accordance with Government of Uganda laws. This is to avoid people destroying this information after seven years because they could be buying time and yet this information may be useful in future.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The proposal is that the records should be kept in accordance with the applicable laws.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, I will concede to hon. Nandala’s suggestion.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is the amendment; instead of seven or five years, the proposal is to have “shall be kept in accordance with the applicable laws.”  Can I put the question? 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Chairman, I just want clarification. If the laws are already there, then is it necessary to repeat it here? Can’t we say, “The secretariat to the committee shall maintain the reports and shall make information…” If we say that they will maintain the reports, then automatically it means they will do so in accordance with the existing laws; should we repeat it in the formulation? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is where the other clause might come in – for the avoidance of doubt. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the reason some of these laws came in - It is like customs, which used to destroy records after six months and then they came in to say, “You must keep the records according to the law.” When a customs transaction has ended, that is the end of it. 

This is also a big thing. If you are not aware, these are big transactions; if you do not allow the records to be kept according to the laws, they can destroy them and then things go ahead. For these, we should be clear and say that we maintain these reports and all the information according to applicable laws and they should be open to the public; anybody – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Attorney-General, Should we keep the records for seven years or should we keep them just in accordance with applicable laws?

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, I stated earlier that there are laws governing the keeping of records. I would be comfortable if the records were kept in accordance with the pertaining laws.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, I put the question to the amendment that the records will be kept in accordance with the relevant laws. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OTADA: Mr Chairman, I am sorry that I had to rise when you were almost getting there. In clause 43, the requirement is for a supplier or distributor to report in accordance with the provisions in schedule 6. Much as I agree that this would be in the interest of whosoever the supplier or distributor is, my understanding of a distributor or a supplier is that this is a franchise holder whose activities are monitored and captured by the manufacturer or the importer per se. Therefore, for practicability’s sake, it would be difficult or it would lead to receipt of distorted information which has been supplied by a manufacturer and an importer and a certain supplier somewhere -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable, what is the subject that you are proposing? Please, propose and then we understand what you are saying.

MR OTADA: My proposal is that it is not going to be practically possible for a supplier to provide information as is required in schedule 6. I am actually proposing for the deletion of a supplier or a distributor. This is because these are franchise holders who work together with the manufacturer or an importer and therefore, whatever information that they have is already captured by the manufacturer or the supplier.

However, for practicability’s sake, something like No. 8 in the sixth schedule - How will a distributor know market share globally, for example, as it is in No. 8 in the sixth schedule? There are certain things which are practically not possible for a distributor or a supplier to know and therefore be capable of providing the correct information. That is my problem. 

If we leave it like this, a supplier or distributor is more than likely going to give wrong information because they are not privy to the correct information. The correct information is with the manufacturer whom they supply for and whom I know they work together with and give up-to-date information of all the things that they do with the importer because that is how it works. The distributor or supplier risks giving wrong information on global market share, as is required in the sixth schedule, because they do not have it. That is my issue.

MR BAHATI: I thank you, Mr Chairman. I think hon. Otada should not get worried about this issue; what is wrong with asking a supplier or distributor how many items they have received and how they are distributing them? If they ask you to tell the market share in the world, for some of such questions you just indicate “not applicable”. No one would expect you as a distributor of tobacco in northern Uganda to tell the market share globally; you just say, “not applicable”. It is as simple as that. However, that question can be applied to another company, which is trading globally.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Chairperson, at the smaller committee where we were consulting, we discussed this issue and agreed that we should maintain the supplier and distributor. This is because we want to know how many they are supplying, to address issues of illicit or contraband products being mixed with legal products. Therefore, it is important that the supplier and distributor must keep records of what they are selling at the lower level and I think we agreed on that one. 

We also agreed on some of the concerns that we are raising. We agreed that when we come to the sixth schedule, we shall make adjustments to address those concerns.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I would to agree with what both ministers have said, that one can fill in “not applicable”. However, in smuggling and illicit trade, there will be a book for correct entries and another book for the smuggled items. I do not think we are trying to achieve anything with this; maybe if you just want to know if BAT supplied a distributor in Mbale, the distributor should in turn confirm that he or she received the 1,000 cartons and those are the same records in BAT. However, if a supplier in Mbale got a stock of Sportsman from Kenya, which he smuggled in and sold, and you think that he or she will also declare the smuggled 2,000 cartons, forget. 

Mr Chairman, I know why hon. Otada is raising this. This is quite redundant. The only person who should be okay is the importer because you will crosscheck with customs. If the goods have been smuggled in, there will not be on record –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, where you in this committee and you agreed on these things?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, I was there and we also raised what he is raising about the market share and we agreed to delete it. We said that the minister will only make regulations on that. In agreeing to delete the issue of market share, I gave an example when I was talking with hon. David Bahati about accounting firms. 

MR OTADA: Mr Chairman, you are absolutely right to ask the question on whether we agreed. It is true that we agreed and as hon. Baryomunsi has just said, they will yield to certain provisions in the sixth schedule, which I think is good. Items like No. 8 on global markets share and No. 9 - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can we move on?

MR OTADA: That is the assurance that we wanted because it was a bit of an issue and I am glad that he has said that. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is not what we are discussing.

MR OTADA: The two have to be read together; clause 43 has to be read together with the sixth schedule. There is no way we cannot talk about the sixth schedule, Mr Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, do you want to discuss the sixth schedule now? 

MR OTADA: No, Mr Chairman. I am just agreeing with him that when we get there, we shall build consensus and I think it is good for moving forward.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that clause 43, as amended, stands part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 43, as agreed, amended to.

Clause 44

DR BITEKYEREZO: We propose to delete the entire provision about the minister to designate non-smoking areas. The justification is that it is redundant since the provisions on indoor and outdoor public smoking are sufficient.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, I would like to take this as a chance to shift the burden to the owners of the premises to designate smoking areas. Rather than lose the provision altogether, we could help this Bill by introducing new sub clauses to cause owners of premises contained in the second schedule to have designated smoking areas. My argument is that –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Would you like to propose it?

MR AMURAIT: I would like to propose an inclusion of a sub clause 44(a) to read as follows: “The owner of a premise listed in the second schedule may designate a smoking area in his or her premises, which does not permit access to people under the age of 18 and is clearly marked as a designated smoking area. The designated smoking area shall be situated…” We would like to propose descriptions and also, if I am given time, the standards that should be followed by anybody designating an area as a smoking area.

All of us have travelled world over and we see this happening everywhere. It is my submission that it is working well. If I could be given time, I could bring descriptions or standards that need to be met. (Interjections) It is a useful proposal and I would like the sponsor -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Please, proceed. 

MR AMURIAT: If I could be given time to bring this to the House after lunch -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What you need to propose is what you are proposing to amend so that you can capture what your amendment is.

MR AMURIAT: I am proposing an inclusion, Mr Chairman.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Chairman, I rise on a procedural point. We were conceding to the chairman’s point that we delete clause 44 because it contradicts what we have already passed in clause 11. What we passed means that in the listed public places, we are providing for 100 per cent smoke-free environments plus 50 meters from the precincts. That is the opposite of what is in clause 44. 

Therefore, the only way you can introduce it is maybe to recommit clause 11 but not move amendments at this stage because they contradict what we passed. Mr Chairman, is the honourable member proceeding correctly when we have already pronounced ourselves on the issue of smoke-free environments in public places?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, it is indeed true that we provided some guidance on how we handle these issues of designation of smoking areas within public premises. We dealt with that earlier. With that still being the position, you may not be able to proceed without reviewing the other position. I think your point is made.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, when you talk about 50 or 100 metres, it does not exist and you are not going to find it because areas in town settings overlap each other. (Interjections) Can I just stick to my point?

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Mr Chairman, we spent a lot of time debating this point and you guided in the last sitting that we go and consult each other. You said that whoever wanted to participate in what we had discussed should meet with all of us. All those Members, including the Budadiri Member of Parliament who was very controversial, met with us and we all agreed and conceded on the amendments that we have brought here. 

Is it in order for the honourable member, who was also here, to continue dragging us in the debate that we had actually concluded? Is it in order for him to keep dragging us, pulling us back and bringing new things that will delay this debate? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the decision as to whether there should be designated smoking areas in public places was already taken. The only way we can open it is by recommitting that clause and bringing it back within the procedure. (Applause) We can hardly use this provision to bring it back because the decision was taken.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, I will be asking for a recommittal after your guidance.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 44 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 45 

MR NZOGHU: Mr Chairman, we passed clause 22, which was about incentives or privileges to tobacco businesses. I see some contradiction in clause 22(c) which says, “A person, body or entity that contributes to or could contribute to the formulation, implementation, administration, enforcement or monitoring of public health policies on tobacco shall not- (c) establish or operate a tobacco manufacturing, wholesale or import business.” 

However, when you come to clause 45 (a), it also says, “The Minister shall in consultation with the committee and by statutory instrument, make regulations- (a) for manufacture, packaging and labelling, importation, distribution and sale of tobacco products, reporting requirements for manufactures and sellers.”  In the circumstances that there is a clause that prohibits all these other issues that I have mentioned, I do not know whether it is again necessary to go into clause 45(a) where a minister should make regulations for the same when it is already prohibited in clause 22.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Have you read clause 22 properly, honourable member?

MR NZOGHU: I have read it, Mr Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 22 says if you are involved in public processes, then you are prohibited from doing those things. If you are involved in the process of formulation, implementation, administration, enforcement or monitoring of public health policies on tobacco, you will not be doing these things -[Hon. Member: “If you are a minister, for example”]-  The minister is not manufacturing tobacco. He is only providing regulations for those purposes; in other words, enhancing the formulation, implementation, administration and enforcement. I do not see that contradiction myself. I put the question to clause 45.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 45, agreed to.

Clause 46

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, clause 46 - “The Minister may, by statutory instrument with approval of Parliament, amend the schedules to this Act.” The justification is that the minister can now go and change anything and yet we have all been here agreeing and this law is very complicated; we do not want the minister to be overzealous.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister - the instrument will be issued with the prior approval of Parliament. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Chairman, I think the practice in this House has been that we give powers to the minister to do subsidiary legislation but he deposits those instruments in Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There are three different aspects of those. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: If it is a strong concern, we concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: “The minister may by statutory instrument with the approval of Parliament amend the schedules to this Act”. Is that the position now? I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 46, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 47

DR BITEKYEREZO: Clause 47 – transitional. We propose to redraft the provision to read as follows: “A manufacturer, supplier, retailer or an importer or exporter of a tobacco product shall comply with the requirements of this Act within one year of the commencement of this Act.”

The justification is: for clarity and to ensure that the manufacturers, suppliers, retailers, importers and exporters of tobacco products are given reasonable time within which to comply with this Act.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay, Members? I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 47, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 48, agreed to.

Clause 49

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, we propose to rephrase the entire provision to read as follows – that is 49 on the issue of repeal: “Any law existing immediately before the coming into force of this Act relating to tobacco or tobacco products shall have effect subject to such modifications as may be necessary to give effect to this Act; and where any such law conflicts with this Act, the provisions of this Act shall prevail.”

Justification: to ensure that no vacuum is created since the Tobacco Control Bill deals with a different subject matter altogether.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is clause 49; so you propose to delete what is in the Bill and we take what has been proposed. Are we okay with this amendment, which has been proposed by the committee? I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and greed to.)

Clause 49, as amended, agreed to.

MS OPENDI: Mr Chairman, I initially wanted to propose a new clause called “general penalty” to read as follows: “Any person who commits an offence under this Act for which no  other penalty is provided shall be liable to a fine not exceeding 100 currency points or imprisonment for a term equivalent to that.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Equivalent to what?

MS OPENDI: Mr Chairman, the reason for this -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, you have not yet proposed.

MS OPENDI: I am sure about this proposal because I saw some gaps earlier –(Interjection) – How many years? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Proceed, honourable minister.

MS OPENDI: The reason for this is that when we were passing clause 36, for instance, - interference with a seized product or item - it is indicated here that unless directed by an authorised officer, a person shall not remove, alter or interfere with, in any manner, any tobacco, tobacco product or other item seized. 

What happens if somebody interferes with the product? There seems to be no penalty for such and there may be other clauses where there are no penalties provided. This is the reason I was trying to propose that we have this new clause, which could come just before 43 under the heading, “general penalty.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Have you got the details now? State it again if you have the details.

MS OPENDI: “Any person who commits an offence under this Act for which no other penalty is provided shall be liable to a fine not exceeding 20 currency points or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months”. That is my proposal.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is the proposal and it is certainly one of those general proposals that you make in case there is an offence that has been created but no penalty is given, to cover a gap in case there is any.

MR OBOTH: I would like to improve her proposal by substituting the word “offence” with the phrase, “any person who contravenes this provision”. This is because if you are stating that there is an offence already committed, any offence that is not properly defined in the Act is not an offence but somebody can be in contravention of the provisions of the law. Therefore, you create an offence by contravening. That is the proposal.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can we do that redrafting? 

MS OPENDI: “Any person who contravenes any provisions of this Act for which no other penalty is provided shall be liable to a fine not exceeding 20 currency points or imprisonment of not less than six months or both.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: “Of not less than”? The other one is “not exceeding” now this is “not less than”.

MS OPENDI: No, I said “not exceeding”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, on the imprisonment you said “not less than”.

MS OPENDI: It is, “not exceeding six months” and they are adding, “or both”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, can I put the question to this amendment as now proposed for the insertion of the new clause?

MS OGWAL: Mr Chairman, I think the minister is being unfair particularly to the people who spent hours going through this document. She should have consulted with us because when you look at clause 24, it talks about a person who contravenes the provision, and the specific provisions are there. Now, I cannot see any other crime, which you are thinking of about somebody committing or contravening. This law is very tight. We went through it and we spent hours going through this. I cannot imagine the minister now thinking of any new idea which she could not bring on that day.

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, it is difficult even to attempt to think of the possible provisions to be contravened. An attempt to do that would be a futility at this time. It is only when the law comes into operation that you find some gaps and this provision is purely to fill those gaps. It does no harm to have it there. It does more harm to leave it out.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Hon. Ofumbi’s submission is not helpful –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Which hon. Ofumbi? (Laughter)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: It is not helpful at all because ordinarily, when you are implementing a law, there are many possible huddles but in a situation where you legislate for an ambiguous offence, it is very dangerous. Whatever offence is committed should be linkable to an existing punishment or offence or a shortcoming. Mr Chairman, I propose that the minister accepts that we delete that proposal.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there may be a conduct that is not foreseen but is mentioned and yet no penalty is prescribed for it. We are regulating conduct here and that conduct may show up. Now, we are making a general provision that where such will show up, there is a general provision to take care of it. Even in the Penal Code Act, there are general provisions of this nature. Therefore, it is not wrong at all to make this proposal.

MR NIWAGABA: I agree with you, Mr Chairman. That provision must be there. We only need to ensure that the fines provided for as suggested by the minister rhyme with the sentence provisions in accordance with the law on fines vis-à-vis the currency points. However, that provision is definitely necessary. I think it was an oversight not to include it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, has it been harmonised with the sentencing law – currency points to correspond to imprisonment terms? Was it 20 currency points?

MS OPENDI: Mr Chairman, I am being guided that it should be 24 currency points to rhyme with the imprisonment term of six months.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I put the question to that amendment, honourable members? I not put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, before we go to clause 2, we wanted to deal with clause 27.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I thought we had finished clause 27. Can we go to clause 27?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, you recall the amendment we talked about? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, let us go to clause 27.

Clause 27

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I would like to move that we amend sub clause (2) to read as follows: “Destruction of tobacco or a tobacco product or item referred to in sub clause (1)(f) shall be carried out in conformity with a court order and standards…” -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: “Shall be carried out by court order and in conformity with…” The rest of the provisions follow.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think we had discussed this thing. Can I put the question to this?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 27, as amended, agreed to.


Clause 2

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is there an amendment on clause 2?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, clause 2 deals with interpretation. I would like us to define “premises” because I do not see “premises” defined here. I only see “‘persons responsible for the premises’ means the owner, manager or other person in charge of the public place, workplace or means of public transport.” I would like us to define premises to mean building, vessels - even a ship can be a premise now - workplace, residence, transport vessels, etc.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, given the earlier guidance of the Attorney-General on the other side, don’t you think hon. Nandala-Mafabi could leave the definition of premises to what hon. Wilfred Niwagaba guided the House on, because they can be so unlimited? I do not know if we are going to list all the premises that we are thinking about and all the premises that might turn up to be so in future.

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, I would actually go with the proposal mooted earlier on by hon. Wilfred Niwagaba and supported by the Minister of State for Finance. An attempt to try and define premises - We should attach the ordinary English meaning to the word “premises”. It would be good to define, but the difficulty is that you cannot be definable enough to define it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, that means we have a problem. On page 9 of the Bill, it says, “‘person responsible for the premises’ means the owner, manager or other person in charge of the public place, workplace or means of public transport” and it ends there. They do not talk about a warehouse or a container, which you brought up yourself. Therefore, how do you cure this? If you arrest me or my container, I will say that none of these falls under “premises”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, when a definition is inserted in a clause, it refers to the clause; it is not of general application. It is to clarify on what is meant in that clause, not in the whole Bill. That is why they put it in the clause to clarify those issues. 

Can I now put the question? I put the question that clause 2 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.

The first schedule, agreed to.

The Second Schedule

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, we propose to delete the words “but not limited to” appearing in the sentence after the heading of the schedule. This is to avoid unnecessary repetition.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Second Schedule, as amended, agreed to.

The Third Schedule

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, on the third schedule we agreed in our meeting to delete paragraphs 14 and 15 and all the words after the word, “establishments” in the third line of paragraph 17.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, you put a full stop after the word, “establishments”? Honourable members, I put the question to those amendments.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Third Schedule, as amended, agreed to.

The Fourth Schedule

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, we agreed to amend the distance from 500 to 50 metres so as achieve practical implementation.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We are on fourth schedule. What item? Is it wherever the 500 metres appears?

DR BITEKYEREZO:  Mr Chairperson, we talked about replacing 500 metres with 50 meters wherever it appears.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, this is for consistency because we have already passed 50 metres under clause 11. So, for purposes of consistency, we have to maintain the 50 metres throughout. Some of us had wanted to remove it completely, but the majority ruled under Mama Cecilia.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this will be consequential; we do not have to pronounce ourselves on this because the schedule is quoting section 15 and whatever we decide on section 15 is what will be reflected here. So, we do not have to pronounce ourselves on that.

So, I put the question that the fourth schedule remains as schedule to the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Fourth Schedule, agreed to.

The Fifth Schedule

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairperson, on the fifth schedule, we agreed to delete paragraphs 1 and 9.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the deletion of paragraphs 1 and 9 in the fifth schedule.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Fifth Schedule, as amended, agreed to.

The Sixth Schedule

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairperson, we agreed to delete the phrase “market share” in the third line of paragraph 1 in the sixth schedule and to put a new provision -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Third line of paragraph 1?

DR BITEKYEREZO: Yes, of the sixth schedule. We also agreed to insert a miscellaneous provision to the effect that all notices displayed by operation of the provisions of this Act shall not attract any charge by the local government.

MR OTADA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. In the sixth schedule, paragraph 10 reads, “All activities attempted or undertaken to influence the formulation of any policy or legislation directly or indirectly related to tobacco control or public health.” How will a retailer know this information and provide it accurately to the committee? I propose the deletion of that, Mr Chairman. I also -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, it is about all activities attempted or undertaken by them. So, if they have not, why would they report on it? 

MR OTADA: To influence legislation, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: If they have not, then they do not have to report on them. It is only when you have attempted to sponsor legislation that one can say they attempted to propose this legislation or policy. If they have not, why would they say so?

MR OTADA Okay, Mr Chairman, I concede on that. Since the chairman has already conceded on market share, I also propose that he concedes on the issue of market share in paragraph 8. The rest are okay.

MS AMONGI: Mr Chairperson, I do not know what the rationale for this is. This is trying to make the committee understand how the brands disaggregated in age, sex and globally, so that this is in the content of the report of the committee. For me, it is important for it to remain in the committee report for us to know which age group or gender is being affected more. If it is deleted and it is not in the report, then we are not going to know this aspect. Therefore, I oppose the deletion.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, the reason we removed market share in paragraph 1 clearly shows that even paragraph 8 will go away. Now, we have agreed that a person who will buy cigarettes will come with his or her identity card. The moment they show their identity card and you give them a packet, will you have the time to record whether they are male or female or that you have sold them Rex or Sportsman? It is going to be a very tedious thing. It is practically impossible. 

What we are trying to talk about is the brand of the cigarette, the person smoking and the age. They can tell you they are 31 years and then at the end of the month, you say those who smoked cigarettes for 31 years -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, there is a proposal to delete paragraph 8.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We delete it. That is what I was trying to tell my teacher, that this is impossible. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Let me concede - (Interjection) – Yes; what are you talking about?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question for the deletion of paragraph 8.

(Question put and agreed.)

Sixth Schedule, as amended, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The Member for Kibanda had something to say.

MR OTADA: Mr Chairman, in fourth schedule, I would like to beg the indulgence of my colleagues, and this is not to say that I am walking back on what we agreed -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Please, proceed.

MR OTADA: I had a difficulty with the amendment to the fourth schedule that wherever there 500 metres appears, we should replace it with 50 metres. 

Mr Chairman and honourable members, this is about selling and it is not about smoking. My question remains that supposing there is a warehouse, wholesaler, manufacturer or importer who is already established and then somebody builds a school 20 metres away from their premises, who vacates? I am looking at an aspect where we are more or less legislating for the closure of people’s businesses. 

Therefore, I want the House to really think about this. It is a matter that I am not very strong on, but I want us to think about it. In the event somebody raises it, it should not go on record that someone in the House raised it as opposed to someone outside the House. If we say 50 meters, we will be legislating for closing of people’s businesses for selling. This is not about smoking; it is about selling. I want the House to look at that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, even when we adopted clause 15, it was about selling and display. So, this matter the Member is raising is not new.

MR BAHATI: Thank you. Mr Chairman, the hon. Bitekyerezo read a provision saying - I am just seeking your guidance to see where to put it – that all notices displayed by the operation of the provision of this Act shall not attract any charge by the local government. In the committee and we deliberated on this. There are going to be billboards and signs and we thought that since this Bill is about public health, this -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I thought it was proposed under a schedule.

MR BAHATI: No, it was not proposed under a schedule. It was proposed under “miscellaneous”. So, I am seeking guidance where we can place it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: He proposed it under the sixth schedule and we adopted it under an amendment to that schedule.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, the chairperson misrepresented the views of the committee.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: How is that? 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Chairman, we deliberated on it in the other consultative committee and agreed to reintroduce it as a standalone provision that the billboards which will be -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Just propose. I do not have time for lectures now. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: There must be a formulation by the chairperson of the committee. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Chair, I am proposing a new clause to be placed at a point that we shall determine: “All notices displayed by the operation of the provision of this Act shall not attract any charge by the local government.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is a proposal for a new clause to exempt the taxation of those billboards which are giving these notices of public health. 

MR OBOTH: Why local government? Why don’t we just say “government”, whether central or local? How about if it is in Kampala Capital City Authority; will you take it as a local government? Why do you want to narrow instead of widening? 

MR BAHATI: I concede that we can replace the word “local” with “Government”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: “Government” includes all the other institutions, authorities and things like that. I put the question to that amendment for insertion of a new clause to take care of that particular exemption. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause, agreed to.

The title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

1.40
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House report. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)
 
REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

1.41
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Tobacco Control Bill, 2014” and has passed it with amendments. I beg to report. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

1.41
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE TOBACCO CONTROL BILL, 2014

1.42
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Tobacco Control Bill, 2014” be read for the third time and do pass. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Tobacco Control Bill, 2014” be read the third time and do pass. I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE TOBACCO CONTROL BILL, 2015”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, honourable members. This House is suspended to 3 O’clock.

(The House was suspended at 1.43 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.04 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, we had agreed to alter the order paper to accommodate a motion. Would you like to deal with the motion? Please call the motion that was without notice and then we proceed from there.

MOTION WITHOUT NOTICE

3.05
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker and Members. I rise to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament of Uganda urging the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to withdraw clause 4(1)(g) of the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2015.

The motion is being moved under Article 97 of the Constitution, rules 8 and 50(1)(m) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament (2012) concerning privileges. 

“WHEREAS the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs introduced the Bill entitled, “The Constitution (Amendment) Bill” and the said Bill was read for the first time on 30 April 2015; 

AND WHEREAS under clause 4 of the Bill that seeks to amend Article 83 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, it provides thus:

    (a) In clause (1), by substituting for paragraph (g) the following: ‘If the person leaves the political party or political organisation for which he or she stood as a candidate for election to Parliament to join another political party or political organisation, to remain in Parliament as an Independent member’; 

AND WHEREAS the words ‘or otherwise ceases to be a member of the political party or political organisation for which he or she stood as a candidate for election to Parliament’ may be interpreted, and depending on the different facts, to do away with parliamentary privileges as granted under Article 97 of the Constitution; 

AND WHEREAS the said clause may ultimately affect the operation, effect and meaning of Article 97 and thus become unconstitutional as it touches on the immunity and privileges of a Member of Parliament;

AND WHEREAS parliamentary privilege is sine qua non for functionality of Parliament under Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda;

AND WHEREAS it is of paramount importance, the circumstances under which the clause ‘or otherwise ceases to be a member of a political party or political organisation for which he or she stood as a candidate for election to Parliament’ needs to be clarified to avoid absurdities and illegality in future through well documented provisions, following wide consultations with the citizens of Uganda and practices in other Commonwealth countries;

AND WHEREAS the report by the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs is silent on the circumstances under which the clause must be invoked so as not to violate Articles 1(1) and 4, 79 and 97 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament that: 
    (a) The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs be urged to withdraw part of the clause, which reads, ‘or otherwise ceases to be a member of a political party or political organisation for which he or she stood as a candidate for election to Parliament’ of the Constitution (Amendment) Bill for its ambiguity as regards constitutionality, particularly in respect to Article 1(1), 4, 79 and 97 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.
 
    (b) The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs be urged to refer this issue of ‘ceasing’ or ‘otherwise ceases’ to the Constitutional Review Commission, which shall come out with specific grounds under which this clause can be invoked for incorporation into the Constitution.”

Mr Speaker, I beg to move this motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the Member for Ndorwa, Member for Sheema District, Member for Kyadondo East, Member for Rubaga South, Member for Kalungu West and the honourable Member for Kampala Central.

Would you like to speak to your motion? Who is the key seconder of this motion? Is that the Attorney-General for the –(Laughter) 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, the words that are put in clause 4 to state that, a person, on ceasing being a member of a political party or organisation for which he or she stood as a candidate for election to Parliament is grounds for the disqualification of a Member of Parliament, is most dangerous and at this point in time, it needs very careful consideration.

The grounds under which a Member of Parliament loses his or her seat are very well elaborated in the Constitution. For us, at this particular point in time, to have such a provision for which we may not be party as Parliament - the processes within individual political parties and organisations are difficult for us, as Parliament, to deliberate upon.

That is why we felt it pertinent that this particular amendment, as proposed in the Bill, be severed and not thrown out but referred to the Constitutional Review Commission that Government intimated to, when the Bill was being introduced.

To that extent, honourable members, let us tread very carefully about this because there are very many reasons, which we may not be party to, that a Member of Parliament can cease being a member of his or her political party or organisation.

To that extent, to draw this Parliament into such individual controversies within parties is very dangerous, to say the least. 

Honourable members, we are now running short of time. We would have wanted to have consultations but we do not have that opportunity to seek the views of the public. Each one of us should have had the opportunity to go back to our respective constituencies and ask our voters whether they would be prepared for their Member to lose a seat because he has had differences with the mother political party. We do not have that time now.

That is why we are saying that we are totally discounting this. In the wisdom of Government, as the movers of the Bill, they could have had good reason but it is important that we take very careful deliberations about this.

We need this to be fully studied and particularly, to see the practice in other Commonwealth countries. When the chairman of the committee was reading a report, we did not get a clear line on how, in those countries cited for instance Rwanda, a Member loses a seat because he has ceased being a member of the party.

However, even in that circumstance, it is more or less under the proportional representation whereby a party has a number of MPs. Once you cease being a member of that party, certainly it causes it to be imperative that a party has to replace its membership in Parliament.

Honourable members, you are aware that we are all voted for to join this House, if that is the path we take.
. Even when members are of the same political party; we get different votes on each polling day we vote; we are voted differently with different numbers. A woman Member of Parliament receives different votes from that of a constituency Member of Parliament –(Interjections)- I beg your pardon.

To that extent, it shows that each member is voted according to his/her own merit and with members of the public. You do not come here because you are given votes of a political party. That is why you end up receiving different votes from those of your colleagues and yet you are being voted at the same time on the same day.

Therefore, to that extent, it is important that we treat this matter with the care it deserves because of its sensitivity. I must add that the fact that this House is constituted the way it is and the fact that we have these four chairs here – (Interjections) - you never know, by the end of this Parliament, we could have had more than five members, even ten can cross over to this place because the circumstances are so unpredictable. You can never say “never” because it can also happen to you. 

For that, let us have that situation in mind and for posterity and political stability, we demand that this particular phrase or provision be severed and the rest of the clause remains, particularly from (g). We shall continue with (h) that talks about independent Members of Parliament and so forth. It is that, that we would like to seek the indulgence of Members to be severed and we proceed with the constitutional amendment process. I thank you, Mr Speaker and Members.  (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Seconder of the motion?

3.16
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Mr Speaker and honourable members, Parliament is one of the three arms of Government. Under Article 79, of the Constitution, Parliament has three major functions. For Parliament to exercise those three major functions, it must be independent of the other two arms of Government.

For a Member of Parliament to exercise these functions he must do so without fear or favour and accordingly the grounds under which a Member of Parliament must cease to be a Member of Parliament must be clear and unambiguous.

Under Article 1 of the Constitution of Uganda, power belongs to the people and the power is exercised through elections. When a Member of Parliament is elected, he/she must be assured of his/her tenure and must be able to know the particular situations under which a Member of Parliament may leave the seat of Parliament. 

The wording on clause 4(g) particularly the phrase “Or otherwise ceases to be a member of the political party or political organisation for which he/she stood as a candidate for election” is ambiguous. Why am I saying so? First of all, it does not show who determines that this member has otherwise ceased to be a member of a political party. You may be seated here in Parliament, hon. Pulkol comes up with his scorecard and says honourable so and so has performed poorly. He is not mentioned on the Hansard and also the people in the constituency will say because of this scorecard, we have withdrawn our confidence. Anybody may interpret that particular situation that way.

Secondly, it does not show that it is the member who decides on his/her own to cease to be a member under this clause. It does not show that it is the Speaker who determines under this clause that a member must cease. It does not even show that it is the political party and also it does not show that it is court. It leaves the gate so wide open that no Member of Parliament worth his/her name can ever come here, sit and deliberate properly when they know that this particular provision is there.

This provision can be invoked by anybody at any time for any reason or for none at all. That is why, had the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs given it adequate consideration, it would have provided conditions under which this phrase would be invoked.

As it is now, this clause would offend the provision of Article 1(1)and 4 of the Constitution. It would also offend Article 79 of the Constitution which invokes the privileges of a Member of Parliament. One of the privileges of a Member of Parliament is the immunity. The way this clause is worded, the immunity is withdrawn and done away with. Nobody would exercise his/her powers as Member of Parliament when this clause is retained.

Lastly, for us as a young democracy, with this clause in place, you would be assured of by-elections literally every week because you do not know who is going to invoke it. Tomorrow somebody will evoke it as a political party, the following day the constituency will invoke it, another day a Member of Parliament will invoke it, and the court may also invoke it. You will end up with a country that is destabilised because you will have unforetold and unforeseen by-elections, which is not good for democracy.

In that respect, I would support the motion urging Government particularly the mover of this Bill to withdraw this phrase onl” and move with other provisions of the Bill for us to move in tandem. I rest my case. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, on Thursday, hon. Theodore Sekikubo raised a point that this entire debate was subjudice. Today it is not sub judice. I do not know the kind of dilemma you have put the House in and the Speaker because last Thursday, you argued quite strongly that this matter was sub judice.

This entire motion is on that subject, which on Thursday last week you said was sub judice and I was supposed to rule on it today. But be it as it may, it is within the rights of a member to move motions and this motion is moved without notice and we have approved it that it should be moved and it has been accordingly moved. 

I now propose this motion for your debate. The motion I am proposing for your debate is for a resolution of Parliament urging the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to withdraw clause 4(1)(g) on the Constitutional Amendment Bill, 2015. That is the motion for your debate and debate starts now; unless the learned Attorney-General has something to say on this.

3.23
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Rukutana Mwesigwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. When Parliament was suspended this morning, hon. Niwagaba brought to my attention his intention to move this motion and he also brought to my attention the import of the motion. The motion is a substantial deviation from the contents of the Bill before the House but it is worth considering. I was proposing that Government be given time so we sit tomorrow in Cabinet and we look at the motion to save the time of this August House, we take a position on the motion – (Interjections) - we need to consult and decide whether we want to concede or oppose the motion. 

I would seek your indulgence that this motion be stood over until tomorrow afternoon, when we come and take a position. I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This House is governed by rules and a close look at rule 129 of our rules is to the effect that the Member in charge of a Bill may at any time give notice that, he or she wishes to withdraw a Bill subject to the approval of the House.

The minister is telling this August House that we wait for Cabinet to sit and take a decision on the Bill. Would that be procedurally right?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the motion is specifically that. It is urging the Minister of Justice to withdraw a clause of the Bill. That is substantially what the minister is responding to. I do not see any violation of procedure or any invention of new procedures here.


We have a Bill before us; it has clauses. A motion has been moved raising concern about a particular clause and it is urging the Minister of Justice to withdraw that.

The Deputy Attorney-General is saying; “okay, there has been a proposal from this motion that we should withdraw this. I have Cabinet sitting tomorrow; can I present this and come back in the afternoon and speak on it?” Would that be procedurally wrong, hon.Mwiru?

MR MWIRU: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, thank you very much, for the opportunity. As you are aware, I am the Secretary-General of FDC. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have not received any notification to that effect. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, if you have not received it, I am notifying you now. I was a Member of the Seventh Parliament when you were also here. I used to sit; I have seen exactly where my brother hon. Nyombi is sitting, there was a man called hon. Dan Kyewalabye from Kiboga West.

Mr Speaker, he got up when we were doing constitutional amendments and raised the following; that we do not need independents in this Parliament and swore over his body. I asked my brother, “why?” He went for NRM primaries, he lost. He was the first person to become an independent. (Laughter) 

Mr Speaker, I was reading the Hansard; there was a very intelligent man from Eastern Uganda called hon. Balaki Kirya -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala, wait. Are you debating now?

MR NANDALA MAFABI: No, I am just driving my point so that I can make a request. 


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: You need the information, Mr Speaker, because I remember you were the chairperson then. (Laughter) There was a very intelligent from Eastern Uganda called hon. Balaki Kirya and there was another intelligent one, hon. Bataringaya from the West.

Their group was good. There was a very intelligent Prime Minister then, from Lango. And you are aware he was nominated from Mbale. You know anybody who wants power has to go to Mbale and I saw recently hon. Amama was also going to Mbale; the blessings are there.

Mr Speaker, they were bringing a law here about detention. I can tell you those five men woke up saying, “This law should have been passed last week.” Indeed, that day it passed. In just three days, they were the ones they were applying the law to. And they were saying, “We never knew” but the law was applicable.

The minister maybe right wanting to withdraw but we as Members of Parliament need to also understand, in context, how this thing comes up. If what the Attorney-General of the middle group, because he also protects me at the back. If what he raised is serious, you are giving Secretary Generals of parties power, more than even members who vote them.

When you do not greet me well, tomorrow as a Secretary General I will say, “fire”, and you know I have powers. I am the Secretary General. I am the one to sign. I am telling you this will be a serious matter; for me, if you annoy me, you know what I will do. (Laughter)

If I go and meet my sister hon. Lumumba and say, “This one has annoyed us; we fire,” your side will be affected. How can a monkey say, you cut the forest. Can a monkey say cut the forest? You are about to cut a forest, with the law we are trying to make.

The minister can go and consult but as members of Parliament, this one affects us directly. We need to deal with it. And if we do not, we are in problems because tomorrow, we are going to debate fearing the powers that be. In fact, even the Leader of Opposition will think, “What is the Secretary General thinking?” Otherwise, he may annoy me and I fire him –(Laughter)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of order. I have listened to the newly elected Secretary-General of the Forum for Democratic Change.I have been made to believe and have seen in practice, that the Forum for Democratic Change is one party, which has demonstrated internal democracy and harmony in the party.

Is it in order for my Secretary-General to threaten me -(Laughter)- with expulsion, including the Leader of the Opposition, even before his leadership has taken root? (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, first of all, the records of this House are not aware about the goings-on in the Forum for Democratic Change. Whether there is democracy or not, this House is not privy to that fact. So, I will not be able to go into the details of those.

Secondly, when hon. Nandala-Mafabi was Leader of the Opposition in Parliament, he did exactly what he is threatening to do as Secretary General. (Laughter) I cannot put that past him personally that he can do it. On whether he is threatening the Leader of the Opposition or the Chief Opposition Whip, I did not read any threat in the words of hon. Nandala-Mafabi. What I read was a warning and forewarned is forearmed. So, I do not find him in violation of any of our rules of procedure. 

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to seek you procedural guidance and direction. First, I would like to appreciate my colleague, the Attorney-General, the other side.

The spirit with which he is moving to seek consultation and to find out whether they can easily concede to the motion - I can also perfectly understand where my colleagues who are moving this motion are coming from especially having tested it. 

My concern is where – and why I am seeking a procedural direction - is that I understand that once a motion is in the House, it is the property of the House. And that even withdrawing it has its procedural technicalities. Being the property of this House, we also have the right and duty to debate it and possibly contribute to the text of what the government would need to consider, whether to concede or not.

For the same reasons given by colleagues who are moving the motion, I agree that we do not need that clause. My colleagues and I have given these reasons in our minority report to the Bill. However, my concern in short is, supposing we would like to contribute to this motion and trim it because some of us are not agreeable to sending this issue before a constitutional review commission. I would easily agree with my colleagues if we were stopping at withdrawing. 

Therefore, at what point do we, as Members, come in to pronounce ourselves or contribute to the debate and to the text that the government side is going to consider? They may come tomorrow and say, “We are conceding to withdrawing it and taking it to the review commission” without hearing our side which is saying, it is idle and redundant. Just withdraw the thing because it has been considered before this Parliament and there are also many other reasons some of which we gave in our minority report.

May I, therefore, seek your procedural guidance, Mr Speaker; at what stage do we come in to give an alternative view to the motion, which would possibly structure the government side and to see where they are going to concede because if they concede to that the way it is, I will object. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable member, can I first rule on this procedural matter? Honourable members, this House does not debate in vain; it debates for a purpose. The purpose of this motion is to urge the government or the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to withdraw the proposed amendment in Article 83 (1)(g) of the Constitution; it is proposed by the government. The motion is seeking the minister responsible for this Constitutional Amendment Bill, to withdraw that clause. 

Now, in the event - and I must hasten to add - in the event that the minister should concede to this motion and withdraws the proposal, this House would not spend any single minute to debate a matter that does not require a debate because there will be no motion and there will be nothing to speak about.

As to whether in future the matter comes to a constitutional review commission among the terms of reference of the things they should look at, we cannot take a decision now that it should never come. That would not be regular. We leave it to them to decide what should come to the House and that House will decide on what can be decided upon.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker again, for accepting to guide me. I am entirely in agreement with the reasoning of the chairperson, as ever. My concern relates to resolution (b) in the motion, which I would invite my colleagues to look at critically. I am raising this in good faith so that the government is properly aligned. 

With respect to resolution (a), I agree, we have no problem. When it comes to resolution (b), “That the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs be urged to refer the issue to a constitutional review commission, which shall come out with specific grounds under which this clause can be invoked for incorporation into the Constitution.”

Now, if the government simply went and conceded on this, it would have an effect on our minority report, which is yet to be debated because our report and our view is that you must - we are proposing to Government to simply withdraw this proposal. When you talk of referring it to a constitutional review commission, it affects the content of our minority report. 

Mr Speaker and colleagues, that is why I am concerned that the best position would have been to allow us an opportunity, which I do not want to smuggle in now, to urge Government to concede to resolution (a) but also for us to amend and remove resolution (b), so that Government clearly concedes to (a) and we move in harmony. With respect to (a), I am very comfortable – (Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Thank you, hon. Medard Sseggona. I would like to seek clarification from you whether the same fear you have for (b) may not be the same fear for the minority report for (a).

MR SSEGGONA: First, I again would like to thank the Speaker for allowing me to allow clarification, where I rose to seek procedural guidance. But to my colleague and chairman of rules; No! Resolution (a) is in tandem with our proposal in the minority report, which is about withdrawing any reference, threat onto a Member of Parliament coming from his or her party or any external force outside Parliament.  Our view in that minority report is that the provisions of the Constitution, Article 83(1) are sufficient grounds for removal of a Member of Parliament. Now when you bring (b) - actually resolution (b) is another looming threat onto me because it is also seeking to empower somebody outside Parliament to amend the Constitution and whittle down the immunities and privileges I have as a Member of Parliament. That is why I am concerned about this - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, is there anybody outside this Parliament who can amend the Constitution?

MR SSEGGONA: No, that is why I am saying, you are empowering somebody outside Parliament to influence Parliament, which is the same threat that we are dealing with.

Mr Speaker, I am allied to the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Brig. Henry Tumukunde, which I would urge all colleagues in the four corners to read. It is very specific and emphatic on the privileges of a Member of Parliament to express himself in freedom and that a Member becomes a Member of the Parliament of the country. 

Therefore, this proposal of going back to a review commission etcetera - after all, the review commission will make recommendations; they will go to Cabinet and will come back here. So, my view with respect to my colleagues and also urging them to accept – is we could amend and remove (b), we send (a) to Government and say “Government, please consider (a)” and Government would come back in good faith and we would move.

I am not objecting at all, Mr Speaker, to the spirit of talking. Actually as a Justice Minister on your left, Mr Speaker, I am in agreement with my colleague across that if we can even move out and agree on this, we can come back with a report once (a) is removed. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion that has been moved is substantially before the House. I have even proposed the question for debate. That means it is the motion for the House. However, the institution or person the motion is urging to take some action has sought the authority of the House to do some consultations with the institution superior to him and responsible for this Bill tomorrow and he comes back in the afternoon.

That means we are not able to debate the motion, okay? I cannot say we will not be able to debate the motion because I have not heard the minister’s response. There are rules of this House that stop us from anticipating; to go into what the member for Busiro East is suggesting would be allowing the House to begin anticipating what the minister will come back with and that might be irregular.

The best thing to do in the circumstances is to allow the learned Attorney-General go back, consult Cabinet tomorrow morning and come back in the afternoon and speak to us of the result of his consultation. When he has spoken, then we see the ambit of how we can then take a decision on the motion because we still have to take a decision on the motion. This House has to pronounce itself on the motion once the minister has spoken and said, “Okay we agree but in the following terms,” then we can agree on the terms which will be taken up.

I think nothing is prejudiced; the only thing that we cannot do is to anticipate what the minister is going to come back with tomorrow –(Applause) 

MR SSEGGONA: I am obliged, Mr Speaker.

3.46
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Mr Speaker, I think the question - (Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, you are aware I was given an order and I would like to first thank you for your wise ruling.  I have seen many things take place and now I have seen Padyere –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you sat on your right this long, you can continue sitting a bit while I finish with Padyere. (Laughter)

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, your guidance predisposed what I was supposed to bring forward. I will not agree more than that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. What I would like to say is that we need to look at this motion but the Attorney-General has to convince us beyond doubt – anyway let me make my case small. I would like to thank you for your kindness again – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Budadiri West, do not exploit the Speaker’s relationship with you outside this House -(Laughter)– to begin making points that are going to push us outside what we should be doing. Let us have what you are going to say. You can raise the concerns tomorrow but for now there is basically nothing to debate. 

Honourable members, I am personally also in a kind of a situation because this motion seeks to take away my work of four days for preparing a ruling on the question of whether this matter is sub judice and I have burnt the midnight candle to prepare a substantial ruling and the proceedings of this motion would dispose of my requirement to make that ruling.

I am also equally concerned that I will be greatly disadvantaged having put a lot of effort in preparing a ruling and I now see a move from the member for Lwemiyaga, who initially caused me to go through this whole process of preparing a ruling and now he wants to take it away from me before I have done the ruling. 

Honourable members, but in the spirit of how we move forward, it will still be beneficial to all of us if this matter can be shortened and then we move with the substance of what is proposed before us.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In light of the above guidance and what is issued, I would like to seek your guidance whether the motion and import of that motion can be severed from the other main amendments which are under 4 so that the state, as proposed up to tomorrow, may not be a deterrent to the proceeding of debating the other core areas that some of us are interested in debating and getting justice about, especially 4(b) and (2)(a) in relation to Article 83. 

The mover of the motion tried to distinguish; so, we are requesting that you guide us on whether that would be able to hold the whole of 83 omnibus or it can be severed?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the motion is only in respect of strictly 4(a).

MR OBOTH: Most obliged.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Even my ruling was on 4(a) not 4(b); I mean the ruling I was going to make was on 4(a) because the issue of sub judice was only in relation to 4(a).

MR OBOTH: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in light of the foregoing - and let me just recognise in the Gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Lugazi UMEA Primary School. They are represented by hon. Ssali Baker and hon. Dorothy Mpiima. They had come to observe the proceedings of this House and I think they are the pupils who have just left. We apologise for that.

We also have in the Distinguished Strangers’ Gallery this afternoon, hon. Stephen Basaliza, former Member of Parliament for Burahya County in Kabarole District. He is here to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming him. (Applause)

Honourable members, in light of what has just transpired and having passed the Tobacco Control Bill and this being the only other item on the agenda and the Constitutional Amendment Bill which this motion now affects entirely, I do not think we will be able to go into item No. 4, which is the Constitutional Amendment Bill, because the motion kind of affects any debate on that. 

In view of that, honourable members, we are unable to do any other business. We can use the time to proceed with other matters which are before us outside this House. As for this House - and tomorrow I am advised that there is some urgent matter in Cabinet and the members of the Cabinet will not be with us in the morning even if we are to adjourn; and it is in the spirit of what we should do together. As the minister has requested that they have this Cabinet tomorrow, we can only come back in the afternoon. Therefore, this House stands   adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 3.53 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 29 July 2015 at 2.00 p.m.) 
