Wednesday, 20 July 2011

Parliament met at 2.31 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s sitting and I have a number of announcements. One is that today, we shall close the debate on the State of the Nation Address and begin receiving responses. Consequently, we shall sit tomorrow morning as well as in the afternoon to ensure that we complete all those answers by tomorrow evening so that we adjourn the plenary to enable the sessional committees to meet and discuss the policy statements.  That means that the standing committees would have to go into abeyance starting from tomorrow until the completion of the Budget process.

Parliament will resume on 16th August for debate on the Budget up to about 22nd August and thereafter, we shall receive committee reports so that we conclude the entire process by 31st August.

However, we have some unfinished business on the Pan African Parliament. If by 10.00 a.m. tomorrow we still have six nominees, then we shall have to conduct an election in the morning to elect the five Members to represent us to the Pan African Parliament. If they become five then there will be no need for an election.

I would also like to announce that as you recall, during our orientation, we discussed the issue of financial management and discipline. So, today there will be a lecture by Mr Ocici of Enterprise Uganda at 5.00 p.m. in the Members’ Lounge so that Members can benefit from that further interaction. We intend that every two weeks, we have that interaction to assist Members to settle down.

I do hope that all policy statements are now in so that Members can begin work. Thank you.

2.35
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As you are aware, in Uganda, we have one President who stays in State House, Entebbe and sometimes I think in Nakasero.

We have seen a continuous trend - in fact, I can say almost every week - of holding meetings of the NRM Party in State House, Entebbe. I would like to seek clarification from the Leader of Government Business if the use of State House Entebbe is for the NRM Party or for the people of Uganda.

In the same vein, you are aware that over the weekend, our colleagues, the NRM MPs, had to visit the President’s home in Rwakitura and even the Deputy Speaker, Rt hon. Jacob Oulanyah, went. We want to seek your confirmation or clarification because you have been around for many years, if it is allowed for a whole deputy speaker to participate in partisan activities like attending the NRM caucus and activities yet he is supposed to be an impartial person.

Finally - (Interruption)

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity. My brother who is on the Floor is raising a very important matter on a very important person in this land, the Deputy Speaker of Parliament. Our Rules of Procedure are very clear on matters regarding the President, Vice President, Speaker and Deputy Speaker, that you must move a substantive motion. A substantive motion requires a Member of Parliament to give information, three days in advance and it must be a substantive motion, not what he is doing now.

Is he in order to start discussing the person of our Deputy Speaker of Parliament in a manner that is contrary to our Rules of Procedure? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Leader of Opposition, I think you have been in this House long enough and the rules are well known to you. If you want to raise an issue about the conduct of the Speaker or Deputy Speaker, you must do so by a substantive motion. On the other matter, I will ask the Prime Minister to respond.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. I think I am putting you on notice that within three days, we shall move a substantive motion as guided by my brother, hon. Okot Ogong. Thank you very much. I have been around, but learning is a continuous process. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, as the Leader of Opposition, I have always been learning. As the Leader of Government Business comes up to respond, he should also confirm to us that the expenses, which were incurred, were not from the State House account.

2.42
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have no knowledge about this question raised by my colleague and nobody has ever complained about how funds are used in State House. So, I am not in position to respond to that – (Interruption)      

MR ODONGA OTTO: I want to thank my learned colleague for giving way. We were together at Law Development Centre. The information I would like to give to the Deputy Prime Minister is that yesterday the NRM Members of Parliament went to State House Entebbe, and utilised state facilities for partisan activities. I do not know whether you were in Uganda or not. We expect you to respond in your capacity as a lawyer and Leader of Government of Business in this House. Should the President continue to deplete public resources on partisan activities? Should Members of Parliament go to wine and dine at State House at the expense of taxpayers yet there are so many hotels available in town?
 
The information I am giving you is that they were there yesterday and I guess you were also there. Can you tell us who foots the bill for running water, electricity and the cost of maintaining those facilities?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I thought it was this Parliament which approved funds for this country to build a State House. I do not think the State House was intended to be a white elephant. I think it was intended to be used. The other day the Prime Minister said that Members of the Opposition are also free to go.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you for that information, Madam Speaker. The Political Parties and Organisations Act demands that all political parties should declare to the Electoral Commission their sources of income and how they are utilised. How do we cost a meeting like that of yesterday at State House? The spirit of the Political Parties and Organisations Act was very clear that party funds be distinctively cleared from State funds. 

MS MARIA NANKABIRWA: I would like to inform hon. Otto that the President of Uganda has got a right to consult Members of Parliament. He can invite hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, the President of CP or the Leader of the Opposition to State House to consult them. (Mr Ken-Lukyamuzi rose_)

It is good that hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi is standing up, I would like to ask him if cannot consult as the CP president and President of Uganda. Where would you consult from?

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, this is a very important matter.

MR CHEMASWET: I am surprised that sometime back Rule 66 was raised against hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi and Rule 46(b) has never been invoked to suspend the Rule of Procedure that was applied against him not to be heard. I have never heard of any motion raised to suspend the said Rule of Procedure. Is it in order for him to contribute to debate? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members it was not continuous, it was applied to the issue that was at hand. 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: We have been very clear and straight forward. I sought guidance from the Speaker of Parliament about a meeting which had been called by His Excellency the President. The Deputy Speaker ruled that the meeting called was not binding to all the Members of Parliament; it was an NRM meeting. So, if a Member stands to ask which funds were used to fund that process, he should get an explanation. He is a responsible person and cares for this country more than the Government does. We want to know which funds were used in State House.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I do not want you to legislate in anticipation. I have already said that you are going to discuss the policy statement; you can then ask the Minister how they have used the money during this year and that issue can come up. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: I am aware that the opinion of the Attorney-General is binding to this Parliament. Can you, Madam Speaker, direct the Attorney-General to give a legal opinion so that this issue is settled once and for all? The opinion should be about whether state facilities can be used for partisan activities? If so, can Col Besigye and other party leaders also be allowed to use those facilities? We need a detailed legal opinion so that these issues are resolved once and for all. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: I would like to give humble information to hon. Otto. We could get the legal opinion but I think let us understand the set-up of a multiparty Parliament. The Leader of Opposition has got an office in Parliament. Quite often, the President of the Opposition party has moved to that office. They have met foreign delegations there, and they have conducted press conferences in it. I have personally gone to that office and taken some water; why should it be of concern when the President, who is also the chairman of a ruling party, convenes a meeting of party MPs? Isn’t the office of the Leader of the Opposition given public funds? Should we also audit who takes his or her water. I think we need to raise substantive issues and not simple partisan politics. (Mr Okot Ogong rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Next item please. Please, hon. Members, next item.

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, we have no parking. There is no space at Bauman House, everywhere is full. Where should Members park? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we made arrangements for you to park at the National Theatre. I announced that last week. (Interjections) But hon. Okot Ogong, is that a matter that you should raise on the Floor of this House? You cannot see the Speaker? You do not know where the Speaker’s office is? (Laughter)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, on Friday, 15 July 2011, I was invited to the United States Ambassador’s residence in Kololo for a reception on petroleum. At the reception, there were Members of Cabinet and top dignitaries in this country. 

I am raising a matter of national importance. To what extent must this Parliament and the country wait until an ambassador, who is a foreign dignitary, declare to Ugandans that actually this country has realised 2.6 billion barrels of oil; to preach that Uganda can choose to take the path of prosperity by utilising well, this petroleum resource, and that Uganda could also choose to have it as a petroleum curse, amongst other discussions. I took this quite important because, as a country, we have the Frontbench and a Government in place - why is the issue of oil and petroleum findings being kept close to only some people’s chests? 

We keep seeing contracts being signed, money changing hands, shares being sold, but Parliament is not brought on board.

Madam Speaker, can I seek your guidance on how long this Parliament can wait for the petroleum policy and the production sharing agreements before we are told by any other person or other interests in this country? Can Government inform Parliament first; can Parliament be the priority in being informed about these issues?

I am lucky I was invited as the Chairperson of the Parliamentary Forum on Oil and Gas, but how about the other Members of Parliament who were not invited? How can we all come on board over this important resource in this country?

Madam Speaker, we need your guidance on this matter in strong terms because it is causing us embarrassment; to be learning about these issues from other sources - from embassies. For example, last week, the French Embassy also mentioned the same – (Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: The information I am giving is that I was equally invited to that festivity and I wondered what celebrations we were being entertained for, in an atmosphere where we remained to receive the products of oil.

MR SEKIKUBO: Certainly, that reception was one in harmony with the oil sector in Uganda, and that Uganda was bound to overtake other traditional oil exporters like Guinea and even Denmark. It is such an important thing, Madam Speaker, that I could not let it go unchallenged. May I challenge Government to tell us when we will be furnished with information and the production sharing agreements among other critical issues that we need in order to know more about oil as Parliament of Uganda? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can we hear from Government?

2.54
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Lt Gen.(Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I would like to appeal to the honourable member raising this issue that we are still handling the State of the Nation Address and that the minister responsible will be able to answer that question. I do not see the urgency and why we cannot wait for two days.

Secondly, we are also very happy for –(Interruption)

MR TINKASIMIRE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a point of order because I am incensed by what the Rt hon. Deputy Leader of Government Business has said; that matters of oil in Bunyoro are not urgent. They have been telling us that there was going to be an early production scheme in 2009. We are now in 2011 – we have been demanding, as legislators – imagine even as legislators from Bunyoro we are that ignorant about what is happening in that industry.

Yes, I was unfortunate not to have been invited to that dinner – (Laughter) but I am fortunate to belong to the Ninth Parliament from where now one of the colleagues is raising this matter. But when he raises it and the Rt hon. Deputy Leader of Government Business responds that matters of oil are not urgent, it beats my understanding. So, is he in order to say such when the people of Bunyoro are anxiously waiting for the production of oil with roads being bad?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, when we commenced the sitting today, I informed you that I expect answers from Government tomorrow on issues that have been raised. This is an important matter. We direct the Minister of Energy to include it in her response tomorrow. (Applause) 

Hon. Members, in the gallery, we have students and teachers of Kisoso Parents School, from Lwengo District, represented by hon. Gertrude Nakabira. They are here to observe proceedings of this House. (Applause)

Hon. Members, now that the House is slightly fuller, I want to notify you that we have not been able to complete our directory because some 25 members have not submitted their details, which is hampering our work. So, let me inform –

(The proceedings were interrupted by power failure.)

Hon. Members, since I cannot see you. House is suspended for 15 minutes.

(House was suspended at 2.59 p.m.)

(On resumption, at 3.07 p.m., the Speaker, presiding_)

Hon. Members, our directory has delayed because there are some Members who have not submitted their records despite being asked to register. I want to read their names so that they can assist us to complete our work: 

1.	Hon. Caroline Amali Okao.
2.	Hon. Gilbert Bukenya.
3.	Hon. Godfrey Ekanya.
4.	Hon. Kahinda Otafiire.
5.	Hon. Sam Kutesa.
6.	Hon. Mike Mukula.
7.	Hon. Maria Mutagamba.
8.	Hon. Vincent Nyanzi.
9.	Hon. Peter Nyombi.
10.	Hon. Nyombi Tembo.
11.	Hon. Fred Ruhindi.
12.	Hon. Edward Ssekandi.
13.	Hon. James Baba.
14.	Hon. Simon D’ujanga.
15.	Hon. Maria Kiwanuka. 
16.	Hon. Nduhura Richard.
17.	Hon. Jeje Odongo.  
18.	Hon. Ruhakana Rugunda. 

There are those who picked the forms but did not return them. They are:

1.	Hon. James Kiiza Rwebembera.
2.	Hon. Aboud Kitatta.
3.	Hon. Peter Aimat Lokeris.
4.	Hon. Samuel Lyomoki.
5.	Hon. Jim Muhwezi Katugugu.
6.	Hon. Ruth Nankabirwa Sentamu.
7.	Hon. Sam Owori Otada.
8.	Hon. Theodore Ssekikubo.
9.	Hon. Eriya Kategaya. 

Please complete the registration; otherwise, we cannot produce the directory. If they are not here, inform them. 

3.17
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We also need a word of caution because that directory actually reflects the true record of the academic qualifications or experience which we, Members of Parliament, hold. So, I request you, Madam Speaker, to caution Members to include their true qualifications or else we shall be embarrassed when people start challenging some of our colleagues’ qualifications that appear in that directory as not the true position. 

We have had this experience before. You see, what is required is an equivalent to A’level and there is no crime in that. So, if you have qualifications up to S.6, just say A’level and end there; other than saying that you have a degree in soap making from a certain university which is unknown. We have seen these things in the last Parliament and they should not be in this Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, what hon. Katuntu has raised is actually very serious. Sometimes I think Members forget what they wrote in the last parliaments and write something different in the next parliament, and it is difficult to synchronise all that information. So, please write what is there because these are public records; they are on our website and they are open to the whole world to check whether they are true.   

3.19
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, maybe in order to avoid problems we could have a dummy where Members can be given time to rethink. They may have filled the forms due to excitement and may have exaggerated; so give them an opportunity to look at it again. 

We are getting a lot of requests to audit our qualifications. To avoid the exercise beginning immediately, audit yourself. Let us have what is going to be produced availed to each Member such that if they want to make adjustments, they can do it now or else they will do it for them. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: I think that is a good idea. Can the Members check what is available about what they wrote to the Clerk and reconfirm before we publish it. I want to publish the directory because it is already late. 

BILLS
FIRST READING 

THE FINANCE (NO.2) 2002 (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011

3.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker and colleagues, I move that the Bill entitled, “The Finance (No.2) 2002 (Amendment) Bill, 2011” be read for the first time. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, we need to know what we are amending. I do not know what this Bill is. 

THE SPEAKER: It is there.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I think it should be “The Finance 2002 (Amendment) Bill, 2011” and not “No.2”. Where is No.1? Please, can you help us so that we can support what we understand?

THE SPEAKER: Where is the text of the Bill?

MR KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, the object of the Bill is to amend the Finance Act, 2002 to increase the levy on export of raw hides and skins of animals, including export for outward processing, and to provide for publication in the Uganda Gazette practise notes issued by the Commissioner-General. 

THE SPEAKER: Are you contesting the nomenclature? 

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to put the record right. I was in the Seventh Parliament in 2002 when the Minister of Finance brought the Finance Bill No.1 and it had some errors. I was a member of the finance committee and we ordered the Minister of Finance to put the record right and bring Finance Bill No.2, which was tabled in Parliament and it was passed. All along, we have been amending that law, which was the Finance Act No.2, and which is in the library. This is what the minister is trying to say. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, then I think my colleague has a huge problem. If No.1 had a mistake, then it does not exist. It was perhaps withdrawn because it had mistakes, and if it was withdrawn, then it ceases to be No.1. You cannot make the record correct. Just say that it is the Finance Act, 2002 that we are amending and not No.2. If we erred as Parliament - I was in that Parliament - then it was a mistake and we should correct it so that we really amend the law. Anyway, the Attorney-General is here smiling; maybe he should help us. Where is No.1 and 2?

MR KASAIJA: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, a record is a record and the truth is the truth. There is No.1 and No.2 so, we cannot withdraw it, and he has given us an explanation. So, if you insist, then perhaps we can bring the Bills here at an appropriate time. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, why don’t you examine that when the Bill is in the committee? At the end we shall have to pass the title, so you can examine it further in the committee. Let us send it to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE STAMPS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011

3.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker and colleagues, I move that the Bill entitled, “The Stamps (Amendment) Bill, 2011” be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? The Bill is committed to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011

3.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I move that the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2011” be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded. The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill is committed to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE EXCISE TARIFF (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011

3.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker and colleagues, I move that the Bill entitled “The Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2011” be read for the first time. 

THE SPEAKER: Seconded. The Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill is committed to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011

3.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I move that the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2011” be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2011 is committed to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.


PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

3.29
THE CHAIRPERSON, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Ezati Kassiano Wadri): Rt Hon. Speaker and colleagues, I am in possession of eight project accounts that have already been audited by the Auditor-General. I have the pleasure of laying them on the Table for this Parliament to consider.

The first one is Partnership Initiative for the Implementation of Strategic Approach to International Chemicals Management (SAICM), covering the financial year ending 31 December 2009 -(Interjections)- The document I have here is for 2009. 

The second document I wish to lay on the Table, containing the Auditor-General’s report, is for project support to Ministry of Foreign Affairs – Preparatory Assistance Project. The financial statements are for the year ended 31 December 2010. 

The third project is Community Based Conservation of Wetland Biodiversity in Uganda (COBWEB). This is a report for the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2010 together with the report of the Auditor-General. 

The next report is on the project Youth Civil Society Empowerment - the Uganda Youth Network, covering financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2010 together with the report of the Auditor-General.

The next project report is for the project National Urban Policy Development Support. This statement of the Auditor-General covers the financial year ending 31 December 2010 together with this report. 

The next project that has been considered by the Auditor-General is the project Crisis Management and Recovery Programme – Livelihood Intervention in Acholi Region. It is implemented by the Norwegian Refugee Council. This covers the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2010 together with the Auditor-General’s statements. 

The next project report is for the project Improved Utilisation of Resources – Support to Alliance for Mayors and Municipal Leaders on HIV/AIDS in Africa. This covers the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2010 together with a report from the Auditor-General. 

The second last project I have is support to District Development Programme (DDP III) covering financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2010 together with the report of the Auditor-General.

Lastly, but not least - I think this one is different. I thank you.

MR ABDU KATUNTU: Rt. Hon. Speaker, I think you need to correct the Order Paper for Item 1. The paper that was laid on the Table was for the financial year ending December 2009 and not 2008 as reflected on the Order Paper. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it 2009? Item 4(i) up to 4 (viii) are remitted to the Public Accounts Committee with amendments as indicated by the Shadow Attorney-General. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE WELFARE OF THE GOVERNMENT SPONSORED STUDENTS IN EGYPT AND TANZANIA

3.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (DR COS KAMANDA BATARINGAYA): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the Government of Uganda receives scholarships annually from friendly countries. The scholarships from these countries cover tuition, feeding expenses, medical expenses and boarding costs. Countries that provide such scholarships are Algeria, Egypt, Turkey, India, Cuba, China, and Czech Republic. The students in these countries are 367 -(Interjections)- in all.  The statement is being distributed, Madam Speaker. 

Uganda and Tanzania, under the framework of the Inter-University  Council for East Africa, exchange students who qualify for Government sponsorship in each other’s country to pursue their study programmes in each other’s country. Under this programme, Uganda has 70 students in Tanzania. This category of students’ scholarships in either Uganda or Tanzania also covers tuition, feeding expenses, medical expenses and boarding costs.

The Government of Uganda pays a monthly top-up allowance to the Ugandan students abroad to help them with other necessities outside those listed in paragraph 1.1 and 1.2. Therefore, the question before the Floor of Parliament, that Ugandan students abroad on government to government scholarships are starving, is not correct.

The top-up allowances to Ugandan students abroad on government to government scholarships are remitted on a quarterly basis upon release from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. This is how our students in the countries which I have mentioned in paragraph 1.1 and 1.2 receive their allowances. 

The Ministry of Education and Sports has finalised the process, as I said in my verbal statement here on Friday - I had said Tanzania, under the Inter-University Council of East Africa Exchange Programme - and the Bank of Uganda was authorised to transfer the allowances on Tuesday, 19 July 2011. I am sure that since today is 20th they should have received that money. The ministry is now in the process of processing allowances for students in Algeria, Egypt, China, Cuba, India, Czech Republic and Turkey. The delay in the release of funds to the Ministry of Education and Sports by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development occasioned the delay of transfer of funds to the students mentioned above.

In conclusion, Ugandan students on government to government sponsorship cannot starve in their respective countries of studies as the scholarships cover all the welfare costs. That is what I have to say, Madam Speaker and hon. Members. 

3.38
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to seek clarification from the honourable minister because on a number of occasions since the war broke out in Libya, it has been reported in the press that Ugandan students were stranded. At one time it was reported that some had been evacuated and even when those who returned were interviewed, they said others had to remain and wait to complete their studies. 

I want to find out from the honourable Minister of Education whether we still have students in Libya on scholarship or sponsorship by whichever authority. Also, given the changes in Libya and what our relationship with them is, are we taking on the interim government which is in Benghazi or are we liaising with the authority in Tripoli? What is the fate of our students under such circumstances? I thank you very much.

3.40
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Youth Representative):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to inquire from the minister because as you can imagine, we receive so many questions from young people, especially from vulnerable homes, on state scholarships and other scholarships of this nature. So, I want to find out from the Minister of Education how these scholarships are received. 

Also, if possible, can this information be availed to as many as possible, especially the MPs? I know that there are quite a number of people that they would want to recommend for these scholarships, some of whom are from their constituencies. Thank you.

3.41
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Franca Akello): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to find out from the minister the criteria they use for selecting these students. We know that in the ministry you have this district bursary programme and every year you carry out admissions for this bursary programme and quarterly, you send Members copies of the schedule. So, we would also be very grateful if you provided all Members - it can be yearly or quarterly - schedules of those admissions in all the universities abroad so that Members are able to appreciate whether their areas are covered or not.

Two, the minister said that it is not true the students who wrote the letter - I tabled the letter myself and I was wondering whether he really read the letter which I tabled. I actually tabled two; one was from the students in Egypt and the other was from Dar-es-Salaam. In each of those letters, they were expressing serious concerns that they are starving because their monies are not sent and there are some salient issues there especially for those students of Dar-es-Salaam. 

Some of these issues are very important for this House to get to know. They stated, for example, that the amount of dollars that they were getting before was reduced without their notice. This has affected their welfare given the fact that the amount they were getting was at least able to sustain them. So, can you assure the House if this was also a lie or it was true? If it is true, why did it happen and why didn’t you let them know? 

The students also expressed concern that each time they were communicating to the Ministry of Education, the staff – actually there was one staff you will see they put in brackets in that letter – told their leadership that they are no longer a priority and so they should stop disturbing them. So, can you take some disciplinary action, hon. Minister, because your staff cannot give adequate answers; instead, they are discouraging the students. That is very unkind. 

Lastly, I thank the minister for keeping his word. Although he promised to bring this yesterday, the feasting at State House failed him. However, we are yet to prove that the students have received the money. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think you are now going into budgetary issues. I do not know whether you cannot handle this matter next week when you are dealing with ministries. 

Before hon. Ssebagala comes in, I want you to join me in welcoming children of Bethel Primary School from Makindye West, represented by hon. Kyanjo and hon. Nabilah. They are up there. (Applause)

3.46
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have four concerns. The first is a request to the minister to clarify whether the scholarship board is still functional. As Members of Parliament, we would like to know how that board functions. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I remember travelling with you to Cuba and when we met our students there, they outlined their problems and you later invited some officials from the Ministry of Education. I would like to know how far they have gone as far as addressing those students’ concerns. Cuba is very many miles away. Some of them are still stuck after completing their studies because they do not have return tickets. I would like to find out if the minister is aware of that. 

Thirdly, I would like to comment on their method of advertising. The Ministry of Education advertises whenever they get scholarships, but in most cases, they do this for countries that are hard-to-reach. When it comes to “juicy” countries, the ministry does not advertise their scholarships. I do not know whether the minister is aware that the advertisements are only for hard-to-reach countries. (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, from Friday we shall be sitting in sessional committees. You are all welcome to go to any sessional committee and raise your issues there. As much as you cannot vote, you can raise issues directly with the officials.

3.48
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): I would like to find out from the minister how much money is sent to these students who are on scholarship. I am aware that the tuition may vary from course to course but certainly, in a particular country the feeding costs, medical expenses and boarding costs should more or less be uniform. So, I believe that this statement would be complete if you provided us with actual costs. I know that these students are not mad; I have seen letters from them and probably this is the first time this matter is being raised. Why didn’t they raise it before?

Secondly, I would like to call upon the minister to provide an audit for the last 15 years, of scholarships that have been extended to students in this country. I think that way we will see whether regional balance has been respected, gender issues are taken care of, whether the beneficiaries actually completed their courses and have become useful citizens of this country, and whether they have returned to the country. All this information is necessary so that Parliament can be able to ascertain whether there is value for money and that there is transparency and accountability. (Member timed out_)

3.51
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to give this information to the Minister. By 10 O’clock this morning, verifiable information from the students, at least those in Tanzania, was to the effect that they had not received the money. They can be reached on telephone lines +255718000426 (Peter) and +255683553525 (Samuel). It will be very easy and useful for you to communicate with them.

The other issue is, when the minister was making his presentation he said there are 70 students in Tanzania. I have a list starting from Asiimwe Noeline – pursuing a course in LLB – and the last student is Namugama Samonica, doing Medicine, at number 67. I would like to know the other three, based on the actual names as have been presented on this list. I do not know whether you have this list. Thank you.

3.52
MR KAPS FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Picking from my colleagues here, the minister’s statement disputes the original complaint from one of our colleagues that there are Ugandan students abroad complaining of starvation. According to the minister here, there are no starving students and they have sent money. Maybe the money has been sent but to “ghost” students. The word “ghost” is not new here; we have had ghost teachers and soldiers. Therefore, I ask the minister to table the list of the students who have received the money from the ministry. 

Can we also get the list of the students who have been mentioned here so that we can prove that the students who complained and sent letters to the Members of Parliament are on the list of the Ugandan students who are abroad? 

Lastly, why is it that we have complaints only from Egypt and Tanzania? Case by case, country by country, can we also have the lists separated so that we can analyse the specific problems that are arising from those countries. I rest my case. 

3.54
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I just have two questions for clarification. One, it is true that the ministry usually advertises some of the available scholarships. However, is it possible, maybe starting with this financial year, for the ministry to share the list of available scholarships with the Members of Parliament so that we could help in popularising and informing our various constituents of the available opportunities? (Applause) This is because some of us represent communities which never have access to newspapers.

Two, the minister says the Ministry of Finance was directed to effect payments on 19th July, but the inquiries that we have made from various accounting officers are to the effect that the Ministry of Finance has not uploaded money onto the system. So, do you think it is possible that Ministry of Finance actually paid when it has not yet even remitted money for districts nor paid civil servants? Do you actually think that Ministry of Finance paid yesterday when it has not been able to release money to all Government departments? Why do you think that Ministry of Finance paid when actually they have not paid all the departments in Uganda? Thank you very much. 

3.56
MR BIRIGWA JULIUS JUNJURA (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just have a few concerns in regard to the minister’s statement. I happen to be representing a very vulnerable region, which I do not think has ever had the opportunity of having any student benefitting in this regard. This raises the other concern which my colleague, hon. Amoding, was raising about the criteria used in this. I am glad the hon. Baryomunsi is also raising exactly the same issue that I had in mind; in terms of popularising the information on the ground such that our people are aware of these opportunities. 

Secondly, I was one of the youth who represented Uganda in Egypt 2004 during the Afro Arab Youth Conference and we met some few students studying in Cairo. The point I would like to raise here is the relevance of the courses which we are offering. If you realise the country’s future in offering these opportunities to Libya, Algeria, Egypt and Turkey – I could restrict myself to Egypt - what is it that we are teaching our people? 

Currently, Uganda is facing the problem of unemployment of the youth, mainly because of the courses we offer in our curriculum. So, sometimes for these students who are going there, hon. Minister, we might need to find out what it is that they are studying and how important it is for them to go there. Otherwise, we might just be paying money to students who might not necessarily be of any relevance to this –(Member timed out_) 

3.58
MS FLORENCE KINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to give the Minister of Education information about what he has just presented to this House. It is not true that all Ugandan students on Government scholarships cannot starve in their various countries because the scholarship covers all welfare costs. The minister should know that in the case of Cuba, some students have taken a long time without getting that top-up. Some have graduated without ever getting it, and the money they get from the Cuban Government is 100 Peso which equivalent to US$ 1 per month. 

When I was still working with the Ministry of the Presidency, State House, I used to go there and at times it would be an embarrassment –(Interjections)- to find a student living on US$ 1 per month and yet getting no top-up. Some students have even run mad due to the situation in some of those countries, but they have not been given air tickets. One of the students, if the minister would like to know, was Dan whose other name he knows very well. He spent over ten years stranded in Cuba until the nearest Ugandan embassy, which is in Canada, learnt of His Excellency’s eminent visit to Cuba that they expressly gave him a ticket back to Uganda. 

I would also like to request the Ministry of Education to send our children to countries in which they know we have embassies or missions. They know that students suffer and have nowhere to go. They end up asking other countries in which they know we have embassies for help and yet they get very little help. It was until you, Madam Speaker and His Excellency the President, went there that these students got the help they are getting now. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.01
MS SARAH NAKAWUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. During the induction which took place at Imperial Royale Hotel some few weeks ago, the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Finance was asked why he takes his time to release funds to the relevant ministries. In his response, he answered that the delay is caused by some sectors which do not submit their work plans and other relevant documents in time. So, may I ask the minister whether the Ministry of Education was among those ministries that did not submit the required documents thus causing mishaps there? Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I just wanted to confirm what the two Members have said. I went to Cuba with hon. Latif Sebaggala and hon. Kubeketerya and we found the students in a really dire situation. When I came back, I wrote to the President about the problem and invited the Minister for Higher Education to see whether they could quickly address the shortages and send money to these children. 

One of the things I found was that the bulk of the courses that these children were taking would have no relevance when they returned here. So, we asked the minister as to why they allowed these children to go and do these courses. Of what benefit are they to this country? A child spends six to seven years there wasting time and they come back and have no jobs and yet they are children from poor families. Most of those in those places are children of poor families. 

So, I would like to pick the point raised by hon. Amuriat. I think we should not just talk about 15 years. Do not just give us an update of 15 years; the Committee on Social Services should now make it a requirement that at every budget, your ministry must report how many Ugandans have been sponsored and for which courses. It is not just the money. We want to know how many have been sponsored, by name, so that we know how the Ugandans are fairing on this issue. (Applause) You can answer, minister. 

4.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Mr Kamanda Bataringaya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleagues for their responses to my statement to this august House. 

I will start with the Youth MP who asked: How do we receive this and how do we distribute the scholarships? We receive the scholarships through Ministry of Foreign Affairs and distribution is normally through adverts. We have a website and those adverts are put there. They are also put them in the media and we also pin them on our notice boards in the ministry. If you go there, you will see which one is for where. So, that is what happens.

The criterion for selection is that we have a central scholarship committee. When you apply, you go through the process. The criterion is laid out, not necessarily per district but as Uganda. We require a minimum of two principal passes as well as the type of courses you are taking. So, the criteria are there and are also put up when the advert is being made.

The shadow minister said that she heard that the allowances have been reduced. It is not true. Our students get US$ 100 per month. For the case of Tanzania, it is US$ 30 per month. This is the top-up. It is not true that it has been reduced, in fact –(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Thank you, hon. Minister, for giving way. The information I want to give you is to the effect that the letter, which was written by the students, clearly states that you deducted US$ 100 from their top-up for the month of April. The letter is here and is written in very simple English. I do not know why the minister continues to insist that this is not true. The letter is there as well as the list of students and their telephone numbers. Let us act as civilised people so that we can exchange this information with humility.

MR BATARINGAYA: Madam Speaker, I would request hon. Kyanjo to lay that document on the Table so that we can take the necessary action. That is what I can say.

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, with much pleasure and extreme willingness, I beg to lay on the Table a letter duly signed by two students, Peter and Samuel, written on the 7th. I think it was given to them already. I also beg to lay a list of the 67 students that we know about for the consumption of the minister, his ministry and this Parliament. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: There is some important information from hon. Ajok. She studied there. Let her tell us.

4.08
MS LUCY AJOK (UPC, Woman Representative, Apac): Madam Speaker, I am a former student in Cuba and I am talking from experience.  This thing is not starting today, but is a chronic disease in Ministry of Education. If it was a father who had sent their child to school and abandoned them there, you would find child welfare running after them. In this particular case, I think it is similar to that; we were sent to Cuba and abandoned there. We had students who could not even get out of bed to go to class because they did not have trousers to put on. We had to practise solidarity and help our own at least to get jeans and T-shirts so that they could study because that was the reason why we were there.

We have a country. Even a refugee would not be reduced to that because UNHCR would be looking after them. We have a situation where instead of students uniting and being together, this action of Ministry of Education causes disunity and hatred. I have my former students who hated each other because they thought Ministry of Education sent money which was eaten by one of them.

This has gone on too long. They must streamline the way students outside are sent money. They have to beg for it yet they need to study. It is degrading the country because people think Ugandans do not care about themselves. It is also degrading the image of the country to the host government, because they get to know. As Madam Speaker said, the Committee on Social Services and each MP should really get to know the list of the students who are outside on scholarship and in which country they are in. We should all try and check, every now and then, on what has happened.

At the very least, I would have thought the honourable minister should have given us the details of remittances to these students, maybe in the last six months or one year rather than just - you have those details in your ministry and they should provide them to you. They should tell you, “We have sent so much money to this place and this was the criteria for sending so much money to this place”. We would not be wasting our time discussing this if that was availed to all honourable members. Thank you.

MR ABDU KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the minister for yielding the Floor. I am a little bit uncomfortable about what my colleague, hon. Hussein Kyanjo, has done by laying the letter, names and signatories to the petition on the Table. What guarantees do we have that these students are now not going to be victimised, because it is going to be a big problem? I am sure that by the time they appealed to this House, they must have had so many fruitless efforts with the ministry. So, can the ministry guarantee that these students will not be victimised because of this petition?

4.12
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, it is good you have noticed that the children of the poor are the ones who are sent to Cuba, Tanzania, Djibouti, Algeria whereas some of those on the Frontbench have their children go to Washington, New York, Boston. They are not poor but are using state resources. 

The problem is bigger than what you are seeing. In fact, we have scholarships from Uganda which the Ministry of Education handles and then there are those given from outside, from good universities. Even Harvard gives us some. You will discover that the ones of Harvard are taken by the Frontbench and the ones for Cuba are given to people in Teso, Arua, Lango, Mayuge. So, if we are going to do the audit, we would need to talk about the scholarships both from Uganda and those we are given - (Interruption)

MR NASASIRA: I have been listening carefully to the Leader of the Opposition making very wild and dangerous allegations while pointing fingers at one side of the Frontbench. He says the students of the poor go for scholarships to some relatively poor countries, but those for the Members on the front bench get theirs to go to better countries. He went ahead to name specific areas in Uganda where some students are sent to certain countries and others go to other places. 

All these allegations are made without substantiating. Is it in order that a leader of the Opposition can continue making such serious allegations to the point of trying to divide the country without any substantiation and evidence?

THE SPEAKER: Does the Leader of the Opposition have information about this divide in distribution of scholarships? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I want you to give us about 15 minutes and we will even read you the names. I can tell you that we have people who are studying about oil; we have people who are in Sandhurst studying ICT and you will not get a Mugisu or an Itesot among them. You will only get people from one place.

MS ALASO: The information I want to give to you regards the two districts that I have had the opportunity to represent in this Parliament; that is, the old Soroti and now Serere. For the entire 10 years I have been here, neither Soroti nor Serere have ever got the opportunity to even send one child on those scholarships for the poor. We do not even have children on the scholarships of the President’s office. We hear that they have them but we do not even have one. 

MR OGWANG: I want to thank the Speaker and colleagues. I want us to be realistic when we are discussing issues about scholarships. I come from Soroti, so let us talk about the East African Civil Aviation Academy; how many people from Teso are in that flying school? Let us look at the facts as they are. We are not benefitting anything as a community.

When we are talking about that East African flying school, then we are talking about pilots. That is a marketable course. I want the Minister of Education to start giving such courses to our students other than giving us fake courses which are not relevant to the current situation. Let us be realistic. The East African Civil Aviation Academy in Soroti is not helping Ugandan students, to be sincere. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I have agreed to get information from hon. Omolo and hon. Sabiiti -

THE SPEAKER: You are taking over my chair, hon. Nandala. 

MR OMOLO: In our area, relationships are patriarchal. This means that children get names from their fathers’ clans. It is, therefore, unfortunate that there was a Mbabazi joining under these district quotas. We wondered where this Mbabazi had come from in Katakwi of all places. 

If you went to the flying school, there are about 70 students and if you look at them, you would imagine that they are from one father because of the resemblance. None of them has a short nose. We begin wondering how those people are selected to go to that institution. We who come from there are not in that school but those from afar are in the school. We fail to know how people get into that school.

MR SABIITI: The issue of scholarships has been on for a long time. It is high time that the relevant minister comes on this Floor and he clarifies on some of these issues. The Committee on Foreign Affairs demanded for that list. I was the Vice-Chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee of the Seventh Parliament and we demanded for that list. State House refused to release it. We know of many people who do not qualify but have gone on state scholarships to Britain and India. Parliament should be given a chance to know who qualifies to be given scholarships on public funds. 

It is an issue that I think should be exposed because a few people in small tribes have taken advantage of the state. They have taken advantage because of their closeness to the treasury, and this should stop so that people who have the right heads qualify to go and study for the benefit of society.

MR KAKOOZA: Let me read Rule 40(1) verbatim: “A Minister may make a statement at the appropriate time on the sequence of business prescribed by rule 22 with the prior permission of the Speaker whether for the purpose of explaining Government policy or action upon any matter. 

(2) No debate shall follow from the statement but elucidatory questions may, with the permission of the Speaker, be asked of the Minister making the Statement.”  

Madam Speaker, I beg your indulgence; Members are raising pertinent questions and you have ruled that since we are going to the social services committee, we can discuss this in detail. The statement from the minister says, in part, that “...hon. Members may wish to note that the delay in release of funds to the Ministry of Education and Sports by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development occasioned the delay of transfer of funds to the students mentioned above.” 

Madam Speaker, I am raising this issue because I would like Members of Parliament to take it as a serious point. You remember that year in year out there is a delay in release of funds. Ministry of Finance should not make it a habit to delay money because the accounting officers are appointed before. I know that this delay affects service delivery in all ministries. I also know that even we, Members of Parliament, may not get our salaries until August and we will be suffering.

So, I would like to beg your indulgence so that as we get into committee work, Members in their respective committees should address this issue and come up with reports so that we can solve it once and for all. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Let us conclude please; two minutes only.

4.25
MR FELIX OKOT-OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, the issue of Government scholarships is very important. Ever since I became a Member of Parliament, about 15 years now, this issue has been coming up. I have taken my time to study it and I want to inform the House that it is an appalling matter. 

When you study the scholarships awarded to students to do oil studies, you realise that the students come from one particular region. When you look at other scholarships, you realise that there is a lot of inbreeding, with people bringing in only their relatives. I would like to appeal to my Government and the country at large to promote unity –(Interruption)

MS NAKABIRA: Madam Speaker, it is not true that these scholarships are given to people from one region and I would like to comment on that –(Interjections)– Yes, it is not true. My sense is that a list should be provided because I know that whenever these scholarships are given to us as a country, the responsible ministry advertises –(Interjections)- Yes! In the case –(Interruption)

MR OKOT-OGONG: Madam Speaker, as I was saying, the matter is very simple. The ministry should avail us with a list of all those people who have been –(Interjections)– Yes, we need a list of all those who have been given scholarships to do oil studies. We need those names. I am saying this because I am talking from an informed position and not on the basis of hearsay.

Further, I would like to appeal to my Government to realise that we must be united as a country because we are all Ugandans and must live like Ugandans. We must enjoy our rights and there must be justice in this country. We cannot allow people from the North and East to go on missing out on these scholarships with people from only one group driving vehicles and sending their children to better schools yet most people are poor. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

MS LANYERO: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I am only giving some information because I once worked with some of these scholarships boards. I once worked with the Makerere University Academic Registrar’s Department. It is true that most of these scholarships do not get to the people in disadvantaged areas. The reason is because of the requirements –(Interjections)– Yes! The reason is about the requirements. 

I am saying this because sometimes when they advertise, they want students who have done chemistry, mathematics or physics and when you look at the applicants, you realise that people from a particular area have better grades in those said subjects. So, the issue is about the education system, which has to be streamlined. There is a problem with it because in other areas of this country, the schools are not as good as those in some –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, I want to continue, please protect me.

THE SPEAKER: Members, please allow her to speak.

MS LANYERO: Thank you. As I was saying, all these scholarships are advertised in the newspapers and university notice boards, but the problem is about the criteria of choosing who goes for a scholarship –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, is the honourable member holding the Floor in order to insinuate that us who come from the disadvantaged areas are genetically dwarfs and cannot perform very well in chemistry yet even the best science professors at Makerere come from those areas she is talking about? Is she in order to assume that we are academic dwarfs?

THE SPEAKER: No, I think you did not understand what hon. Lanyero was talking about. What she said is that the facilities in the schools in this country are not uniform and, therefore, in some parts of the country, students do not have the facilities to enable them get those good grades. It is not that there are dwarfs in certain parts of the country; she actually wants facilities to be uniformly supplied to schools in the country. Hon. Lanyero, please conclude.

MS LANYERO: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for protecting me and making my point very clear to the Members. What I am saying is that there is a problem with our education system. If we do not address that, there is no way there can be regional balance in regard to scholarships. So, this is now the task for the ministry. How is the ministry going to ensure other districts also benefit from these scholarships? How is the ministry going to ensure schools in those other districts have equipped laboratories so that students from there can also favourably compete for these scholarships?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, for the record, when we went to Cuba, we were so traumatized that we had to leave our per-diem with the children there, but also those were children from only one city where we were. We were told that there had been others who had failed to come over because they had no transport. The situation is very serious, by the way. We need to find a solution. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you can also see for yourself that what hon. Nasasira wanted from me has been provided in less than 15 minutes –(Interjections)– Yes, because it is not only this side that is complaining; the Government side is complaining too. My sister who once worked with scholarship awarding boards has even confirmed to us; they killed Layibi, Nabumali, Busoga College Mwiri, Teso College, Mvara so that the good ones can be taken to a certain area to come and take all the scholarships. I think that is very dangerous for this country. It is important that we review our systems. You have had your share but you continue to cheat us but we shall fight up to the end. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this matter is very important and we want the committee to address it and bring a detailed report when we report back for the budget debate. We want to know how much you are giving these children, how many have gone, how many have come back and what courses they are doing because some of the children I found in Cuba really spoke of useless courses. 

MR DOMBO: I want to seek your indulgence. I listened to this debate and did not want to interrupt at the time, but if it goes on the record of the Hansard unchallenged, the future Hansard readers and most especially the children in the gallery may fail to understand what this House is up to. Whereas there could be unfairness in the way Government or individuals act, as a Parliament when we debate and describe regions or people and border on insulting communities, it becomes unfair to the House and to the people who watch us on television. 

Madam Speaker, an honourable member referred to children in the flying school in Soroti and said that they look alike and with sharp noses. Whereas this description of individuals’ borders on insulting communities and friends and it can hurt decorum in our House, it must be condemned and we must refer to people with respect. That is what I want captured on the Hansard. 

MR OKUPA: I need guidance because, hon. Members –(Interjections)- I need to be protected, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, when a policy was adopted here for quota allocations for universities, the government did well and published all the names per district. Is it possible for you to direct the Ministry of Education to do the same for the list of Ugandans on scholarships, or those studying out of the country, such that this matter can be put to rest and we get to know who is telling the truth and who is not? We should know those who are in Iran for the petroleum courses and those in these countries that have been named here, those under the President’s scholarship and those in the Scandinavian countries, those in America, those in the UK and others. We should know this such that the country is comfortable about the list and possibly corrects it. 

If the Government can do that and have it in the media like it has done for the quota admissions to Makerere University and other government universities, then the country will know that we have them at heart. We would then have solved this problem that we are talking about here. If it has been skewed to one side, let us accept and have a fresh start; otherwise, continuing like this is very dangerous for this country. 

THE SPEAKER: I do not know what the ministry says. 

4.39
MR VINCENT MUJUNI (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issue of scholarships is pertinent both internally and externally. Whereas Members of Parliament have raised pertinent issues regarding these scholarships, I rise to seek your guidance, Madam Speaker, whether it will not be an insult to some of us who belong to some regions. 

I represent Rwampara County and it is in the western region; if by insinuation that is what they meant, and Rwampara has never had a scholarship, I want this to be on record. I want to know which part of the western region it is that they are talking about -(Interjections)– I will not take the information because the last time I took information, I did not exhaust my submission. Allow me give you the information instead. 

By insinuation, they said that they are the same people with long noses and you know what that means. So, we want to know by region and description what the honourable members mean when they talk of regions, such that we are on record tomorrow. If it means a region benefiting from –(Interjections)– I am not accepting information, for heaven’s sake! People from the northern region are complaining and it is on record; the eastern region is complaining, the central region is complaining and the western region is complaining. Which region is getting the scholarships? (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you, hon. Mujuni, for yielding the Floor. The information I want to give you is that all this that has been said is not about nothing. A few months back, one of our colleagues laid on the Table a document pertaining to the parochial recruitment of officers in the Police Force. For your information, Maj. General Kale Kayihura’s area had 23 and Teso had only three people. So, you can see the unequal share of the national cake.

MR MUJUNI: I thank you so much, hon. Wadri. This raises pertinent questions on the system of our scholarships. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to propose that there must be a strong coordination committee on these scholarships. Just like the honourable member said, if it is true that Kisoro has 22 cadets, Rwampara has no cadets and I represent Rwampara, and I am from the West, and they are talking of the western region –(Laughter)- it becomes very dangerous for me as a representative from the western region. 

It is for this reason that I think as honourable Members of Parliament, we must rise above partisan, regional and all other party lines. We must have a system that cuts across. Otherwise, it will be dangerous even for posterity that such words can be mentioned on the on the Floor of a national parliament. I thank you very much. 

4.44
MR WAIRA KYEWALABYE MAJEGERE (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): 
I thank you, Madam Speaker. (Interjections) The problem is regional balance. The criteria is the biggest problem. I have a simple answer to this. I propose that we agree as a House that each constituency should be represented by one student on a scholarship because the number is 376 -(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, protect me.

THE SPEAKER: Order. Those are his views.

MR KYEWALABYE MAJEGERE: It is these criteria which will assist. Whether you are NRM, whether you are from the Opposition, your constituency will at least benefit. It is from that principle -(Interjections)- that each constituency will be represented by a student each year. We can then argue from that principle. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR KYOOMA AKAMPURIRA: I am rising on a procedural matter. I have carefully listened to honourable members deliberating about the regions. They have been saying a certain region, a certain region; little did I know they were referring to a region where I come from as intimated to me by hon. Kyamadidi. It is painful if they were referring to the region where I come from. 

Like hon. Kyamadidi has said –(Interjections)- I am talking about the western region. Like hon. Kyamadidi has said, unless someone brings it to my attention that I have someone benefitting from the state scholarships for abroad, I do not know any now. If we keep on generalising - and I want to assure you that the public is watching - if someone was following what we are debating now, the conclusion will be that perhaps the western region is benefitting at the expense of other regions, which is not true -(Interjections)- I think I am informed on what I am deliberating about. I am informed about what I am submitting. I am not taking the information for now. 

I prefer that if they are referring to a specific district, let it be a district. Is it, therefore, a matter of procedure that honourable members keep on generalising -(Interjections)- when some of us who belong to such regions are not benefitting? I thank you.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I had made a ruling which I thought would help this House, that the Committee on Social Services takes up this matter and demands from the Ministry of Education a census - district by district - of these students. From that report we can know the bigger districts and those which are buried under the coat and so on. We are now speculating.  Please close.

4.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Mr Kamanda Bataringaya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling and guidance. I want to put this on record. We have talked about scholarships but what I brought here is government to government scholarships for the countries I mentioned. 

As you are aware, it is not only the Ministry of Education and Sports giving scholarships. There are so many key players in this country like the embassies -(Interjections)– Yes! Embassies give scholarships. You are aware. It is not only the Ministry of Education and Sports. There are other ministries also. 

THE SPEAKER: It is a pity hon. Rukutana is not here. When we came back from Cuba, we were so alarmed by that kind of arrangement where the students who go through the ministry are the ones who get the allowances and those who go through the embassy do not get any money. They had to share the money. I called the minister and said, “Can you stop this practice”. That was in 2009. If it is continuing, why is it continuing? Why are children of the poor allowed to go when we know there is no money? Why do you continue allowing them to go? 

MR BATARINGAYA: Madam Speaker, I want to report to you that we have already addressed that. All students in Cuba are now getting the same allowances like our own students. 

MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are beating around the bush because we are not coming to the end of this. It is all about the education system in Uganda. As far as I know, these good schools like Gayaza, King’s College Buddo are the ones taking students to Makerere on Government scholarships. These are students of the rich. The able-bodied people who have money are the ones who send people on Government scholarships. Even the 1.5 for the ladies is being taken by those people who are very rich. 

Much as we are going into regions and the rest, we should look at these schools which are very poor - deep in the villages - and find a way of giving these students Government scholarships. Otherwise, we are moving here and there yet students of the rich are the ones benefitting. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, please wind up.

MR BATARINGAYA: Hon. Baryomunsi requested that we share the information in terms of the students who are going or receiving these scholarships. I want to assure this august House that we shall do that.

Hon. Kyanjo, talked about the money. In my statement, I talked about 19th, which was yesterday. The procedure is that when we authorise the Ministry of Finance, it goes through Bank of Uganda and the money is remitted through Bank of Uganda. I am sure if you contact the students tomorrow or on Friday, they will tell you they have received the money.

I have already said the Cuba issue has been addressed. All the students, both Government-sponsored and those who went through another system, are receiving the US$ 100 per month.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, honourable minister. You have just stated that there are so many players in this scholarship arrangement but you have come short of mentioning the others. 

I want to help you because you are saying you are only going to produce those ones under the Ministry of Education. I know there are State House scholarships. Is the Minister for the Presidency responsible? She should also be tasked to present this to this House because the minister, as you have seen him, was reluctantly mentioning it. The minister is only comfortable with the Ministry of Education. So, the Minister for the Presidency should also produce the State House scholarship beneficiaries such that Ugandans know who these are. I remember when I was on the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee and we kept asking for that list. Up to today, the list has not come out. We need it at least from hon. Kabakumba.

MR KAMANDA BATARINGAYA: Madam Speaker, what I said in terms of key players – I mentioned embassies. They also provide scholarships. I never talked about the others. That is -(Interruption)

MR KASSIANO WADRI: Madam Speaker, I have repeatedly listened to hon. Bataringaya saying that embassies also give scholarships. I believe we are running this country as a system and as a government. Even if scholarships are given by embassies, Ministry of Foreign Affairs is still made aware of what arrangement has been made for which number of children going for scholarship studies through the provisions made by individual embassies. 

Could the minister, as he is preparing the response and the documents that we are asking or demanding of him, liaise with Ministry of Foreign Affairs? You are a government; it is not about hon. Bataringaya sitting in Development House. We are looking at Uganda as a government. Can you liaise with your colleague in Ministry of Foreign Affairs, who has got all the information on students who have gone out of this country through embassy arrangements, to do the same, let alone hon. Masiko Kabakumba - you have a very big responsibility. 

A lot has been talked about State House scholarships, both internal and external. It would enrich information if you could also avail us that document so that we are able to know who the beneficiaries are. Who are those who partake -(Laughter)- more of the national cake than the other disadvantaged areas? I thank you, hon. Bataringaya.

MR BATARINGAYA: Lastly, Madam Speaker, I want to assure hon. Kyanjo that no student will be victimised. When they laid the list here they were worried that these students would be victimised. We shall not victimise any student. The concern of the MPs was the delay in the facilitation for these students, not so? We are not going to do that one. 

Finally, I would like to thank my colleagues for the heated debate and your contributions which have been positive -(Interjections)– yes, which have been positive. The list will be provided as we appear before the social services committee which will report to Parliament as per the ruling of the Speaker. I thank you. 

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMNET POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT TO THIS PARLIAMENT ON TUESDAY, 7 JUNE 2011

(Debate continues.)

4.57
MRS JULIANA AUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Abim): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join the rest of the honourable members to thank the President for the State of the Nation Address. 

I have this to bring to the attention of the House. This is an issue concerning the health sector. The referral hospital which is in my district, Abim, is in a very bad state. There is no mortuary in that hospital as we talk and although electricity was connected to the district two years ago, up to date there is no power in that hospital. The people walk as far as 60 kilometres for the ARV drugs, the security which is in place notwithstanding. 

I would like to know from the Minister of Health about rehabilitating that hospital because I have been made to know that rehabilitating this hospital is going to be phase by phase. The first phase took off two years ago and that covered the sewerage system. However, as we talk, the sewerage system of that hospital is not working. The mothers bathe outside on the veranda such that even when you are driving by you can see them. I would request the Committee on Social Services to do me and the constituency a favour and visit that hospital. Somebody might think I am exaggerating things but this is the truth of the matter on the ground.

I would also like to comment on the issue of Prosperity-for-All. In the Karamoja region, it is the private sector which is handling these issues of giving loan facilities to the agriculturists or to the peasant farmers. However, the conditionalities which are tied to these funds are so tight that the common man or the real beneficiaries are not benefiting. 

I would like to bring it to the attention of those concerned that these loan facilities which are being taken to our region are creating more of an economic imbalance than balance because it is only those people who can borrow who are borrowing. The real poor who are meant to benefit from these funds are not getting the facilities.

The third issue that I would like to bring to the attention of the House concerns security. This was raised last week by my colleague, but I would also like to add a bit of information. As we talk, the security in Abim District worsens each day. From January to date, we have lost 13 people to gunshots - not any other way but gunshots. This is done within short range; like when you are walking between 10 to 8 kilometres, that is where you get the ambush, more so in places where there are detaches. 

I had consultations with the relevant security forces and I was made to know that the security offices in the district are not well facilitated. At the Central Police Station, for example, these people are given only 240 litres of fuel per month and they are supposed to service their one vehicle - the only vehicle that the security has in the district - to a distance of 200 kilometres, and that is in Moroto. You do not even get this fuel within the district. You have to travel 92 kilometres to get this fuel. 

At the same time, if this vehicle is supposed to undergo general servicing it has to be driven all the way to Kampala using this very fuel in one month. At the same time, this is the very fuel that these officers are expected to use for patrolling in the district. This gives them a challenge in that they cannot do their mobilisation well and they cannot patrol the place well. That is why there are incidences of shooting along the way. 

Apart from that, I was also made to know that last year there was a transfer of 45 policemen to Abim District but out of the 45, only two people reported. I am seeking clarification from the ministry concerned: What are they doing to ensure that these police officers report? There are proposed Police stations which are supposed to be opened, but because of lack of personnel, this is not happening.  (Member timed out_)

5.02
MR SULAIMAN BALYEJJUSA (NRM, Budiope County East, Buyende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise in support of the motion to thank His Excellency the President for the elaborate State of the Nation Address. 

On the health sector, I want to commend Government. There is some improvement registered in the health service delivery system. However, I also want to observe that there are still noticeable challenges on the ground. In the whole of Buyende District, for instance, we do not have a district hospital. 

There are also concerns registered by my constituents that His Excellency the President, on his previous visit to the constituency, made a number of pledges which have not been addressed. The President promised to upgrade Irundu Health Centre III to grade IV. He also promised to upgrade Ngandho Health Centre II to grade III. He also pledged to construct a women’s ward at Bugaya sub-county headquarters. The people of Budiope East are wondering what the status of these pledges is as we speak now.

On energy, the other day I was reading through our guiding document on development planning – that is the National Development Plan – where it is stipulated that in order for us as a country to attain a middle income status, we must as a matter of necessity industrialise. I also know that before you industrialise, you must have access to energy and connectivity. The finding of the 2002 Uganda Population and Housing Census reveals that Budiope East County has a population of close to 150,000. These are people who are being perpetually kept in darkness. We do not have a single electric pole in the whole of the constituency. I register that concern to Government for action.

On education, I want to address myself to the challenge of unemployment. In Uganda, the main cause of unemployment is lack of competitive skills and a curriculum which is not tailored to our local needs as a country. So, you end up with a situation where children leave college or university with little or no employable skills to take to the job market. This is very dangerous because its sum is a mismatch between what is demanded by the employment agencies and what has been churned out by the colleges and universities. 

If you allow, I want to share one scenario with honourable members. One day, I went to meet a friend of mine who is a chief executive of one of the big companies in town. For obvious reasons I will not name him. While I was there, a nephew of his who was looking for employment came to see him. In the course of interaction, this boy was asked what his competences were and he told him that he has studied Bachelor of Arts (Psychology). Hon. Members, I mean no offence if you happen to have studied psychology because I am only using this to further illustrate my point. When the boy was asked what he was capable of doing with his qualification, he said, “When I look at you like this, I can tell what you are thinking about.” You can imagine these are the kinds of skills which have very limited application on the job market of Uganda today. 

I am glad that the other day the Minister of Education, in her maiden speech – if what was reported in the papers is anything to go by – emphasised vocational education. Vocationalising our education is the way to go. This story is broad but for limited time, I need to handle my submission optimally. 

Regarding tax revenue, I commend Government for the improved figures of tax collection for the last so many years. I know these figures have consistently risen and I know, as a representative of my people who are lacking very many projects and are demanding several unfulfilled pledges –(Member timed out_)

5.08
MR JACOB WANGOLO (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the President for his State of the Nation Address. I thank him for his effort to run Uganda since 1986 to-date. 

We know that Uganda’s backbone is agriculture. There is a saying that, “It is very difficult to look for a black cat in a dark room.” I hear several people, even educated ones, crying out about lack of jobs in Uganda, but agriculture on its own is a source of employment. We would request the Minister of Agriculture and Minister of Finance to put more facilitation on agriculture to make it attractive.

In my district, there is a problem and I do not know whether the government knows about it. We no longer have livestock because they all died. Quarantine was declared in 2005 and we no longer rear any animals yet we are supposed to be practising agriculture. We are aware that it is not possible to effectively use a hand hoe for meaningful agriculture. We used to have ox-ploughs but because the animals died, we are now requesting Government to provide each sub-county with a tractor to help the farmers.

Still on agriculture, we have a very big problem with the NAADS programme. Whereas this programme is good, in my constituency the money was released very late and inputs were brought in May. You know that as regards farming, there is nothing much you can do in May. So, there is no food as I talk now and when they brought these seeds to famers, they planted them and poor yields are sure to follow.

On education, the programmes are good except that teachers are underpaid. They, therefore, have to look for “side-dishes” and they go to school very late because their pay is very small. I urge this House to raise their salaries so that they can concentrate in schools and educate our children. Let us help the teachers because they do not have many things like houses and so on. We are all aware, and the Minister of Education should note, that many teachers are registered but they are always running around looking for survival.

The other thing is that in my constituency, I have three sub-counties without secondary schools. In the whole constituency of six sub-counties, there is no vocational institute and yet we need these vocational schools to help our people with skills.

There were pledges made by the President. In 2001, the President of Uganda pledged to tarmac our road from Namutumba via Busolwe to Mbale and Busolwe to Tororo. Up to now, there is nothing that has been done. (Member timed out_)

5.14
MS EVELYN ANITE (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for giving me this opportunity. Since this is my maiden speech, allow me to congratulate you upon your success on becoming the Speaker of the Ninth Parliament. (Applause)

I would like to join the rest of my colleagues in thanking the President for the wonderful State of the Nation Address.  I would like to address myself on the issue of land, labour and employment on page 32. The President said that through the Ministry of Labour and Social Development he is going to provide non-formal and vocational entrepreneurial skills training to 334 youths in this country. 

But my concern is that I don’t know how the President could give concern to recruiting only 334 young people to acquire these schools and yet when you look at the population of Uganda, out of 32 million, 8 million are young people.  So, I feel that this is just a drop in the ocean and cannot really help us solve the problem of unemployment. 

The President also said that 167 youth groups in 19 districts shall be given seed capital as grants. But which are these districts that the President is talking about? This afternoon my colleagues were debating on issues of transparency and equity, but the region that I represent has 28 districts out of the 119 districts that make up Uganda today. So, I would really want to know which districts are these and whether my region is included in these districts. 

I come from West Nile sub-region which has eight districts, but we have been in darkness for years; even before I was born.  I have never seen light in that region; there is nothing like this light which I see in Kampala. The darkness is too much; power comes and goes; at least the people here are enjoying something called UMEME.  Much as the President had promised that we would have had the power by last December, it did not happen and now this year he has once again said that since there is Nyagak, there will be power in our region by December.  We support him, but it is discouraging us the young people of that sub-region to see that we are in darkness and yet we are singing praises.  Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.18
MR YAHAYA GUDOI (NRM, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  This is my sixth year in this House.  Madam Speaker, when you were elected Speaker of this Parliament, I was the happiest. I congratulate you upon your success and I know you will guide us. 

Ladies and Gentlemen, especially our colleagues who have come for their first term, I would like to share my experiences with you. In Parliament the way to go is to make friends. The first friends you should make should be with the people on the front bench and the other are the Members on the Opposition side. Why am I saying that? These are the people who will generate whatever was contained in the State of the Nation Address vis-a-vis the Budget Speech.

To our colleagues on the Opposition, I have been a teacher for long, but you act as a mirror. You see, when you have a mirror, it will not only show you the dirty side; it will show you everything, even the clean parts. So, my colleagues on the other side, don’t concentrate so much on the dirty part. What you do, you should begin by acknowledging the good and advising on where we should change. 

What is the State of the Nation Address to our people we have left behind? You see our people down there don’t know the importance of the State of the Nation Address and neither do they know the importance of the Budget Speech. Now, who should do that? It is Members of Parliament. But still we have organs down there, which are failing us in our day-to-day running of the country. A district has leadership headed by the LC V Chairperson and councillors, and when you go to the sub-counties, you find the Chairman LC III and councillors. 

What is contained in the State of the Nation Address, which was delivered by His Excellency the President on 7 June 2011? There are achievements he highlighted, but who will help our people know their importance? They are the councillors at the district, sub-county, and village levels. But the people down there    keep quiet and I can assure you, my colleagues who have just joined us here, the people who are going to say, “You are not performing,” include the district chairperson and councillors and yet those two are the people who receive all the monies that we are going to appropriate here. 

Madam Speaker has said that we are going into committees to look at policy statements and the budget as a whole. It will not take them long to say, “We are failing because a Member of Parliament is weak.” Even here, as Members of Parliament, why did I say we should work in harmony with the Executive?  You can find a Member of Parliament saying, “The minister is not performing,” or the other way round a minister goes to your constituency and says, “You elected a very weak Member of Parliament.” (Laughter)  So, you see the scenario? That is why out of the many Members who are here, at least 9/10 will not come back -(Interjections) – yes, I have been following Parliament since 1996; those who come as new Members are always more than those who have been there because we always try to lead by intrigue. 

Having said that, normally when we are here, we concentrate on five things categorised as services to our people. Services are classified in the following five groups that I am going to mention: education, health, agriculture, energy and works -(Member time out_) 

5.24
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion to thank the President for the State of the Nation Address. However, I would like to raise my concerns on a number of issues in the address.

I wish to thank him for all the efforts he has put in improving good policies to do with UPE. We are all aware that UPE is a brain-child of education to the nation because that is where our children start their education. We are aware that several times, the President has asked the country, the Ministry of Education and the headmasters, to avoid charging money from our children in UPE schools.

That notwithstanding, it is still a fact that the headmasters and parents connive and plan that children should pay some money, especially in our rural setting. As I speak, in the district I represent, we have a high rate of UPE school dropouts simply because many parents cannot afford the fees that a few able parents levy on the children in UPE schools.

I would like to ask the minister to put this as an important factor because we are suffering from early marriages of our girls as soon as they drop out of school at the age of 14 and 15 years, because they cannot afford to pay this money levied by school administrations. It is easier said than done. The President says it; we all hear it; we also say it in our constituencies, but this money is being levied on the children.

Secondly, there is still a problem in delivering UPE funds on time and this gives the headmasters a loop-hole to charge extra fees. They claim that when the money delays from the ministry, they have no chalk and no services to run the school and that is why they claim they have to raise money from the parents. So, I would like to ask the minister in this House to do his best and ensure that this money comes in time because the money the parents pay is never refunded to them when the money from the ministry eventually comes.

I also wish to talk about our health centre IIIs and IVs. I have recently been in my constituency and I had an opportunity of visiting many of the health centre IIIs and IVs. I would like to thank the ministry and Government for availing many of the essential drugs in our health centre IIs. I checked in many of the stores; talked with many of the patients; did some small survey and I would like to say that there is a great improvement in the supply of these drugs.

However, there was a problem that the Ministry of Health is sending some drugs that are not very relevant to these centres. It is like saying that if drug X is sent to the East, it must also be sent to the North and yet some diseases are peculiar to some areas. For example, the nurses are claiming that in my district it is a long time since we had any outbreak of scabies or trachoma, so they feel these drugs should not be forced upon them because finally, they expire; they should be sent to the regions where these diseases are rampant.

Finally, I would like to talk about NAADS. We know there is a lot of money that is going to NAADS for the improvement of agriculture. I know we have changed and improved NAADS several times, but as I talk, we need to look at the current NAADS and do another revamping.

The committees, which you call procurement committees in the villages, in some areas have been compromised and for that matter, the intention for which the President had improved NAADS is not getting its required objectives. That is why we get some sub-standard animals simply because the procurement committees are not doing their work with the district NAADS coordinators. I would like us to look at NAADS II and improve further. (Member timed out_)

5.29
MR CLEMENT OBOTE ONGALO (NRM, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion thanking the President for his clear, concise and Ugandan orientated State of the Nation Address. We should not forget that in all that the President was saying, it is Uganda that we are talking about. Most of the criticism levelled at the President’s State of the Nation Address has been in comparison with other countries like the US and so forth. But we are talking about Uganda, and if we care about Uganda, then that speech really addressed the salient issues that our nation needs to address over the next five years.

I would like to comment particularly on four issues. The first was on improving education, which I think is very important. However, I think that in Kaberamaido District and Kalaki in particular, we still have a long way to go to bring about reform in the education sector; particularly, I am talking about teachers. 

The policy of hard-to-reach areas has failed to take root in Kaberamaido because we don’t have accommodation for teachers; so we cannot take teachers from Kampala to a remote area maybe in Bululu because they don’t have anywhere to live. As a result, we have had a situation of academic inbreeding; you have a teacher who goes to primary school (a), secondary school (a) and ends up in TTC (a) then he comes back to teach in primary school (a); so we are really getting nothing out of this education reform.

Also, our teachers, poorly paid as they are, don’t have any bank within the district where their money can be paid to them. To go all the way to Soroti, they spend Shs 10,000 to withdraw that meagre salary. So, the culture of saving has failed completely because they have to withdraw that money all at once; if they don’t, they have to spend a third of it on transport. Therefore, I believe that the government needs to introduce at least one bank in Kaberamaido District, as soon as possible, to help our teachers and also to help our farmers and encourage them develop a savings culture.

I also want to thank the President for emphasising creation of employment opportunities. However, I would really appreciate it if we did something about protecting our people who are already in employment, particularly in the private sector. I have lived in Lugazi for so many years and I have had the privilege of having friends who are sugarcane cutters and who are CEOs. These people handle tonnes of sugar a day and yet when I go to visit them, they can’t afford sugar in their houses. I think this is terrible and something has to be done to protect these people.

The same goes for our boys and girls who work in these private security systems. That is good employment. Their employees pay over Shs 400,000 or Shs 500,000 to their security agencies and yet these people are paid Shs 80,000 a month. It is no wonder that sometimes they turn around and begin robbing the people they are supposed to guard? My surprise is not that they rob sometimes, but that they take so long before they decide to rob these people.

Provision of health services is definitely very important and I thank the President for emphasising it. However, in Kaberamaido, we do not have a hospital; all we have is a health centre IV and we do not have any wards. Right now, males and females share the same ward irrespective of what they are suffering from; whether you are in labour or you are being operated for Hernia, you are all supposed to share the same ward. I think this is terrible.

I want to talk a little about justice, law and order. I thank the President for emphasising and continually trying to improve the Justice Sector, but I believe that more has to be done especially for our policemen whose living conditions are really appalling. No wonder corruption in the Police Force is becoming an everyday affair. These people are paid very little money and something has to be done for them.

Also, I believe that there is very little confidence in our justice system at the moment; that is why we have so many instances of mob justice. Something has to be done for our people to believe in the justice system.

I know that Article 23 of the Constitution provides that a person has a right to a lawyer; this should be amended. Article 28 says that such a lawyer shall appear at that person’s expense. Uganda has been a place of firsts, I want us to inform our criminals when we arrest them that they are entitled to lawyers and if they cannot afford them then the state can represent them.

5.35
MR ALEX RUHUNDA: (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Fort Portal): Coming from a municipality, coupled with my experience in Kampala, makes me ask myself how we can look for a solution to the congestion of the city. I have realised that Kampala City provides all that Ugandans would need to take to their households. 

When I look at the plan in the State of Nation Address and the NRM manifesto, there is a clear indication that it is high time we began thinking of establishing other cities. Other countries have solved this problem by having a policy of making sure that they create other cities to avoid a lot of congestion in the major city.

The people of Fort Portal Municipality want to be part of the team that will spearhead the effort of Government in forming cities that will enable many Ugandans to access jobs and services.

The theme is job creation and service delivery. We are now being challenged by the fact that we need to transform this country from a peasant economy to a modern economy. We can only do that if we have this deliberate policy of creating cities. These cities will liberate peasants from the soil and then they will leave land available for commercial agriculture.

We also realise that physical planning in this country is centralised and people in the municipalities cannot access information that is needed to build their places. We would like Government to decentralise the physical planning and support our places to grow into cities. 

We commend the Government effort in establishing Kasese-Kampala railway and the people of Fort Portal being tea farmers, would like it to extend to them. It takes seven days to transport tea from Fort Portal to Mombasa, but it would take three days if we move by railway. This will enable our people to increase their income and employment. 

We have poor single mothers who have no access to land and yet the NAADS programme is about farmers. These single mothers are living in urban areas in rented premises. They are asking, what can be done to help them access the NAADS programme. The mothers have sent me to make sure they can get a special fund from NAADS that would really cater for their actual needs. This can be in the form of accessing a small fund that will enable them to transact business. Much as we have all these plans, the major issue is about expanding tourism (Member timed out_)

5.41
MS EVELYN KABUULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luuka): I want to thank the President for granting us a district status, and the Eighth Parliament for approving it without which I wouldn’t be here.

I also thank the President for the elaborate speech on the State of the Nation Address. I want to comment on three sectors; agriculture, education and health.

When we talk about agriculture, then we are talking about food security. We all accept that NAADS is a very good programme and it has helped, but it leaves a lot to be desired. We need a proper management system to be able to benefit from NAADS. 

In my area, families are given nine kilograms of beans but mixed with soil and other things. Out of the nine kilograms of beans, you find that only four are real beans, which cannot even germinate. I suggest that we have a comprehensive management system of the NAADS, which is all involving so that the stakeholders get together and know how to manage the programme. I also suggest that we do a pre and post procurement audit for the NAADS programme. 

There is a problem about sugarcane growing in our area. Our investors force our poor people to sacrifice the little land that they have to grow sugarcanes as opposed to growing food. Remember we are talking about food security; if a person has one acre of land and dedicates all of it to sugarcane just because they want money. The land they are leasing to our friends, whom I do not want to mention because they say I am racist; the money they give is about Shs 300,000 per acre for seven years. I suggest that we put a policy where our members will be sensitised against giving all the land they have to sugarcane growers. That way, our management policy will work and we shall divide the land that we have between food and sugarcane growing. 

I am also talking about a situation where people grow food but they don’t have food stability or security. So, I am appealing to the Members to come up a system that will see each home have a granary. This will help in keeping people away from selling all the food they grow. Most times they sell off all the food and drink all the money they get. Let us make it a policy to have a granary in each home just like we used to have them in the olden days. It is because of the lack of granaries that we don’t have food security.

On education, I would like to thank Government for starting UPE and USE. However, the question is, do we have the values that we would like to impart to our students? Don’t we have a blanket education system? So, why don’t we look at the education system that we have so that all the stakeholders can read from the same script? This is because we are talking about the rural versus the urban and we have just been talking about scholarships – the question is, are we all going to read from the same script? Do we impart skills aligned to our development plan, which we have? Do these skills address the development plans that we have in place? Do we have a man-power export potential in the areas that we represent? I believe we all want to do white collar jobs, but can the people in Luuka District, for example, favourably compete with people from other areas of the country for us to have equality in regard to employment? 

On health, I would like to say that I do appreciate the minister’s statement that malaria drugs will cost about Shs 100 from Shs 20,000 according to the policy statement. But in my area - and not in Luuka alone, but Busoga in general - most of the health centre IIs that we have are non-functional. I would like to suggest that we put functional health centre IIs because they are nearer to the people –(Member timed out_)

5.46
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to join those people who have thanked the President for delivering the State of the Nation Address. I also wish to congratulate you upon being elected as the first female Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda. How you lead this Parliament is going to be a matter of study for many people who would like to follow in your footsteps.

I have three issues that I would like to comment on in regard to the State of the Nation Address. One of these is peace and security, particularly in the Karamoja Region. On page 44 of the State of the National Address, the President clearly said that Uganda is now totally peaceful because the warriors were disarmed.  It is true that the Parliament resolution passed in May 2002 required Government to disarm all armed Karimojong and any other person in possession of a gun illegally.

However, that resolution had several aspects to it. It was not only about removing illegal guns, but also providing livelihood mechanisms to those who would be disarmed. Just like we do with the soldiers; they are disarmed, rehabilitated and given a livelihood mechanism. But seven to eight years after the disarmament exercise kicked off, we are not seeing much of the other side; I mean the development side, which has not been as visible as we would have wanted. As a result, we have started to experience increasing lawlessness and theft, both within and outside Karamoja.

On that note, I would like to learn from Government – recently the battalions that were keeping peace and security in my constituency and the neighbouring district, battalions 29 and 35 were deployed elsewhere and I guess they were sent to Somalia, but now the whole belt from Kumi to Katakwi to Amuria and Namalu is empty. The thieves are just roaming. Madam Speaker, you might have heard from Members of Parliament from Teso, that there is now room for the thieves, yet we had contained that situation before. They are now robbing their neigbhours both within Karamoja and across.

Just two weeks ago, the Pokot were able to walk all the way from Kenya across my constituency and emptied one of the villages of 500 to 600 heads of cattle. Up to day, we have only made a recovery of 12 heads of cattle. You can imagine they walked 60 miles into Uganda, rustled the cattle and went back after overpowering our forces.

So, Madam Speaker, since disarmament is a Government Policy, which was approved by this Parliament, it is high time that policy is reviewed. I would also like to suggest that this Parliament be regularly updated on the progress and achievements that have been realised, including the challenges that are facing this disarmament exercise. I am saying this because we are about to start asking how far this exercise has gone; we need to know when it will end.

Secondly, my colleagues were asking for scholarships – in the last few years I have been in Parliament, I have been asking for a seed secondary school.  I would like to know how far the Ministry of Education has gone in getting a seed secondary school to my constituency. Since Uganda became a country some constituencies have never got access to secondary education. Recently, we had to convert some primary school into a secondary school in order to get one. 

The first secondary school was built as early as 1964, but you know that before then, there were many secondary schools built as far back as 1910. We, therefore, need more support and affirmative action in terms of secondary education in that region. Otherwise, how do we start claiming for scholarships when we even don’t have secondary education services?

5.52
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA KAGWERA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the previous speakers who spoke thanking the President for aiding the economic growth that we now see in the country. The President listed a number of indicators such as people having many vehicles, and Mukono, Kampala and Entebbe joining to show there is economic growth in the country.
However, my problem is that he only looked at growth generally and not development. This growth is so important, but what we need to address is the widening gap between the rich and the poor. The buildings we are talking about in Mukono and Entebbe and the many vehicles, are owned by very few Ugandans. We need to see this growth spread. However, as an NRM Government, we are going to move down and sort out all that.

I would also like to comment on the way we invest. I notice that we are investing without looking at the comparative advantage. I believe that we should be investing so much in agriculture and tourism because it is in these areas that we have a comparative advantage. Of course the President talked about the deficit in balance of payments, terms of trade and even inflation. This is as a result of bad investment. Let us put our investments where we have comparative advantage. Let us look at irrigation; let us look at mechanising agriculture more; let us look at value addition and let us look at issues of post-harvest and we shall get there. 

Madam Speaker, the situation of livestock is appalling in these Government farms. Land has been grabbed yet we should be investing to get stock to give to the farmers for breeding purposes, but we have not done this and the local people have taken advantage. You recall that at one time the fisheries sector moved steadfast and we were getting a lot of money, but overtime, the sector is collapsing. So, I believe that we should invest correctly and we will get on the correct path. 

Healthcare; colleagues have talked about healthcare, but we still have a long way to go. When you go to our hospitals, you find people lying on floors; people have no blankets and at times we have a lot of drug stock-outs. So, much as we have done a lot, we need to be sincere to ourselves that we still have a lot to do. 

I appreciate that Government has done quite a lot, but let us look at the feeder roads. The districts do not have the capacity and we really need to equip the districts such that feeder roads are joined to the highways. 

On the education sector, of course Government has done a lot with UPE and USE, and we are moving on, but the only problem is that we have emphasised free things and parents seem to have abandoned all the responsibilities to Government. So, I encourage parents to really know that these are our children and also put in effort. They should not leave the burden to Government alone. We should also emphasise technical education. There was an idea of having vocational institutions at sub-county level, and I think this is the way to go. How many people go to university with the current level of education?

On the issue of corruption, we should avoid the idea of patronage. I have seen people, when cornered, who say, “No, it is only the President that will solve the problem.” This is not the way to go really. There are institutions in this country where you can go and answer if you are cornered. 

On the issue of good governance, of course the NRM has done quite a lot. The Electoral Commission has done its work, and I have only heard people talk about the term limits. It is the only problem that I have heard people talk about, but we have the Constitution and when the time comes and we feel like resetting the terms limits, we shall come here and if we feel that the time is ready, we shall support it. So, I feel there should not be any problem –(Member timed out_)

5.57
MR WILLIAM KWEMARA (NRM, Kyaka County, Kyegegwa): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Let me join my colleagues to congratulate you upon assumption of this big Office and this is my maiden speech. Let me also join the rest of my colleagues in thanking the President for the State of the Nation Address. He fulfilled his constitutional obligation and by showing us what has been achieved so far and the road ahead, and also for being accountable to Parliament and the people of Uganda, and thereby even enhancing our oversight role. 

However, allow me to observe the following; actually if you want to improve or if you are doing evaluation, you need to take the discrepancy model and try and point out some gaps and then propose positively. I have a few observations basically on corruption, health and NAADS, and I will limit myself to that. 

Corruption; it is true that there is a lot that has been done by the President to fight corruption. He has put in place the legal and institutional frameworks - the CID, the IGG, the Anti-Corruption Court, the Directorate of Ethics and others, and even the Bills that are being debated by Parliament. However, my observation is that these measures are rather reactive. We want more proactive ways of curbing corruption. A lot of corruption goes unnoticed and if you wait for corruption to take place in order to take action, then you may not do much. So, I look at it as a half key but if we have to have a full key, then I propose the following:

1.	I am an ardent believer in social learning. What is important here is whether we can integrate corruption into the school curriculum so that the children grow up knowing the evils of corruption even up to university level; 

2.	Can we review practises and procedures of Government so that we reduce the opportunities for corruption? This is based on the law of criminal opportunity; in the theory of criminal opportunity, if you avail an opportunity to a thief, the thief will certainly take the money. However, much as the thief will have done wrong, you should be careful not to avail the thief the opportunity. 


3.	Can we also popularise the efforts and achievements of the anti-corruption institutions for the rest to know that there is work that is taking place. Can we also have anti-corruption campaigns and can we use ICT in curbing corruption. Why do we have ICT if we cannot use it in governance? 

4.	Also, I would like to engage the church and other religious institutions in fighting corruption. There is a lot that the church can do to fight corruption. Countries like Hong Kong have done it and it has worked. 

Madam Speaker, I would also like to make a few proposals on NAADS. The intention and spirit behind NAADS is absolutely good but we need to reconceptualise it. NAADS replaced the training and the extension system but it was influenced by the neo-liberal thinking that anything public is bad and private is good, and we are aiming at cost-cutting but today, there is a realisation that not everything public is bad and that is why we are talking of public-private partnerships. 

Also, in the State of the Nation Address, the President pointed out that he does not need sub-county NAADS coordinators because we already have extension workers at the sub-county, but the approach, alone, rendered these people ineffective. 

Lastly, on the issue of health, I know there is a lot that is being done in the health sector, but we also need to refocus health and focus so much on the preventive aspect of it. For example, in my county, we have got only 16 health centres out of the 42 parishes, and I know the policy is that every parish should have a health centre II. So, we should focus more on the preventive part of it. It is cheaper, it can be achievable and we can do a lot to achieve health for all. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

6.02
MS FLAVIA KABAHENDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will speak on only three issues. I would also like to thank the President for fulfilling an obligation to provide us with the State of the Nation Address, and I will start with the issue of health because this is the right key that gives us access to other rights. I would like to commend Government for the five-year health sector strategic and investment plan which came up with community health initiatives or village health schemes. I really appreciate the operations of the village health teams in matters of first aid, controlling stigma, accessing the health facilities which are very far or even those which are very near, to especially the women and the vulnerable groups that may not easily access these facilities, and for giving us sensitisation in health matters. 

However, we can add value to these village health teams other than providing and distributing those other facilities; they would be more functional by acting as health centres I which can even record the health status of each household because they understand them better. They can even refer these patients to the right health facilities. I think if they were given skills and facilitated, they would even assist us greatly in curbing the number of quack clinics that are mushrooming in our villages.

I recommend that the Ministry of Health checks on how they use the village team members. Let them be trainable; let them be skilled; let them be empowered and facilitated to take over the role of the health centre I functionally and not just for distributing drugs.

I want to talk about education. I am pleased there is a commission of enquiry into the management of UPE and USE funds. That was on page 26. However, I got worried when the commission was given a task in January, 2010. It was reported that they had not even given a single report. I do not know how much time they were given to come up with the report; but I wouldn’t also want to pre-empt them. 

Allow me to give this information if they did not take it. Most of these headteachers, especially in primary schools, are non-financial managers. Most of them graduated from primary seven and went to PTCs for Grade II. They have only been upgrading; they do not know what is in accounts. They do not know record keeping and now they are being told to give accountability. Even the finance committee is composed of teachers who may, even if they completed senior four, may not have even learnt about accounts; they may not have opted for accounts. The membership to the school management committees is composed of those people who just have sympathy for the school not those who have merit or skills. Such supervision may not ensure the right accountability and transparency. Again –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Grace Kwiyucwiny

MS KABAHENDA: I am still on, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Is it?

MS KABAHENDA: Yes. Even then, these headteachers receive the funds, spend them and also account for them. There are no checks. Can we have a bursar in the primary schools so that expenditure of public finance has some checks?

Lastly, I want to talk about livestock and agriculture. Kyegegwa District has registered an increased production of milk. Dairy farming is doing well except for the issue of water. They are water-stressed. That is the reason why it cannot really satisfy as required. As I talk now, most of the cattle-keepers have settled in Katonga Game Reserve. They are fighting with the rangers over water. By the time they go back after the dry spell, their wives would have been married by others -(Member timed out_)

6.08
MS GRACE KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity and congratulate you for attaining that chair. I would like to thank the President for giving this comprehensive, clear State of the Nation Address.  I have a few issues to raise.

I come from Zombo District where there is no Police post in two sub-counties. The rest of the sub-counties have Police posts, but there is no district Police station. Three sub-counties do not have secondary schools. We do not have hospitals except for one, a not-for-profit hospital. We do not have a bank except a small one in one corner of the district. But one of my mentors told me not to lose hope. Hope should be the last thing to die. Therefore, I have hope in this except for a few issues.

When I saw in the State of the Nation Address that there are 5,000 Police constables being trained; I had hope that Police posts are going to be established in the sub-counties and I would have a district Police station functioning so that the visibility of the Police in Zombo District will help curb crime which is growing by the day because of the change in society, technologies and other factors. 

But when I see this number of 5,000; I also ask my Government, “Where is the accommodation for the Police?” I also ask my Government, “Where is the salary, which was recommended by the Ssebutinde Report a long time ago?” When is it going to be implemented so that their welfare improves? I am also asking about the quality of training they are going through. I had an opportunity to talk to the policemen as a consultant reviewing their situation. One of the things they raised was that the quality of the training curriculum was wanting. A Police officer should be comprehensively and all-round trained to be effective. 
On banks, the government should help us get a bank in the district. The teachers, the civil servants still have to bank in Arua or Nebbi District. The local farmers benefiting from the NAADS programme are given written cheques and have to walk long distances to Nebbi or Arua District. I wonder and get worried that if we do not get banking facilities in the district, how effective will the NAADS programme again be? This can easily fail the NAADS programme. 

When I look at the training of the youth done by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development; in this book, it is noted that 334 youth were trained and 167 given seed capital. It goes on to say that this financial year, emphasis will be put on building capacity of labour market information systems. We should not rush and leave the training component. The training component should be redeveloped or redefined. I get worried when I see 1,000 youth gathered in a place that they are being trained. At the end of the day, they are given a certificate of attendance but I do not know what fundamental change is happening. 

I want us to look at the quality of that training and define what can tune the youth to be effective producers in Uganda at the moment. I would also like to see a training mart where the youth will choose from a point of information that this is the training I would like to have instead of calling for a training and 1,000 youth are collected on a regional basis and in the end you do not see the impact of that training. 

I told you I do not have a hospital in Zombo District except for one missionary hospital. That is where the close to 200,000 people go –(Member timed out_)

6.13
MR GEORGE EKUMA (NRM, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion. I would like to thank the President for adapting vision and growth strategies. In the President’s speech, he emphasised production of energy such that we can have more industries to increase production in this country. When we have more industries, we are able to create jobs for our people. When we have electricity, we have local farms growing and we can keep poultry and do piggery, and we can see all these developments emerging in the nation. This will promote economic development.

I would also like to thank the President for granting the people of Teso a ministry. Now we have a ministry in charge of Teso affairs. I thank the President for that. 

I also want to particularly thank the State Minister for Agriculture for responding effectively when this august House brought up the issue of Foot and Mouth Disease that affected the cattle corridor. The minister immediately came to Bukedea District which I represent and gave a partial lifting of the quarantine in Teso Region. Right now the people of Bukedea are able to eat meat and they are able to sell their animals. Therefore, they are going to get fees in order to send their children to school. Ministry of Agriculture that is effective supervision. I appreciate that.

I wanted to raise some few issues. Ministry of Health should follow suit. Currently, we have a situation in places like Kakere, Kamon and Katabuli in Bukedea District that have been infested by Tsetse Flies. I call upon Ministry of Health to immediately come to our rescue before this situation deteriorates further. This is a very serious issue because it is going to affect the health of most people and it is going to affect even the health of animals. So, your intervention is needed immediately.

I also want to challenge Government or this Parliament to support institutions like MUBS that are promoting entrepreneurial skills. I am a graduate of MUBS. I know I was able to do business effectively because of the skills I acquired from that university. Let us support the elevation of MUBS to an autonomous university. Entrepreneurial skills and innovation are being promoted in such institutions. 

In Teso, we are talking about a university. We are requesting the august House to support us in our request for a public university such that we can attain the education levels that we require in the region. 

I also want to thank the Speaker for the way she is handling this Parliament. Right now I see more objectivity in the House. The honourable members are able to take objective decisions -(Member timed out_)

6.18
MR RWAKAJARA ARINAITWE (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to join colleagues to thank the President for the speech on the state of the nation. I also want to congratulate you, Madam Speaker, for having become the Speaker of the Parliament of this country. I want to thank the President and the government because recently as workers, we got the employment policy which has never been there. However, I have a few workers’ issues.

We are members of the East African Community and other countries in the East African Community have a minimum wage. It is only Uganda which has no minimum wage. I know we operate in a liberalised economy. However, this has affected us so much. We need a minimum wage for our workers. I know the microeconomics experts are giving reasons that this will scare away our investors. However, this has caused us a big problem. Our workers are being exploited; they do not have proper contracts. This is a very serious issue that needs serious attention in this country.  

Labour issues are not monitored and supervised very well and this I believe is caused by the problem of not having an independent ministry. The Ministry of Labour is like a department in a bigger ministry with a political supervisor. Our workers in this country are being sexually harassed, exploited left and right and nobody is monitoring those activities. (Mr Ken-Lukyamuzi rose_) Madam Speaker, let me continue and I exploit my time. 

Madam Speaker, you remember very well that we used to have labour centres in every district and this used to solve most of the worker-related disputes in districts. Today, there is nothing. I will give you an example. Recently, on Nyakashita-Kamwenge Road, we visited them, but our workers are in terrible condition and there is no labour officer in those areas and other areas.

Another important issue is on oil and gas. In the President’s speech, he said that out of 49 exploration oil dams, 44 have found oil and gas. However, my concern is the expenses or costs of these experts who are doing exploration because in future they will bring these costs and present them to the government and yet they sleep in Serena and Kabira, and I do not know who monitors those expenses. In future, you may find the costs are higher than what we are going to be getting as a country.

Another issue is that in productivity, we are ranked last in East Africa. I think this is because we do not have our labour college which we used to have, and which is LDC today. (Member timed out_)

6.24
MS CHRISTINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I congratulate you on your election and the people of Kumi are grateful to have a female Speaker. I also thank the Opposition for electing hon. Nandala-Mafabi as the Leader of the Opposition. I pray that he will work closely with the government side. I thank the President for the State of the Nation Address and specifically for the support he gave to Kumi University. The government gave money to Kumi University for the construction of a new faculty building. 

Kumi University is a private institution and is situated about 10 kilometres from Kumi town. I invite all parliamentarians to get to know and support it. However, the students have asked me to remind the President of his pledge for a bus and the tamarcking of the roads within the university campus. This is the humble appeal we are putting across to His Excellency as we debate this State of the Nation Address.

Regarding the inspection of schools, there is an outcry, especially for the department of education; they lack transport. The DEO and his inspectors do not have transport to take them out to monitor and supervise schools. There are also schools that need coding – this is a request the people of Kumi would like to be addressed.

On the issue of peace that is highlighted in the State of the Nation Address, now that peace is there, the people of Tisai Island in Ongino sub-county need to be re-settled. I am calling upon Government to have these re-settled in the land they had abandoned for the last 20 years due to cattle rustling.

Another issue in Kumi is the delay to give people land titles. We do not know what is happening in the Land Registry because even after people apply, it takes very long for land titles to be released. So, there is an outcry about the delay and yet we thought the computerisation of that department would now make it easier to process titles. 

There is also need for copies of the Land Act translated into Ateso. In the State of the Nation Address, they are talking of it having been translated into 19 languages; one of them is Ateso, but there are almost no copies in my district. I call upon the Ministry of Lands to have them sent.

Finally, Madam Speaker, we are happy that case-disposal in courts in Kumi is at least progressing now. We now have cases handled in a faster manner than it was before. We would like the judiciary to keep the tempo and dispose of most of the pending cases. I congratulate you, once again, Madam Speaker.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Speaker, last week, when the Deputy Speaker was presiding over, he told us that Members on the front bench from both sides should would be given time on the last day. He noted that Wednesday would be the last day for both the ministers and shadow ministers to make their submissions, especially their responses to comments from Members. But now you have already given a chance – moreover he said more time would be given to the Members of the front bench – to hon. Amongin, who spoke, not as Minister in Charge of Teso Affairs, but Woman MP for Kumi. I really ask for your guidance on how we are going to proceed because you have started inviting other Members. 

THE SPEAKER: Tomorrow morning I will give the shadow ministers five minutes each – yes, I only have tomorrow and thereafter we shall go to the committees. I will give you five minutes and you say the most important things. The rest will be pointed out during the Budget debate.

6.30
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The people from the Mother Kingdom are very happy that you are in charge of Parliament. (Laughter)  We have also got salutations globally, including a recent email I got from the IPU/LDC version and they are asking how you are doing. So, there is already international recognition. 

I thank the President for his elaborate State of the Nation Address, more so after being re-energised with the fresh mandate of the people – the Social Contract with the population of Uganda for the next five years.

I would be unfair if I did not thank the Eighth Parliament for standing by my people at a time when they were supposed to be declared landless in their own land because the country had discovered oil in their region.  

I also want to thank you, Madam Speaker, in particular, for your position which you took strongly to ensure that the pastoralists’ movement in this country was investigated. Unfortunately, in the last eight months of the last Parliament, although this matter appeared on the Order Paper and the report was ready, nothing came out. 

I request the Ninth Parliament to take up that report because it was not a Buliisa issue. There were several areas in this country that had been invaded and at least some sanity has finally prevailed. We need to make use of that report and find solutions for these citizens and help them to settle.

Madam Speaker, as I have said, I come from an area – this morning I heard people talking about scholarships, but we have never seen them yet we are expecting oil. I have four sub-counties without secondary schools. I have accidents on the lake every week. Just at the beginning of this month, I lost 30 people between Butyaba and Panyamur; these are citizens dying without even being covered by the press. We have a lot of challenges down there. So, I would like to start by requesting for a comprehensive inter-ministerial Albertine plan; it is not there. The oil sector is private-sector led. That is unfortunate. Can the government, please, take charge of this problem? That is one of the problems we are having. 

There are Members who have talked of a lot of money being siphoned, no wonder we are having challenges of dollars in this country. The MTNs take the money - I did mention it here on the Floor of this House; the bankers are taking the interest – they are capitalists and now the companies which are working in the oil industry are also taking the money; all that causes problems for this country.  There are so many issues before this country, which we need to bring out if at all the country is going to benefit from the oil industry.   

Bunyoro doesn’t have a university, but even as I talk of the universities, we should remember that Uganda is having an education system where you start from UPE, through to USE and with so many universities. But are you aware that over 95 percent of our people don’t reach university and our education system doesn’t target them? Can we vocationalise our education system so that we can deal with this problem? We have a very high young population that is going to be a disaster. These UPE and USE graduates are going to beat you up as leaders if we don’t address their crisis of unemployment. 

We have a problem in the land sector; people are grabbing land, not because they are using it for production, but – (Member timed out_)

6.35
MS AGNES NABIRYE (NRM, Woman Representative, Jinja): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker.  I also rise to thank the President for the State of the Nation Address and also to congratulate you, upon that elevation as the Speaker of the Ninth Parliament. 

I thank the President for improving on health facilities, like my colleagues have already said, in the country. However, I would like to put the concerns of my constituency - Jinja.  We have Nalufenya Children’s Hospital, which is found in Jinja, but covers the whole of the Eastern Region. It might be the only facility to cater for children, if I am not mistaken, in the whole country. But that facility is in a sorry state; it needs some quick intervention. When you enter there, you find five or more children sharing a bed and the toilets are bad. So, I am calling upon the government to come out and help that facility so that it can help the whole Eastern Region much as it is located in my constituency.

In the education sector, we have a primary teachers’ college, for which I would first of all like to thank the government for, because they have built the teachers’ houses and library and right now they are building students’ hostels.  But there is a problem that Jinja PTC no longer receives money for music and sports, which I don’t know whether it features in other colleges elsewhere in the country.  And yet sports and music are the examinable subjects that the students are supposed to go out and train the pupils in the surrounding schools. I wonder how they will be able to teach these subjects when they haven’t received any formal training in them. So, I am calling upon the government to give more money to the PTCs so that our children can get better teachers.

The people of Jinja feel that it has taken too long before being elevated to city status. We know that when Jinja gets city status, it will come with many blessings. Like in many other towns, there is a high rate of unemployment which could be curbed once given that status. So, I call upon the government to expedite this elevation so that we can solve the issue of unemployment in Jinja.  Thank you very much. 

6.39
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak):  Thank you, Rt hon. Speaker.  I have four areas to comment on in the State of the Nation Address. Firstly, I thank our beloved President, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, for being a foresighted leader and a strategic planner. There are indicators as shown in the State of the Nation Address, which are vividly seen and felt by not only the people of Uganda, but also by other nations that easily show us that we are  really progressing; we are transforming. 

If I can mention some of these very key indicators which we all see; peace and stability. Surely, most of us Ugandans who have lived in the times of other regimes should be able to quickly draw an analysis and differentiate that we in the current situation are much better off, which means that we have really achieved.   There is peace and stability in the country.   When somebody says there is no peace - I overheard someone say, “There is no peace” - he is really deceiving the nation. There are isolated cases that I surely cannot deny; one or two or three cases, which can happen elsewhere.  But the summation is that there is peace and stability in our country.
  
However, there are some situations which we need not to be complacent about. For instance, in Karamoja, the government has achieved a great deal, but it is still my proposal to the Minister of Defence and the Minister of Karamoja Affairs not to sit and think that we have achieved total peace there. There are still pockets of stubborn characters and so we need to sit down, make a review and evaluate so that we can see how we can be able to address some of the inadequacies or shortfalls which may come up again.

On the economic transformation of Uganda - this is a reality - these are indicators which show us that we are really developing. When you read you find that Uganda has made a significant economic transformation and it is important for most of us who are able to explain to the rest that from such and such a year backwards, this is where we were and right now we are here. So, it is our duty to educate the rest that we are really progressing. 

However, there are some challenges which we must be able to deal with like corruption, which is in some sectors. It is really our duty - us here - to identify those areas and address it.  Otherwise, we are progressing.

Political development is another area that Ugandans should be proud of.  I have been to a number of countries like Namibia, Kenya and Tanzania and they were all talking well about the politics in Uganda.  One indicator which I can mention now which can make us  be convinced that we are politically okay is that out of the three arms of Government; the Executive, the Legislature; and the Judiciary there is no single moment that they have antagonised each other. They have always been in harmony and so that is already a good example that we are getting on very well.

To make it more practical, the wisdom of our President, who has ensured that Ugandans should have a participatory political system, has already been demonstrated by recognising that women are very important and even sometimes surpass men in decision-making and management. We are also very proud to get our Speaker as an example, which means we are progressing. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for demonstrating to us that women in Uganda are capable of managing us and we are very grateful for that.

Two other points, which I would not want to miss in this presentation -(Member timed out_)

6.44
MR STANLEY OMWONYA (NRM, Okoro County, Zombo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like also to add my voice to the rest of my colleagues to thank His Excellency the President for a very elaborate State of the Nation Address, which he gave to this honourable House and the nation at large.

I have only three issues to raise from the State of the Nation Address. The first one is about power. I would like to appreciate that the President and the NRM Government is doing all it can to increase the supply of electric power to Uganda.

Madam Speaker, there can’t be any development without power. In my constituency, which is Okoro and in West Nile generally, we don’t have any source of reliable power. We have had Nyagak, which is still under construction. Nyagak has been a campaign song since 2001, 2006 and 2011. To date, that project is still under construction and the people of Okoro and West Nile in general think that it is a political programme. We would like to have a definite timeframe when that project is going to end.

On the same issue, the government should not look at Nyagak as the panacea for power for the West Nile region because what I know is that Nyagak has its own challenges and one of them is the level of water. Therefore, even if it was ready today, that power would not be able to supply the whole of West Nile at any one time. 

I am, therefore, proposing that West Nile should be supplied with power tapped from Lira so that we can also benefit from the Jinja hydro power dam while we wait for Karuma, Ayago I and Ayago II, so that when the people of Uganda are suffering from load shedding, we are together.

I would also like to talk about livestock development. His Excellency the President talked about it and I would like to appreciate the efforts that the government is making to prevent the control of diseases and vectors in this area, especially Foot and Mouth Disease.

Madam Speaker, I will recall in the past that there used to be deliberate Government efforts and programmes to vaccinate animals. Farmers would collect animals in certain locations and those animals would be vaccinated. What has happened to that programme? Can the Ministry of Agriculture revive that programme so that we can eradicate Foot and Mouth Disease and other cattle diseases once and for all, to avoid fire-fighting as has happened recently in Teso and other areas where Foot and Mouth Disease and other diseases came up?

Lastly, I would like to talk about agriculture. His Excellency the President acknowledged that agriculture has remained the backbone of Uganda’s economy, and he says there is need to commercialise and transform the sector. However, I would like to inform this honourable House that we cannot do this without first of all thinking of fertilisers and irrigation -(Member timed out_)

6.50
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The people of Kasilo are happy with you and they are happy with this Parliament for having elevated you to that position, because you become the third person in the protocol in this country. 

They are also very grateful to this Parliament for electing you, mainly because in the East African countries, Uganda has entered into the books, because Rwanda was the first to have a lady woman Speaker, then Tanzania, and now Uganda has joined that rank, and I think we are on the right track. So, for those reasons, they are so happy and they wish you all the luck and blessings.

I want to say a few things; one, about the Police Force. I had expected something to be said about the Police Force accommodation. We have been lamenting for so many years. We are happy that enough equipment has been provided for the Police, but on the accommodation part, our policemen are still sleeping in very dilapidated houses, and it is a shame to this country and to us as leaders. I think something must be done in this coming budget and it should have been stated.

Two, is about the professionalisation of the Police Force. You can’t imagine that we only have one handwriting expert in the Police Force, Mr Ezati. If Ezati resigned today, or if we lost him, God forbid; what would happen in the Police Force? How can the Police Force have just one handwriting expert for the last 25 or so years? I think something must be done and Prime Minister, we really plead with you to take up this matter and handle it.

Three is the issue of NAADS, which is a good project but is being mishandled by corrupt people. During the budget time - I am going to lay in this House seeds that were supplied under NAADS by Victoria Seeds to Teso. They never germinated. I can talk specifically for Soroti District. Hon. Ochola is here and he was the Chairperson of Soroti District and knows about this.

In Kasilo County, Victoria Seeds supplied seeds, but they never germinated and this company continues supplying seeds under NAADS. Why can’t we stop Victoria Seeds? Why can’t we blackmail them? I think we must put a stop otherwise they are just taking money for nothing and supplying air.

The other one is about the road network. They said they have tarmacked 150 kilometres, but there is Tirinyi-Pallisa-Kongoro-Kumi Road, which has always been talked about during every campaign. When will it be tarmacked? We now need to tarmac Kumi-Ngora-Serere-Bugondo. When will it be put on the programme? There is Soroti-Serere-Kagwara Road to link us with you, Madam Speaker in Bukungu. When will it be on the programme?

The other one is about the Kamuli-Kagwara-Kaberamaido Ferry. In 2008-2009 under the Prime Minister’s office, Shs 2.9 billion was provided, but we have not seen anything. Prime Minister, we need you to follow up this because this ferry was supposed to be operational by last year. 

On page 16, the President highlighted about the landing sites that were worked on under the African Development Bank project. We passed a loan in 2003/2004 for this project. They were supposed to build 31 landing sites, but it is a shame that up to today, only nine have been completed. This project was supposed to be only for five years. They gave the President wrong information by saying that they are yet to start the construction of Kagwara in Kasilo. The construction started in 2009/2010 but it has stalled. How can we be proud of that? The people responsible must be held culpable. 

I want to thank the President because there are people who wanted to take the property of Soroti flying school, but when we raised this with him, he acted very first and it was stopped. I must thank him for that because there are people who want to grab Government property and take off. 

My only concern is about the construction and rehabilitation of the school that had been promised. I am happy that the Minister for Teso affairs is here and she will be able to take up this matter. 

Finally, I want to talk about the issue of the compensation of the people of Teso, which was key in the campaign. We were promised that we were going to be given a ministry which they have done, but we want to see it in action. (Member timed out_)

6.55
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Congratulations to the high office, Madam Speaker. I would like to congratulate my colleagues who won in their respective constituencies. Judging from your performance in the last Parliament, I have no doubt that we have a good Speaker and I have a lot of hope in this Parliament. 

While commending honourable friends, I would like to observe that most of us went through the process of an election that did not go smoothly. It was an election where the military was called upon to intimidate and disenfranchise would be voters. This was an election where a lot of money was injected in the economy to bribe voters and lure them to vote for a specific person or party. This kind of election does not lay credence to a democratic country. We are monetising elections completely and this removes poor but well intended people from getting into political office. It also undermines the principal of democracy that we keep singing about. 

In Kumi, the Army, DISOs and RDCs were involved in partisan elections yet these are people who are commanded by the Constitution not to be involved in any kind election, especially in supporting one side against the other.

It is my view that because of the money injected in the economy, we are suffering the downfall of the shilling and high prices of essential commodities. The Ugandan economy is something that is being laughed at. We are going to experience more strikes by different people such as the political parties, civil societies and the traders. All these are up in arms because of excess money in our economy. I would like to challenge the authorities in this country to do something about this. 

I am surprised that the President talks about growth of the economy and uses the huge houses that are being constructed in Kampala. I do know whether Government has taken stock of who owns these houses. You might be surprised that only five percent of the population owns these houses. I think this is not a good way to measure economic progress. Economic progress should spread across the country.

All of us know that about 82 percent of our population is employed in the agricultural sector. We are being afflicted by climate change today. It is no longer possible to rely on rain fed agriculture and, therefore, the solution to our problem is irrigation. 

I have been here for the last 10 years and every time the State of the Nation address is read and I debate, I have talked about irrigation. Today, we see the President referring to Mubuku that his Government killed. We see the President referring to Olweny, Doho and Agoro. These schemes were killed by this Government. It has taken us 25 years to begin talking about restoring these irrigation schemes.  When are we going to start talking about the farmer in Kumi? I am surprised that the President is glorifying this farmer in Northern Uganda using Buveera and bottles of water as a form of drip irrigation. This is a time when we are talking about mass production. Honestly, this should not have found its way into this document. 

Where has the railway gone? We have been promised the railway year in, year out and RVR has been brought here to practically loot this country. The railway will relieve our roads of excess loading and, therefore, we will be able to preserve investments. 

We also need a university for Teso.

We want our property that was looted by the NRA during the insurgency in Teso. I want to also say that Kumi town is waiting for its water.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the Deputy Prime Minister, and Members on both front benches, I want to thank you very much for your perseverance. About 170 Members have contributed to this State of the Nation Address. We had to interrupt and discuss other pressing issues, but we have to close the debate today. We shall reconvene tomorrow at 10 O’clock and start with responses from the shadow cabinet. The Government side will respond in the afternoon. We have to adjourn tomorrow evening to enable us start working on the budget process. House adjourned to 10 O’clock in the morning.

(The House rose at 7.04 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 21 July 2011 at 10.00 a.m.)

