



Tuesday 21 July, 2020

Parliament met at 2.43 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I would like to say that we need to work expeditiously to reduce the items on the Order Paper.

I am just reporting that last week, we started screening for COVID-19; for both members of Parliament and staff. The exercise is on again today and will end at 4.00 p.m. In case there are staff who have not yet had the screening, they are free to go there so that we get that out of the way. 

However, let me thank you for the response and I thank the medical team for their tenacity because their plan was to be here for only two days but they have gone beyond the two days. Thank you.

There are just a few matters of national concern. We shall start with hon. Abbas Agaba and he will take two minutes. 

2.45
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kamwenge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, we recovered and buried the remains of the eighth person, who was attacked by crocodiles in Lake George. In the recent two months, crocodiles have eaten atleast eight people in my constituency. 

Madam Speaker, crocodiles were not endemic to Lake George but Government took a decision and introduced them in the lake. It appears that they have now surged in numbers. When our people go to the lakeside to collect water for use at home, especially the young ones - in the last two months - it has been intense that the crocodiles have been eating them. Sometimes you only find a head and that is all you bury. Yesterday, we buried only hands; in one of them, we only found a tongue and the rest was eaten. 

It is my prayer, Madam Speaker, that the Ministry in charge of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities comes in to help our people. We can gazette a few areas along the shores of the lake from Kanyabikyere, Kyendangara, Mahyoro and Kayinja. We can gazette a few areas and protect them so that they are specifically used for collection of water. Their extent in the water can be protected so that the crocodiles do not kill our people.

Secondly, we have a quarry that is at the boundary of Kanara Sub County in Kitagwenda and Kamwenge Sub County in Kamwenge District. For a long time, the problems were contained because we were together as Kamwenge District but now that we have split, there is an issue of fooling about who owns the quarry. The historical documents we –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: You have only two minutes. 

MR AGABA: The documents are available and indicate that the quarry belongs to Kitagwenda but recently, when we wrote to the Minister for Energy and Mineral Development, they wrote back to us to write to the ministry and propose an account number on which the money should be sent for sharing of loyalties. 

Shortly after, another letter was written that changed the status quo. The decision by the ministry on where the quarry belongs can take time but there is a looming conflict which will lead to bloody clashes in case it is not attended to. That is why I would like to request that the ministry be directed to come on the ground and sit with the local people and leaders to contain the current situation. Let the people be calmed down as they deal with the issue of who owns the quarry. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities is required to address the situation at Lake George, in particular, to establish a safe corridor for the human beings to be able to collect water without being endangered by the crocodiles and give us a report in a fortnight’s time. 

With regard to the quarry, the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development is required to go and examine the situation and give us a report in a fortnight’s time about the conclusion of that conflict. 

Hon. Okot, your issue is for the Minister of Local Government. I advise you to proceed straight to the minister on that issue. 

2.49
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, I have two matters of national importance. The first matter concerns the 40 districts under lockdown. I have a complaint majorly from my people, the Busia Tax Drivers Association. This complaint arose after a meeting of almost all the tax drivers’ chairpersons from the border districts. 

There is a big challenge because these driver’s families are undergoing a very serious problem of having no means of livelihood, to an extent that we have some drivers that have lost their lives. For example, Ngobi of Busia died due to lack of food and the pressure they have from the banks. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, it is my prayer that we help these people to survive, like it is in other parts of the country. The taxi business in this country on the border districts should be opened to allow other districts - like where we come from that have been under lockdown for four months - to operate. 

The second matter of national importance is that the National Water and Sewerage Corporation procured fake water metres worth Shs 17.5 billion from Kenya. The procurement did not follow proper procedures of the Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets. It is almost a year and these fake metres have not been distributed. 

My prayer is that this House directs that this matter be investigated so that Ugandans can get the right metres in this time where there is a big need of water as one of the essentials to fight the COVID-19. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, concerning the drivers’ issue, we have already asked the Minister of Works and Transport to come to us and report the national arrangement to manage this situation. Therefore, let him include the issue of the taxi drivers at the border. 

Concerning the issue of the National Water and Sewerage Corporation, I will ask the relevant committee – I think it is the Committee on State Agencies and State Enterprises (COSASE) to examine this urgently and give us an update. 

2.52 
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue concerns the relationship between the Uganda Revenue Authority, the National Gaming Board Uganda and the gaming companies.

A law was passed to establish the Gaming Board with a major purpose of regulating activities of gaming companies. However, it has come to the knowledge of Ugandans that instead of the Gaming Board regulating companies, it now works hand in hand with the gaming companies and the Uganda Revenue Authority to under declare the levy that they collect. 

Madam Speaker, gaming companies are everywhere. They are in schools, behind churches, small trading centres and every area where one passes. However, when the gaming companies send information to the Gaming Board, the Board under declares the number of companies from which they have received such information. For example, the Board may declare that they have received information from only 50 companies yet in actual sense they received from over 500 companies.

My concern is that we need to have value for money. These gaming companies are mostly owned by foreigners. I pray that Parliament picks interest in this matter to help Ugandans have value for their money and even save the money that is going to the wrong hands. 

I further pray, Madam Speaker, that you instruct the relevant committee of Parliament to investigate this matter. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable members, Macho and Kibalya, are raising very important issues. However, to enable the committee or anyone to pick up on this issue, could they provide some documentary evidence? Otherwise, the way we are proceeding - if we just say it without having where to start from - these are very important issues and so, for someone to follow them up, they need evidence. 

Is it procedurally right that the honourable members can raise such pertinent issues without giving evidence to the House? Otherwise, Parliament cannot start from just their narration. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I believe that when the committees sit, they will invite the honourable members as the first witnesses or the complainants or as people who have the required information. So, if you have the information, please take it there. If you do not have, you go there and say, “I told said something different.” 

In the meantime, I know we have not had an opportunity to examine the performance of the Gaming Board and the gaming companies. Therefore, I ask the committee on COSASE to examine the complaint; the honourable members should present the matters that need to be investigated.

2.56
MR MBWATEKAMWA GAFFA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter is about a presidential directive on bailing out private institutions and schools. In one of his addresses on COVID-19, His Excellency, President Museveni, instructed the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to register all private institutions that are likely to benefit from a Government grant. 

However, yesterday I saw on television news where some private school teachers and proprietors of private schools staged a strike in Masaka. One of the reasons is that they have not seen anything take place since the President issued that directive and I am very concerned. 

My prayer, Madam Speaker, is that you instruct the two ministers in charge of those sectors to come and explain to the House how far they have gone with registering all those private institutions that are likely to benefit from that grant. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable member, I do not know whether this is what was contained in the bail out from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development or it came directly. Was this part of what was contained in statement of the Minister of Finance or did it come separately? 

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It was separate because the President gave a directive in one of the addresses to the nation on COVID-19. I do not know what has transpired since then. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, the Minister of Education and Sports should give us an update on the presidential directive to register private schools owners and teachers. Are the ministers of education here? Let us first hear from the minister of finance first. 

2.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICROFINANCE) (Mr Haruna Kasolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Mbwatekamwa for bringing up that matter. However, as the ministry of finance, we are not aware of that directive. We shall have to ask hon. Mbwatekamwa for details because he recently visited the President and so, maybe it is a new directive. Therefore, he needs to update us to help us see how best we can implement that directive, Madam Speaker. 

2.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS)(MS Florence Nakiwala Kiyingi): Madam Speaker, it is true that on 22 June 2020, His Excellency, the President, while addressing the nation on the COVID-19 pandemic updates said that there would be a special activity to address the needs of the vulnerable groups falling into the categories of saloon operators, people who have lost jobs and those who are hard-hit amongst the vulnerable communities of youth and women. 

From that time, two meetings have been held so far. I, therefore, request that you give us a few days to come up with a statement to update the House. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have talked about the saloon operators and the youth but he was talking about private school teachers and owners. Is it part of that programme?

MS NAKIWALA: It is not part of the lineup, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: I think we will ask the Minister of Education and Sports to tell us whether there is actually a directive and to update us on how far they have gone. 

3.00
MR APOLLO YERI OFWONO (NRM, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Government commissioned an industrial park in Tororo. It was a complex that was supposed to accommodate related industries in the mining/manufacturing sector consisting of phosphate fertilizers, steel and others. 

In August 2018, the then Minister of Energy and Mineral Development, hon. Irene Muloni, commissioned a free zone for international cooperation, which was on about 600 acres of land. 

On 23 October, hon. Matia Kasaija, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development also commissioned the fertilizer plant; the President has also been there. However, as we talk, they are laying off workers and the factory is coming to a standstill. We do not know what really is happening. 

I, therefore, request the respective ministers to explain why this project has stalled. What is the reason? How do people come in to rescue this young baby? This would transform Tororo, the eastern region and the nation at large. What is really happening? 

THE SPEAKER: Are you sure it is not related to COVID-19 by any chance? Anyway, the Minister of Industry and Cooperatives is required to examine the claim that Dong Song Factory in Tororo is winding down and causing unemployment. He should report to us within a fortnight.

3.03
MS CISSY NAMUJJU (NRM, Woman Representative, Lwengo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The matter I am presenting is in regard to the new transmission line, which passes through Lwengo District. The Masaka-Mbarara 400KV transmission line in Lwengo District was constructed on land, which was taken from the people in 2015. To date, they have not been compensated for their land as promised. The land is undeveloped and the people cannot do anything on their land like farming, selling their land or leasing the land yet they were not compensated for their land. 

The residents of Lwengo District are concerned that compensation for their land has taken a very long time. Therefore, they request for your immediate intervention so that they can be compensated. Just like you have helped many Ugandans throughout the years, I pray that you help the people of Lwengo District so that they are compensated for their land.

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that you give a directive to the right ministry so that the people of Lwengo, who lost their land can be compensated as they were promised in 2015. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I believe that this line must be coming from somewhere to enter Lwengo and also exiting somewhere. I would like the Minister for Energy and Mineral Development to come and explain to this House what happened to the project affected persons and their compensation, for the land taken in 2015 to construct a power line in the whole road. I believe it may not only be Lwengo because it starts somewhere and ends somewhere. Give us an update within a fortnight. 

3.06
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In the last one week, we have received rare visitors in Tororo County South. We have been visited by beasts; hippopotamus that are marauding around, destroying people’s crops and killing animals. 

The communities of Amoni, Water Village, Malaba, Abwanget and Ngelechom villages are living in fear. These animals have become a very serious threat to them. The community that has never seen such animals in the past is now in total fear. These animals graze in Uganda for two days and the next two days, they cross to Kenya. The whole community along that area is in total fear. So far, six to seven cows have been killed.

Madam Speaker, my prayers are that:

    1. The Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities helps these people and relocate these animals, if possible.
    2. If the animals are to live with us, let them also come and sensitise the community on how to coexist with these animals.
    3. Let the people be considered for compensation for the loss they have suffered because they have lost all their crops and animals cannot be grazed in their common grazing places. 

I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, of course the movement of animals from Kenya to Uganda is part of regional integration. (Laughter) However, on a serious note, I would like to appeal to the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities to go and rescue the situation in Tororo, ensure the coexistence between the animals and the population but also the border incursions and give us a report in a fortnight’s time. Thank you very much. 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER ON THE EVALUATION OF GOVERNMENT’S RESPONSE TO THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Health –

3.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Madam Speaker, these two papers on evaluation of Government’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic and the extension of the quarantine period for returnees from other countries over and above the 14 days - I would like to request that my ministry brings these papers and presents them on the Floor of Parliament next week on Tuesday. 

This is simply because right now, the National Task Force is meeting with His Excellency the President and as we all know, tonight, he will be addressing the nation. Therefore, we thought we could have a comprehensive response in terms of evaluation, which could be presented next week. 

Madam Speaker, in the meantime, allow me to thank you for the vigilance – (Mr Macho rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Why are you harassing the minister? 

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, I have risen on a point of procedure with tears because whereas the people from the minister’s place have been moving freely for four months, some of us from Busia District have had no taxis moving for four months and nobody has left Busia for four months. 

We have not got any food from Government for four months. I do not know whether the minister is proceeding well to tell us that the evaluation report on COVID-19 should wait when Ugandans are suffering in the 40 border districts. I, therefore, do not know whether the minister is proceeding well. 

THE SPEAKER: You are anticipating what the minister is going to say. Our rules do not allow anticipation. Honourable minister, as we give you this extension, please remember that in the last one month, there have been no updates on the COVID-19 situation here. 

DR MORIKU: Madam Speaker, indeed it is true that there was no update. However, this is an evaluation statement on Government’s response to COVID-19. A lot of activities have been undertaken within this month and I thought that after today’s meeting, a lot of changes will come up. Therefore, when we have a comprehensive package for the evaluation report next week, that will be more adequate. 

However, allow me to say that from the time the President addressed the nation a couple of months ago, out of the 40 districts, which are high risk at the border, a number of them have been unlocked. 

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable minister, you are now going to cause issues. There are others, which have not been unlocked. Therefore, next week. 

DR MORIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I said, I would like to thank you and the Members for the vigilance in making sure that our Parliament is free from COVID-19. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I hope you enjoy our air conditioned plenary here. 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER ON ACTION TAKEN ON THE VARIOUS PETITIONS ON THE PLIGHT OF BODA BODA OPERATORS IN THE WAKE OF THE COVID-19 LOCK DOWN

THE SPEAKER: They are not here. Next item. 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

COMMITTEE FIELD VISIT REPORT ON THE PERFORMANCE OF NEWLY CREATED ADMINISTRATIVE UNITS (DISTRICTS) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Onzima – Our chairperson is not here. Is the vice chairperson here?
Oh, the minister is here for item No. 3. 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER ON ACTION TAKEN ON THE VARIOUS PETITIONS ON THE PLIGHT OF BODA BODA OPERATORS IN THE WAKE OF THE COVID-19 LOCK DOWN

3.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Ms Joy Kabatsi): While we wait for tonight’s address, this is what the ministry has put in place for the boda boda riders. These are the Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) that we have put in place as a ministry.

1. 	The first one is the statutory requirement. Operators shall comply with the statutory requirements for operating commercial motorcycles or boda bodas, as we call them.
a. 	They must have a valid operator’s license allowing the motorcycle to carry passengers for hire or reward.
b. 	A valid driving license with Group. A.
c. 	A valid third party insurance.
d. 	The motorcycle should be in good mechanical condition.

2. 	On the health and safety measures;
    a. All motorcycle riders shall, at all times, while riding, wear a face mask covering the mouth and the nose. They also must have a safety helmet.
    b. All passengers shall, at all times, while travelling on a motorcycle wear a face mask covering the mouth and the nose. Passengers are, however, encouraged to use face shields while travelling on a motorcycle.
    c. All boda boda operators are required to regularly disinfect their motorcycles and their jackets while using antimicrobial cleansers prior to every trip. At the end of the trip, they should do the same thing. All passengers should also be compelled to clean their hands with sanitizers prior to boarding a motorcycle.
    d. A boda boda shall strictly carry one passenger at a time.

3. 	On social distancing, operators shall remain at a social distance of two metres apart at the stage.
4. 	On public sensitisation, boda boda operators and stage chairpersons are encouraged to make constant public reminders – that is, sensitising the people on how to minimise the spread of COVID-19 by following the guidelines issued by the Ministry of Health, for example washing hands, avoid touching the eyes, the nose and the mouth.
5. 	Inspection of motorcycles for road worthiness has been extended to up to 31 December 2020. However, voluntary compliance is encouraged before 01 January 2021.
6. 	Curfew times must be observed at all times from 5.00 p.m. 

The rest, we shall wait for the President’s address. If he allows the boda bodas to move – (Interruptions) 

THE SPEAKER: Please allow the minister to speak. We wanted this information. Okay, one minute each. No submissions. Just ask your questions. 

3.18
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the action taken on the various petitions for these boda bodas; most of these bikes have been confiscated and one of the issues that caused this petition is to see that these people get their motorcycles back. In the statement of the minister, that did not come out clearly. 

Secondly, the minister has said that at all times, both the boda boda person and the passenger will disinfect and also be required to wear a face mask. However, I need clarification as to whether boda boda riders are allowed to carry passengers with immediate effect with these prerequisites in place or that this will come into effect later. 

We also need to know which formula they are going to use to implement their directive of the disinfectants. Will all boda boda riders access a single stage to access the disinfectant or there shall be police officers to ensure that the regulation is implemented? 

3.19
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for declaring that the boda bodas are free to carry people. My understanding is that she has allowed the boda boda men to carry passengers -(Interjections) - She has told us so many steps that they are going to take. 

Madam Speaker, you remember when the motion was brought here in the House, we talked about the killings that were taking place, the death of boda boda riders. Why isn’t the minister telling us about those killings? Clearly there is nothing about them in there. All she is talking about is COVID-19 yet they promised to bring a statement and steps that the Government is going to follow to address the plight of boda boda men in Uganda. 

At the same time, she is talking about the need for everyone to wear masks. However, Government promised to give masks to everyone. I need her to tell us whether she has supplied masks to all the boda boda riders and the would-be passengers of the boda bodas in Uganda. 

I need help to understand because these are my people because I was one of them. So, I need to help them. They should be able to resume their normal business. I am confident that instead of them operating in a clandestine manner, they should actually tell us today. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Abala, on the issue of the plight, I think the minister will come with an action taken report concerning the other resolution. That is separate from this. 

But, secondly, honourable members, the position of this House has been, can we allow them to work because this is their livelihood? Therefore, do not complain about the masks. 

3.21
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Today, I am very happy because the Government I believe in, which I know is going to win in the next election, has come here through the Ministry of Works and Transport to say that boda bodas will operate because it is really terrible. 

For the people of Butaleja, if Government will not bring masks early enough, we shall sell our “kalo” and buy the masks. Therefore, madam minister, rest assured that the people of Butaleja and indeed Uganda will get them - because masks are only Shs 3,000. 

Madam Minister, I would like to thank you and thank the President that starting tomorrow, the boda bodas will start carrying people and we shall observe the standard operating procedures. Thank you.

3.22
MR REAGAN OKUMU(Independent, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification on a few issues. 

The minister came up with a lot of measures but she fell short of the monitoring mechanism the ministry is putting in place. Among others, the minister talked about the boda bodas being checked. I do not know whether the Ministry of Works and Transport has established centres throughout the country, with enough capacity to inspect every motorcycle in this country. Otherwise, we should not talk as if we are on Mars.

Lastly, I would like to find out from the minister what is so scientific about 5.00 p.m. that boda bodas must stop riding at 5.00 p.m. yet curfew begins at 7.00 p.m. What is very scientific about this? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3. 23
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Madam Speaker, I am also concerned about the 5.00 p.m. People stop working at 5.00 p.m. to go home and they use boda bodas but you arrest the boda bodas. Therefore, I think the issue of 5.00 p.m. does not make sense. 

Secondly, on the issue of the face shields – Madam Speaker, face shields costs Shs 15,000. If you require me to use a face shield when I am going to a distance of about 2,000 kilometres – I think we should talk about masks not face shields since they are very expensive. You are actually telling boda bodas not to operate. Thank you, 

3.24
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank the minister for her submission. 

Madam Speaker, these down-trodden people, who get their livelihood from daily income have had a four months nightmare of no livelihood. The boda boda business has already informally started working. I do not know what the minister is waiting for, to declare that the business should be opened. Otherwise, to say that she is waiting for His Excellency the President to further state that they should work, is being unfair to this august House. 

Otherwise, the question to her was how they were going to operate. This is because we are trying to curb the community spread of COVID-19. 

Madam Speaker, these people have credit facilities whose obligations they have not fulfilled. We have over one million people living off the business of boda boda. They cannot wait anymore. We are here to hear from the minister, who should be able to tell the whole nation that they are now free to go back and work and that they should bserve the Standard Operating Procedures as they start their work. Thank you.

3.26
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (Independent, Tororo North County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to commend the minister for finally listening to the plight of the boda boda people of this country. However, I did not hear the minister mention the plight of the boda boda people in the border districts. 

Madam Speaker, they also took loans like any other boda boda person across the country. They have been under lockdown for a longer time, than even the rest of the country. I, therefore, expected the minister to have mentioned them because these boda bodas have families and they are starving like any other Ugandan in this country. I am, therefore, requesting the minister to be kind enough to give an explanation on the plight of those boda bodas in the border districts. 

As I conclude, I would like to – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you had one minute. 

MS NYAKECHO: As I conclude, I would like to request Government – because I have not heard Government mention this anywhere - that just like they planned to help other people who have been affected by COVID-19, they should also put aside some little funds for the boda boda people. Otherwise, most of their motorcycles were confiscated in police stations. Government could help them with a start-up fund such that their lives can be better. Thank you. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was here when the Minister of Works and Transport gave us a statement. She told us the Standard Operating Procedures that they have prepared to submit to the President, who is mandated to declare the boda bodas open. 

I have also listened to Members who have contributed but they are trying to indicate that the minister has now authorised boda bodas from now onwards – Madam Speaker, that is not her mandate. It is the President who has been the commander and in fact, he is going to address us this evening. I, therefore, thought Members are debating on wrong information. This is the clarification I wanted to seek. 

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Speaker, we were responding to the statement of the minister as it is. We have not added anything neither have we subtracted any. Of course, she informed us that the President is going to give an additional statement in the evening but we expected that her statement has issues to do with collective responsibility, that when a minister comes here – 

Madam Speaker, in fact, yesterday was a Monday. It was a Cabinet meeting day. So, we expected that these issues were already discussed and therefore, whatever the minister is feeding this House has been agreed upon by Cabinet. This is why we are responding to the minister’s statement as is – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lubogo, one minute. 

3.29
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I would like to appreciate the minister for responding to the issues that were raised in the petition that I presented here last week. I would like to speak on three issues. 

The first is about the face shields for passengers. Most of the people who use these boda bodas are the poor people yet you are now telling the passenger that he or she must wear a face shield in addition to the mask. I think it is important for us to make it practical. What is practical is that a passenger should be required to wear a face shield. 

Secondly, there was a prayer that the minister has not answered. That prayer was about clemency for those whose motorcycles have been impounded and cases opened, because they broke some of the Standard Operating Procedures when they were attempting to look for food for their families. Madam Speaker, we want Government to come out clearly and state its position on this. 

Madam Speaker, the President has always extended some bit of lenience in particular cases, especially, the people who are struggling to make ends meet and put some food on their table. These motorcycles need to be released and cases forgiven. 

Finally, on the issue of when the boda bodas are to start, my understanding is that the minister is speaking here on behalf of Government and she is addressing the nation. The President is going to make his statement but we believe that what you have been presenting here is what has been agreed upon. 

Madam Speaker, our understanding is that should there be a reason that the President does not make a statement, you have said that under those guidelines, the boda bodas should start operating. Therefore, we expect them to start operating tomorrow - (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister did not say that the boda bodas must wear shields. She said they are encouraged but that the mask is a must. If you can have the face shields, it is better but the standard is the mask. That is what she said. 

Honourable members, the minister is responding to what we asked. We said that him and his minister - and I am happy that they have come back because we asked them last week to tell us how these people can live - and that is what he has done. 

Regarding what the President had not done yet, you know we are talking about people’s lives and livelihoods. We should be sensitive to the livelihood of the people; stop the bureaucracy.

3.32
MR PETER OCEN (Independent, Kole South County, Kole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the guidelines she has given for the boda boda riders. I would like to request the minister to add something to the guidelines, when presenting them to the President - we have boda boda motorcycles that have been impounded and are in police custody. And even some of the boda boda riders have been arrested too. Some of them have been aligned in court and are on remand in prisons. If possible, honourable minister, may you also present this to the President so that these people are pardoned and even the impounded motorcycles returned to these riders without any conditions. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: That is an appeal for clemency for those who have been convicted or are on remand.

3.33
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the minister for the response given. At least, finally we are getting to where we want the boda boda community at large to be. 

However, honourable minister, I have listened carefully and noticed that you are talking about social distancing. I do not know how far you have gone to organise these stages.

If you are talking about two metres apart, for example, along Kampala Road, it means the whole of Kampala Road will be covered by these boda boda riders. So, how are you going to handle the issue of social distance at those stages? 

Given the numbers of boda boda riders per stage, that is something you need to evaluate seriously because it is going to create a lot of problems. You may end up denying others the opportunity because of the lack of space to accommodate them at the various stages; you need to review that a bit.

Secondly, you have not explained the steps you have put in place to enable them operate. This country is funny. Tomorrow you might hear of somebody registering boda boda riders and making money out of them. Where are they going to go, to get all the licenses, be inspected and so on? Is it at the ministry? You need to categorically come out on that for them to know that for any rider to operate, this is where they have to go to and get licenses and certificates. I thank you. 

3.35
MS LILLY ADONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the minister for giving some hope. Although it is yet to be confirmed by the President, I would like to beg His Excellency, the President to do us a favour and help the boda boda riders.

Madam Speaker, yesterday, a terrible incident happened. Some of us with rural constituencies, there is no other means than the boda boda. Particularly in my district, we have some volunteer boda boda riders who were given cards so they could be helping people in the villages though in some places, they refused.

I would like to inform the minister that at the beginning of the lockdown, the Minister of Works and Transport kind of suspended or advised that those who do not have driving permits or those whose permits had expired should not be harassed. However, now you are saying that all the boda boda riders should get driving permits. When and how are they going to get those permits given the fact that most of them do not even have permits? We should not make life very hard because they are also voters.

Madam Speaker, I would urge the honourable minister and the team to expedite the process and have - people are getting tire and agitated. You know that you have not provided everything to all the people in Uganda. For example, you gave food only to the people in Kampala; we do not have it in our area. You have not even given the face masks to some of these areas. Where are they going to get them from? Before you force everybody in the villages who is going to board a boda boda to put on a face mask, have you distributed to these people? You promised to deliver the masks in two weeks. It is one month and not everybody has been given the face mask. Even in the districts that have been locked down, not everyone there has received a face mask. So, if you find it difficult to do it, why do you think everybody can easily do it? Thank you.

3.37
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is now exactly four months ever since we entered into the lockdown. The issue of boda boda riders has been a concern of everybody including you, Madam Speaker, given the number of petitions from boda boda riders that have been filed with your office.

Madam Speaker, I would like to request that without any delay - I do not agree with some members who are tagging it to face masks - the boda boda riders are in position to buy the masks for themselves and be on the road whether the Government has provided them or not. As long as they are working and carrying passengers, they can buy the masks for themselves.

Secondly, I would like to request that even the curfew time - because the boda boda riders have been stopping operations at 5.00 p.m. but with all the sincerity, the 5.00 p.m. cut off time should be extended to help them  - because so many people’s business get to the peak at around 5.00 p.m. So, even if the curfew has not been extended from 7.00 p.m. to some other hour, I request that the boda-boda operating time be extended to 7.00 p.m. and not 5.00 p.m. because that is the peak time for them to carry passengers back to their homes or areas of residences.

Finally, Madam Speaker, we would like to request that a special package for boda boda riders be put in place because many of them got these motorcycles - I mean a special package from Government to help boda boda riders to access interest-free loans, for example, from Islamic banking. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.39
MR ROBERT CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to request that a special package be considered for the boda boda riders most especially now that Government decided to even include them among the vulnerable category. Otherwise, for the last four months, if I may speak for my constituency, not even a grain of maize has been distributed to the people there. 

I, being a patron for the boda boda riders in the constituency, I find difficult spending some of my meager resources to provide for the citizens whom the Government is responsible for. These people have even borrowed money. For instance, I guaranteed them to take a loan from microfinance support centre and they are supposed to pay interest on that loan. They have rented an office to operate their activities yet the motorcycles are parked and rotting away.

Therefore, the sooner the Government opens the boda boda transport, the better for these citizens of Uganda. Otherwise, this industry was also not only providing transport services -(Member timed out.)

3.41
MS NABILAH NAGGAYI (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am very grateful that the minister has brought a statement regarding boda boda riders and their imminent - because I cannot say officially resuming - resumption of services.

I would like to ask the minister, since there is a stimulus package because otherwise these boda bodas, bulk of them have loans from micro-finance institutions. Is there an economic relief package so that the last four months do not accrue interest on their loans? That is my request. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

3.42
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Sembabule): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to that of colleagues who have raised the issue of the concerns of the boda bodas, especially their livelihood. We all know that they are among the most vulnerable groups and we anticipated that when the President talked about essential service providers, they would have been included. 

I would have wished to hear from the minister because a statement states facts. We are not here to speculate what the head of state is going to say about the boda bodas. In case he says nothing, what happens? I would like to call upon my fellow colleagues that we must resolve it here that the boda bodas must be allowed to operate. (Applause) All of us have used this service. 

The boda bodas in my constituency have become a source of income to some departments. Their motorcycles are confiscated and the owners are asked to pay money to sustain some institutions. This is a big concern for everybody and I call upon us to resolve that we must – What if the President does not mention them? Boda boda riders are the people who live on only one source of income.

When it comes to curfew, boda bodas are not necessarily the ones carrying passengers. Other business people use their motorcycles as well. When they close their shops at 6.30 p.m., and the curfew for boda bodas is at 5.00p.m., what happens? Should they carry the passengers on their heads? What should they do? 

It is now that we must resolve the issue. We must have had a package to sustain these people for the last four months. I would like to move, at a later stage, before we close, through you, Madam Speaker, that the boda bodas are given – (Member timed out.)

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I am seeking clarification from the minister. Honourable minister, I happen to be a biker. I ride a motorcycle and at the same time, I am a client of boda bodas. For road safety, you are supposed to use a helmet whether you are a passenger or a rider. Therefore, when you talk about the face shield, if I am seated on a boda boda and I am a client who is wearing a helmet, how am I supposed to fix a face shield? If I have my helmet, tell me how I am supposed to first put on a mask and then later I put on a helmet. Is it practical? Are we speaking because we do not use these boda bodas? 

What you are proposing is impractical. We are complicating people’s lives. If you have a helmet, which has a screen then you have a shield. Why should we complicate the lives of Ugandans? Honourable minister, I think they wrote this statement for you and you did not internalise it. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to say a few things. First, I think when the Government is thinking about boda bodas, they should not think about Kampala alone. They should think about Uganda. I represent a rural constituency. There are no matatus in Kamuli. The available taxis move from Kamuli to Kampala. Anywhere else, you must go by motorcycles. Therefore, it is not true that all motorcycles are boda bodas. You must bear that in mind. 

Secondly, to say that they must stop moving at 5.00p.m. - Who are they transporting at 5.00p.m.? People leave office at 5.00 p.m. and then you ask them to walk. It is because the people who are making the directives are driven in cars. (Applause) That is why they forget about those who have to walk. 

Honourable minister, you can answer questions but let us be humane. Let us be alive to the suffering of the people. It has been four months, people need to get on with their lives. 

MS KABATSI: Thank you for your direction, Madam Speaker. I would like to assure the Members of Parliament that I have not allowed boda bodas. You have to wait for the President; he is the one to allow boda bodas. When he allows them, he does so with a team of scientists. 

Honourable members, you need to watch your televisions and see what COVID-19 is doing. The curfew on boda bodas to stop moving at 5.00 p.m. was done scientifically. This was on the advice of scientists – (Interruption) 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, we are ruling in accordance with the 1995 Constitution, as amended and we know that the President does not rule by decree. He has a team of people that he works with. 

Last week, you made a fundamental statement that this country must review the issue of coronavirus and the restrictions that are following its management, with a view that we should be able to find out whether we cannot afford to live reasonably with the virus. 

Is it in order for the minister, who is nominated by the President and approved by this Parliament, to say that unless the President has spoken, nothing happens? Is she in order when she is a member of the Cabinet and she knows that she is an advisor to the President? The members of the Cabinet should be able to advise the President because they are in contact with the people whose views they represent. You must carry the voices of the people to the President. Is it in order for the minister to give the impression that the President is ruling by decree?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, when we asked you to come back here, we thought you were speaking on behalf of the Government. That is how you brought those guidelines on behalf of the Government. 

MR KABATSI: Madam Speaker, if you want me to speak on behalf of the Government, give me a chance to come tomorrow so that we listen - (Interjections) – This is a matter of COVID-19. Do you want me –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, take your seats -

MR NSEREKO: Madam Speaker, we have two sides in this House; on your right is the Government side and on your left is the Opposition. The President, who is the leader of this Government, is represented by ministers in this Parliament. The role of ministers is to present – 

THE SPEAKER: Take your seats! 

MR NSEREKO: The role of the ministers is to present positions for and on behalf of Government. Madam Speaker, you clearly stated that the minister should come on behalf of Government to give the position of the state of the transporters in our country with a view of the following: 

    i. Returning to normalcy, 
    ii. Telling us about the status of curfew, and 
    iii. The status of our transporters in transporting the people. 

Is it in order, Madam Speaker, for the minister to appear before this august House and state that she is not aware of the situation and yet she is making her presentation for and on behalf of the Government? 

MS KABATSI: Madam Speaker, I was only asking that you give me a chance to come tomorrow after the President’s address. These are matters of COVID, which have to be handled as matters of COVID. We want rights. Be reasonable. 

THE SPEAKER: Order! Honourable minister, if you are not speaking on behalf of Government, take your seat. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

    I. COMMITTEE FIELD VISIT REPORT ON THE PERFORMANCE OF NEWLY CREATED ADMINISTRATIVE UNITS(DISTRICTS)

THE SPEAKER: Order! Hon. Onzima is on the Floor. 

3.55
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have come to present a report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government on the performance of newly created administrative units and districts. 

Madam Speaker, the Committee on Public Service and Local Government undertook an oversight visit in the newly created districts of Lwengo, Rwampara, Kitagwenda and Kazo to ascertain their levels of operationalisation and performance from 18 to 21 November 2019. 

This was supported by the Rule 185 (b) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament which mandate committees of Parliament to initiate and evaluate action programmes of ministries and sectors under their preview as well as make appropriate recommendations there yet. 

Madam Speaker, I wonder whether I am supposed to present the report or I am just supposed to lay it on the Floor of Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: Lay it. 

MR ONZIMA: It is unfortunate that many members want to take over the Speaker’s role and give directives. I think that is very unfortunate. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to lay a copy of the report and the minutes of interactions of members with the various officials from these districts. I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, we shall appoint a day for the debate. It is now available for the members. 

    II. COMMITTEE FIELD REPORT ON PERFORMANCE OF SALARY AND PENSION PAYROLL MANAGEMENT IN LOCAL GOVERNMENTS.

3.57
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay a report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government on the performance of salary and pension payroll management in local governments. 

I beg to lay a copy of the report and also minutes of interaction with the various stakeholders. I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. An opportunity will be given to debate that report. Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and members of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NATIONAL COFFEE BILL, 2018

Clause 28 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, you will recall that, the other day, when we left, we were dealing with a clause that reads, “A farmer shall appeal.”

It reads, “A coffee farmer, aggrieved by the decision of the authority made by subsection (1), may appeal to the minister.” We were raising an issue on how a villager that has never been to the town will move from a village to Mbale town to Kampala up to Entebbe to look for hon. Ssempijja, which might take a year because he is in Cabinet and has various other activities. 

We had made a proposal that an aggrieved farmer looking for an appeal should start at a village level, go to the sub county up to the district. Failure to resolve that, then, it will reach the minister. 

However, in the current state, you are making it so hard that a farmer will never appeal when he has been deregistered by UCDA. Madam Chairperson, you know very well that coffee takes about five years before it starts yielding. After doing it, somebody who is very angry with you can abuse his office and say he has delegated you so that if you want to appeal, you need to go to the minister. 

Madam Chairperson, I would like to plead with you that the appeal process starts from the village level where there are local councils because we have established them. Probably, the appeal should go to the local councils 1, 2 and 3 up to the district before it reaches the minister. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like you to look carefully at clause 28. It is the authority that deregisters so if you have gone to the authority, how do you go back to the LC1 to appeal. It is not the LC1 that deregisters so you are creating more bureaucracy for the farmer, in my view.

MR NSEREKO: Madam Chairperson, there are two centres of authority here. Whereas we have the authority, we also have the minister. However, what I understand from hon. Nandala-Mafabi is that you are envisaging a situation where you have at the moment 1.7 million coffee farmers. In addition, assuming 500,000 have not been registered or have been de-registered, the procedure of appeal to the minister creates backlog.

We are trying to solve this by not creating that backlog by appealing at a lower stage because there are inspectors, supervisors, etcetera, at a lower stage. Can’t the appeal stage stop there rather than everyone appealing to the minister?

Assuming 500,000 farmers have appealed to the minister after having such a decision taken, isn’t it a disincentive to people investing in coffee growing?

MR OSHABE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Whatever appeal process we put up will be difficult to our farmers. What we desire is that if they deregistered me for neglect of a coffee farm, we should not focus so much on the appeal, but we should tell this farmer to address the problem. 

Once the problem is addressed - because the committee report has provided for something clause (3) where they say, “Any person who was registered as a coffee farmer and subsequently deregistered by the authority, may at any time be re-registered with additional terms and conditions as the authority may specify”.

Madam Chairperson, my proposal is that we require this farmer- once he or she is deregistered; because it comes in as a punishment for neglect of a farm or adulterating coffee and some other faults; let us require the farmer to address the problem so that immediately he addresses the problem, his registration is reinstated.

Madam Chairperson, once we go into creating appeal levels, it will be a discouragement for many coffee farmers.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, I think what you are talking about is to have another level of deregistration not the authority because you are talking about the LC I. Then the lower level should be the one to deregister, you do not go to the authority, because if you have reached the authority, how do you come back to LC I?

MR SSENYONGA: Madam Chairperson, the concern is that a farmer should be given time and this time should be specified. In other areas, some farmers are really very far. For example, you have farmers on the islands. Sometimes, someone could fall sick and you find that his or her coffee garden, during that time is not well managed and he is deregistered. Some people are not even fair, Madam Chairperson. That is why we should specify some given period so that the farmer can readdress the problem on his or her farm.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now, honourable members, look at clause 27, it is about the national register of farmers, it is kept by the authority not at LC I. That is the difficulty I have.

MS KATUSHABE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Registration is simple because we need to know the number of trees and farmers and to give Government a way of planning for those farmers. 

Deregistration is so difficult because when you are going to register, the national team will go to the villages and register all farmers and the number of trees. However, for deregistration, it is an individual farmer. If it is deregistering, then the farmer should be given an opportunity to act on the problem before uprooting their coffee. 

However, remember this is a crop that takes four years to yield. You are now uprooting the trees and deregistering the farmer. When you register again, it means you are going to grow coffee which will take four years to grow; that is why it is difficult. We should not make redundant laws, Madam Chairperson.

It will not be possible because you cannot just come and uproot my trees before addressing the problem. Madam Chairperson, that is why we are saying that this problem should be addressed at the village level.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now, I wish the minister could help me because I understanding the members’ desire to maintain the farmers’ gardens and so on. Now, we are talking about the national register. The register is with the authority.

Ms NYAKECHO: Madam Chairperson, I wanted to add more information on what the member has just said. The process of deregistration, from the arguments, it might be a catalyst for corruption. Officers might come from Kampala, go up country and intimidating people and threatening them with deregistration just because they what to extort money from them.

I want to believe that this particular clause looks a little bit redundant unless we suggest that the highest level of appeal should be at the district as it is captured in the committee report. It is nearer than saying you come all the way to the centre which is in Kampala. I think we should maintain what the committee had captured in their report so that we are at a better position, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now, can I hear from the mover?

MR KAFUUZI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I wanted to propose that under clause 27, there is a proviso for regulations to be made by the minister. I wanted to propose that the appeal process be embedded under here so that it is made in the regulations and it is addressed to the extension workers because they are closer to the round. For example, there are people who will be deregistered and may choose not to appeal but instead improve on their gardens. The extension worker can easily inspect and see that they have improved and met the conditions and then have them registered afresh.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why don’t we then provide for two levels of deregistration- the one at either the parish, or a different level.

MR NANDALA: Madam Chairperson, if you look through the report on page 13, there had even said that it is very difficult for somebody to come to the minister in paragraph (6.5). 

They further said that they should either establish a tribunal at the district level. They were trying to say that it is very complicated for somebody at a village level to reach a minister. Madam Chairperson, the only problem the committee made, is that it never made a provision or an amendment for it. That is why we are coming up to say, has the committee recognised that the minister is too far?

Secondly, the farmer is in the village. If the farmer is in the village, the person who knows that farmer in village is the LC I chairperson because that chairperson works through the Minister of Local Government. In fact, that chairperson is part of the state. So, why don’t we allow deregistration, or even registration, to start from the village level? Otherwise, why should you deregister that farmer? What you can only do is only to refuse to buy their coffee. You don’t have to deregister them because coffee is coffee. Whether it has grown in the bush or anywhere, as longer as the area is known for coffee growing.

Madam Chairperson, coffee quality is determined by the moisture content and moisture content is as a result of how one has dried their coffee. Otherwise, no matter whether the coffee is from Bulambuli or from the bush, what matters is the seed. If the coffee plant is grown under a tree, the seeds are bigger and smaller, if the plant is in the open; the taste however, remains the same. Some coffee might even need grass under it. 

Anyway, what I want to put across is that if you allow extension officers to come and deregister members, you are giving them the powers to abuse the authority and cheat these poor farmers.

I stated here from the beginning, that the second most traded commodity, after oil, is coffee. If it is coffee and we are a regulating it, that regulation should not be to disadvantage the people who grow coffee.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, let us stand over this clause, as you think, plan and design.

Clause 29

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the committee has a proposal, immediately after clause 28, to insert a new provision to read as follows: 

“Reregistration: Any person, who was registered as a coffee farmer and subsequently deregistered by the authority, may at any time be reregistered with additional terms and conditions as the authority may specify.”  The justification is to give farmers a chance to be put back into the register in case their appeals are successful. I beg to move.

MR CENTENARY: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think we are legislating not to impede but to promote the coffee growing given the fact that Government has put up enormous resources through the supply of coffee seedlings to farmers. All this is to enable the country to produce coffee so that we are able to realise the many million bags that we are looking for. So, if we insist on deregistration, it is going to discourage coffee farmers and it will breed a lot of malpractices.

I would like to propose that clause 28 be deleted from the Bill because it is going to create challenges. In my view, registration of farmers should be able to give us inventory for us to take stock of how many coffee farmers we have, and to project the output of the coffee that the country is able to produce not to ensure quality assurance because it is the duty of Government to provide extension services to the farmers. 

Therefore, if the extension workers have not provided their services, the farmer should not be punished. As a coffee farmer, the quality of coffee is determined by the moisture content not the type of plant.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is your proposal?

MR CENTENARY: I am proposing that we delete clause 28 on deregistration of farmers.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I had already said that we stand over clause 28 and the new clause, and go to clause 29. We shall come back after we have agreed.   

Clause 29

MS OKORI-MOE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The committee proposes to amend the provision in the headnote, by substituting the words, “application to operate a coffee nursery” with the words, “application to operate a coffee nursery or coffee seed gardens.” The justification is to cater for the coffee seed gardens. 

In sub clause (1), the committee proposes to insert the words, “or a coffee seed garden” immediately after the words, “a coffee nursery.” It is a subsequential amendment.
In sub clause (2), the committee proposes to insert the words, “or a coffee seed garden operator” at the end of the provision. The justification is that it is a consequential amendment.

In sub clause (3), the committee proposes to insert the words, “a coffee seed garden” after the words, “the coffee nursery.” It is also a subsequential amendment.

The committee further proposes to insert a new sub clause, after sub clause (3), to read as follows: “Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, a person who wishes to plant coffee shall obtain planting materials from a certified coffee nursery.” The justification is for quality control of planting materials. I beg to move.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, clause 29(2) says that the authority shall assess the soil type to determine the type of coffee variety to be planted by the coffee nursery operator. In clause 26 we deleted a similar clause of that nature because we indicated that in this country, we do not have many soil laboratories. So, I beg that we delete this as well.

In clause 3, it is said that the authority shall assess the coffee nursery operator after putting and it is satisfied that the nursery - Madam Chairperson, I find this one very redundant. I am a coffee nursery operator and I know that at the point of putting it up, you will have already got the type of soil to use. However, here, the law requires that the authority assesses. The law is requiring the operator to put it up and look for the authority to do the assessment. 

A nursery operator is just doing multiplication; they are not operating coffee garden. So, it is my humble request - because this will just be creating a red tape for nursery operators; it is not going to help in any way.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, maybe let me again speak as a coffee farmer. Not all coffee seedlings that are planted are from a coffee nursery. For example, usually, what the old men do is to allow ripened coffee seeds to fall and germinate on its own under a huge tree. Those are the ones they transplant to their gardens. One doesn’t need to be a coffee nursery operator to do make coffee seedlings.

When you look at this clause, as the committee is proposing, you realise it is saying that if one gets a person with coffee seedlings, they must have come from a coffee operator. That is wrong because in our area, we have old men whose job is basically to work under such trees and produce seedlings for planting. Therefore, when we say that it is a garden, there is no need - The seedlings do not grow in the air; they grow in the garden. That is why you do not need to bring this law to this country. 

Madam Chairperson, I would like to make a proposal. Instead of talking, as the committee is saying, let us use our own experience. One, a coffee nursery operator will have authority from UCDA - that is those who are going to supply Government. However, those with their own way of growing their seedlings should not be curtailed by UCDA to plant those materials. That is why I am saying that those from the other trees are better seedlings than those from nursery operators who even put fertilizers and when they give these seedlings to farmers, they die because of poor soils. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can we know what we define as a coffee nursery? If we can define it, then we do not have to interfere with the old men under the tree.

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. A nursery is an area where seedlings are raised. They are raised in conducive conditions to make high quality seedlings. Therefore, there are certain standards that are required and put in place to raise seedlings.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Must everybody have a nursery?

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Chairperson, not everybody has a nursery. What we are trying cure in this - It is true, like hon. Nandala-Mafabi has said, that long ago, farmers would allow the seeds to fall down, germinate and then they plant them. That is where we are getting a very big problem with seedlings that are not of high quality. 

Madam Chairperson, we are running away from what we call “elite seeds” and doing what we call “cuttings”, which are high yielding seedlings that are resistant to diseases - (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I come from Bugisu and the coffee which we have is called Nyasaland. This coffee was planted without having to go to those nurseries we are talking about and it has lived for years, up to date. 

Is the minister in order to say that the coffee seedlings from the nursery are better than the ones, which were grown years ago and even now without having to go to the nursery? Is he in order?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the minister is an agriculturalist professionally, so I believe he knows what he is talking about.

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to bring it to the attention of my colleagues that it is true that what was produced in the 1950s to the 1970s cannot stand the challenges of the present times. That is why we are coming up with laws to regulate the kind of planting materials that will stand the test of time. 

Research has been conducted and it has been confirmed that they will give us the right yields, be resistant to diseases and to other weather vagaries, and give us the right size of coffee beans. That is why we are saying that a nursery should be regulated and a nursery operator should be inspected and certified. That is the essence of this clause.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourable members, the question is that clause 29 be amended as proposed.

BRIG. GEN. BYEKWASO: Madam Chairperson, I would like to respond to what hon. Nsamba said, that we do not need soil testing. I stand to say that we really need it. Like the minister has mentioned, with these type of coffee cuttings, we first plant in the mother garden; we do not go straight to potting. The mother garden requires the soil to have been tested to see whether it will support the kind of coffee that you need. 

Regarding the other point raised by hon. Nandala-Mafabi, that coffee just grows, I would like to respond – (Interruption)

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, the honourable member representing the UPDF did not hear me very well. I indicated that in this country, we have only two laboratories. I expected her to challenge me on that and not on whether we need soil testing. It is true we need soil testing - it is agreeable - but challenge me by saying that you have laboratories in your district that can do this soil testing, so that you do not complicate life for the nursery operators. 

There are thousands of nursery operators in this country. The reason why I was saying that this is going to create a problem is because we now require the authority to do something that is complicated for the authority itself. Challenge me on the number of facilities we have.

BRIG. GEN. BYEKWASO: Madam Chairperson, whereas I may agree, the point is that this is a Government Bill. If we have two laboratories today, does that mean that it is going to stay like that permanently? If the Government is making this law, doesn’t the Government know what they are doing?  - (Interjections) - This is just speculation; we do not know what is in future. We do not know whether Government will budget to put up more laboratories. If you want them, ask for them - (Interjections) Madam Chair – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: We do not want a coffee war here. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, allow the General to speak.

BRIG. GEN. BYEKWASO: Madam Chairperson, gone are the days when we used to pick coffee and it would grow anyhow. Where I come from, we no longer have those areas where we pick coffee seedlings anyhow. If we want coffee to cover the entire country, we have to operate nurseries. We cannot run away from that. The coffee described by hon. Nandala-Mafabi is maybe only in Bugisu. In these other parts of the country, it is no longer there.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like you to understand that the minister is not saying that everybody who is a coffee grower must have a nursery. I do not think he is saying that. That is not what they are saying. They are saying that you can grow the other coffee but if you want to operate a nursery, you should apply.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I come here with practical examples. The nursery operators are basically staff of UCDA - (Interjections) - I would like to give you an example – (Interjections)

Madam Chairperson, can hon. Santa, who grows cotton, know coffee more than me? I would like to be protected. This is not a law for cotton; it is a law for coffee. The reason I am raising - (Interruption)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Take your seats, honourable members. 

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. It is very clear that people who have interests in coffee deliberately did not want to appear before the committee. They did not join the consultations but they are bent on rapturing this Bill to make it vulnerable so that it can remain ineffective. We are actually trying to improve the coffee sector to tap into the export market. 

Is it procedurally correct to allow people to change the Bill fundamentally – (Interjections) – Yes, that is what you are doing –    when actually they did not participate in the consultations?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us go stage by stage. Let us go to the amendment of the headnote. I put the question that the headnote be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agree to.)

Subclauses (1) and (2), as amended, agreed to.

MS NAUWAT: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Whereas in the headnote we have included “coffee seed garden”, when we get to subclause (4), where we are talking about planting materials to be obtained from a certified coffee nursery, I am wondering whether we are abandoning the idea of a coffee seed garden. If that is not the case, then we need to add, immediately after the word “coffee nursery”, the words “coffee seed garden.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is it a consequential amendment?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, sub clause (3) in the Bill says, “The Authority shall assess the coffee nursery after potting and if satisfied, issue the coffee nursery operator a certificate to operate a coffee nursery.”

Madam Chairperson, not all coffee is planted in pots. If you came to Bugisu, I would show you this. You will find a man near the riverbank who has planted coffee seedlings where he can access water. However, according to Uganda Coffee Development Authority, that is not a pot and so this farmer is not supposed to get a certificate.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. The person who will get a certificate is the one who will apply. If you do not apply, no one will force you to take a certificate.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, anyone can apply. Even a cooperative society can apply to grow coffee seedlings. If they have been given a certificate, it does not necessarily mean that it should be in pots. 

MR SSEWUNGU: I would like to thank the honourable member. Madam Chairperson, we must be very careful when dealing with this law. If Ssewungu Joseph is making a seed bed for his own business - not to make money - what he uses to make his seed bed does not affect any individual. In fact, this law does not specify the materials to use to make the seed beds. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, if you are not going to be a coffee nursery operator, you do not apply for a certificate. You can make the nursery under your tree, grow your coffee and deal with it there.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to make something clear; what is good for one person is good for others. I am a coffee farmer and I know what coffee farmers go through. This is why we are raising some of these issues. It would, therefore, be wrong for a minister to come and say they invited us to the committee meetings but we never went. Madam Chairperson, we went and even applied to be considered to talk but we were not given the opportunity. 

I would be happier if the law on coffee came with the laws on cotton, cows and milk, tea; why coffee have the law on coffee now and not the others? If that is the case, we, the coffee growers, must deal with it as representatives of the farmers so that the farmers get the best out of it. It would be very unfair and unfortunate for you, Madam Chairperson, as the head of the institution, to allow such ministers to come and abuse us.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, under clause 29, I propose that we leave subclause (1) as it is - “A person who wishes to operate a coffee nursery shall apply to the Authority in writing.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have already dealt with subclause (1).

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: That is okay, Madam Chairperson. Something is coming through that we do not want nursery operators to apply. We want them to apply. However, once we start putting provisions in the law that may come through regulation, it becomes quite difficult.

Madam Chairperson, I am a nursery operator and I know that when you pot coffee, you must plant it there and then. You do not have time to go and ask UCDA to come and verify after potting. You will lose time. These matters can be captured in the regulations but not in the law. Let us stop at sub clause (1) and say “a person who wishes to operate shall apply to the authority in writing”. Sub clauses (2) and (3) are very dangerous.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you saying that you do not need the certificate referred to in sub clause (3)? Do you apply and then nothing happens?

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Chairperson, I think my colleagues are not understanding this matter very well. I would like to, therefore, beg them to understand this matter.

If you look at the Bill, even from the clauses that we first handled, we talk about increasing the number of extension workers. These are the extension workers we agreed to and passed here. They will be working with the farmers. We removed the element of regional extension workers; this means that we may even have extension workers in coffee growing areas down up to a sub county.

Madam Chairperson, on the issue of applying or getting a certificate, we are bringing the regulations down to the people at the lowest level. So, this matter should not scare colleagues in this House.

On the issue that has been put across by hon. Nandala-Mafabi, it is true that even in planting you can use lines, hand hoes, broadcast but those are rudimentary ways of doing things. Now, we are talking about appropriate technologies that can be used. This is why we are saying – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, would you be happy if we removed the word “potting” since it is causing problems? We can then say, “The Authority shall assess the coffee nursery and if satisfied, issue the coffee nursery operator a certificate…” Is it okay if we delete the word “potting”?

MR BAGIIRE: I think it is okay, Madam Chairperson. 

Secondly, I do not disagree with the committee but I would like to add a proposal on sub-clause (4), which was introduced by the committee – “Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, a person who wishes to plant coffee shall obtain planting materials from a certified coffee nursery.”

Madam Chairperson, we request that the proposed sub-clause (4) is pushed to clause 30 and becomes sub-clause (5). Let us remove it from clause 29. That is our proposal from the ministry.

MR MPUUGA: Madam Chairperson, before you call for the vote, I would like to comment on the issue of potting. If you are planting coffee seeds, potting is the third stage but if you are planting cuttings, potting is done on day one. Where is the distinction in the law and the proposals as to what we are potting? Can we be clear on this before we legislate? This is because the ambiguity in the way it is stated here could easily make cuttings and seedling cartels edge out ordinary farmers.

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to give some information. According the records that are available, in 1980 when we were using appropriate technology, we were producing about 2.1 million bags and Vietnam was producing 77,000 bags. In 2018, Uganda was producing 4.5 million bags while Vietnam, which adopted what the committee is talking about, is now producing 19 million tonnes. Therefore, these measures that they are talking about are going to help us as a country in the process of developing and promoting the growth of coffee in this country.

I would like to propose that the authority must have a say in matters concerning the nursery operators; there is no question about that. At the same time, why do we fear to say that a farmer should be registered, yet it is a business? Why should we go operate like we did in the 1980s when we were producing 2.1 million bags? Thank you so much.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 29, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 30

MS OKORI-MOE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The committee proposes to amend clause 30 as follows: 

a) 	Amend the headnote by adding the words “or coffee seed garden operator”. 

b) 	In sub-clause (1), insert the words, “or coffee seed garden operator” at the end of the provision. 

c) 	In sub-clause (2), insert the words, “or coffee seed garden operator” immediately after the words, “coffee nursery operator”.

d) 	In subclause (2) (a), insert the words, “or coffee seed garden operator” at the end of the provision. 

e) 	In sub-clause (2) (b), insert the words, “or coffee seed garden operator” immediately after the words, “coffee nursery operator”.

In paragraph (c), the committee proposes that we substitute the words, “district or village” with the words, “district, subcounty, parish, and village.” 

In paragraph (d), the committee proposes that we insert the words, “coffee seed garden” immediately after the words, “coffee nursery.” 

The justification is that these are consequential amendments

Madam Chairperson, the committee also proposes to insert new subclauses immediately after subclause (2) to read as follows: 

“(3) The Authority shall, on ascertaining the particulars submitted under subsection (2), issue a certificate of registration to the coffee nursery operator or coffee seed garden operator.

(4) The certificate issued under this section shall be renewed annually.” 

The justification is that this is for quality assurance. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 30 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 30, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 32

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to propose an amendment to sub-clause (3), which is about registration of coffee value chain actors. Before I move it, I would like to comment on why I am moving it. 

The main persons who are now involved in the nurseries are the staff of UCDA. They use a front but they are the ones who operate the nurseries and do the bags. Therefore, I would like to propose here under subclause (3) that no staff of the Authority shall be involved as an actor in the coffee chain except as a farmer. The justification is that they have insider information and this will lead to trading, and when they are paying coffee farmers or seedling operators, the first ones to be paid are those with whom they have an interest. 

We also made a law for the Auditor-General here and it was very clear that any staff of the Auditor-General’s office involved in malpractice will go to prison for 12 years. I would also like to propose that we include in this law punishment for the staff of UCDA who get involved in the coffee chain except as farmers. The justification is: to ensure that we stop that bad practice so that we have a well-regulated coffee sector. I would like to propose that if a staff member contravenes this Act, they shall be liable to pay a fine of not less than 5000 currency points, or five years imprisonment or both.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Thank you so much for that proposal, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. I see that you are trying to cure a problem but I also see a challenge. These days, we have extension workers who do not even have gardens of their own. We are talking about nursery operators but what about an extension worker who cannot even operate a coffee nursery, yet we are looking for a situation where if an extension worker works at my garden, I can visit his garden to see what he is doing. So, it goes on even in the entire value chain. I see a situation where these people may be trained to do these things and if we leave them -

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is your proposal?

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, I was just seeking for clarification from hon. Nandala-Mafabi because he wants these people to be excluded completely except at farm level.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I will give an example. Madam Chairperson, we always had demonstration farms for these extension workers at different levels. If coffee was being grown in an area, at every subcounty there was a demonstration farm where the extension workers would carry out the demonstration. Do you want to tell me that for me to be a teacher, I must have a child in the school where I teach? That is wrong. If I have been trained as a teacher, I must teach everywhere and not necessarily because my child goes to that school.  

What we are trying to say is that the extension workers will be based at the demonstration farms owned by Government. We want to avoid conflict of interest. When you deal with that, you will see the coffee sector booming.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, what do you say about the proposal by hon. Nandala-Mafabi? 

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. First of all, I would like to change this notion that hon. Nandala-Mafabi is putting forward. Hon. Patrick Nsamba is an example of a nursery operator, yet he is not a staff of UCDA. So, coming to this august House to say that all these coffee nurseries are owned by UCDA staff is very unfortunate.  

Secondly, Madam Chairperson, I think hon. Nandala-Mafabi could be right in what he is trying to cure because there could be an element of conflict of interest. However, there are laws in this country that govern conflict of interest declarations, which are binding on UCDA because UCDA is a Government entity. 

Thirdly, in Article 40(2) of our Constitution, it is stated that every person in Uganda has a right to practice his or her profession and to carry on any lawful occupation, trade or business. Therefore, if we put his proposal in this law, we may be going against the principal law of this land. 

I would like to say that somebody may join UCDA as a member of staff and yet they have been coffee farmers or processors before. So, putting this clause in the law may be redundant. Thank you.

MR MPUUGA: Madam Chairperson, the honourable minister really has not provided a remedy for the question you raised in lieu of the proposal moved by the hon. Nandala-Mafabi. 

First of all, I would like to amend the proposal before I propose to retain it. We are not making a penal law; therefore, the five-year imprisonment would be beyond that misdemeanour. We could bring it to the realm of say two years. That is my proposal. Again, in this same law, when you go to clauses 54 and 45, you will find prosecution of farmers who will abandon gardens, et cetera. Therefore, all this is feasible. 

I would like to propose that we bring down the penalty proposed by hon. Nandala-Mafabi, especially on imprisonment, from five years to two years and the amendment stands. Conflict of interest is various and we know it. The only way to stop it is to legislate so that we can ably deal with the offenders.

MS ALUM: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I wonder whether – (Interjections) – Yes, it is important that as a member of the committee -

THE CHAIRPERSON: If you are a member of the committee, you can give information but – Hon. Santa Alum, you are a member of the committee; you cannot debate your own report. If you did not sign the report, you should have had your own minority report. You cannot hide behind not signing the report. 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank you very much. I also thank hon. Nandala-Mafabi for making that proposal. It is really very important for us to ensure that we provide a law that governs conflict of interest. Indeed, that is what is happening – (Interruption)

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, I would like to give information to my colleague and it is very important that this information is taken on board. We cannot make a law, which infringes on the rights of people to trade. The best thing to do is to add a provision in the law that says that whoever wants to trade must declare their interest; that is all. It will then be easy to control what is happening. Thank you.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you for the information. Madam Chairperson, I was saying that I support the proposal moved by the hon. Nandala-Mafabi although the penalty is a bit high. Therefore, the proposal moved by the hon. Mpuuga is appropriate; it will control conflict of interest. 

Conflict of interest is everywhere; even in Parliament here, we have rules that govern debates. If you have conflict of interest in an issue, you are not supposed to participate in a debate about it. So, in terms of enabling coffee farmers and Ugandans to participate in this sector, it is important that we guard against conflict of interest. 

Finally, Madam Chairperson, what hon. Nandala-Mafabi is raising as a reason is true because when you look at what is happening currently in the supply of seeds and other items under NAADS, you realise most of the beneficiaries that are being paid work in the agency. It is really important for us to manage conflict of interest. Thank you, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like to put the question that clause 32 be amended as proposed -

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, kindly allow me respond to the concerns of the Members. It is actually discriminatory to say that UCDA staff should not grow coffee. It is like saying that a veterinary professional should not own a cow, or a lawyer should not have a law firm, or a teacher should own a school. 

Madam Chairperson, the committee even made an effort to go to the constituency of hon. Nandala-Mafabi, but he was not even there to interact with us. Otherwise, we would have harmonised these things – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I represent a constituency called Budadiri County West where the district headquarters are and the whole chairperson of the committee is saying I was not there. 

Madam Chairperson, today is Tuesday. I am supposed to be here to do legislative work. If the chairperson decides to go there today without informing me, how will I be able to know? Am I an angel or God to know that the Chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is in my constituency? 

Therefore, is the chairperson of the committee in order to allege that she went to my constituency and that I was an angel to know that she was there and be around to attend to her? Is she in order to allege that when she did not inform me? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, how did you access hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s farm without inviting him to be present? 

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, it is a practice by the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries that whenever we are going to a district, we write to inform all the Members of Parliament from that area. That way, when they have time, it is courteous for them to interact with the committee so that they can also see what is happening in their constituencies. So, we wrote to the Member and we have a record that we did so. Thank you, Madam Chairperson. 

MR KIBALYA: Madam Chairperson, it seems a battle is beginning to come up between hon. Nandala-Mafabi and the chairperson. My submission is that in whatever we do, we should lead by example. Even in fields like that of the Attorney-General - he will tell you that he has a chamber somewhere. The Minister of Education and Sports also has schools. There is no way you will demonstrate what is good and should be done without showing where you come from or that you are doing the same. 

Working in Uganda Coffee Development Authority does not mean that one should stop being themselves. Some of these people have their private work. Assuming somebody’s employment is terminated tomorrow, what would that mean? 

Madam Chairperson, I think we are denying some people their right to invest and work. Let us follow the right law and use all the laws that operate in other organisations as well. However, saying that somebody in Uganda Coffee Development Authority should not operate a nursery bed or coffee farm is denying these people their right to invest and work in this country. 

BRIG. GEN. BYEKWASO: Madam Chairperson, we should not use the argument that we are denying some people some rights. The issue of conflict of interest is not new in this country and it is not beginning with coffee operators. It has been in existence and we have been discouraging people in some sectors from doing the same work while they are in office. Therefore, whoever is in Uganda Coffee Development Authority and wants to be a nursery operator - After all, they are not denied the right to be farmers. We are only saying they should not operate coffee nurseries or be in the value chain other than as farmers. Otherwise, we shall be encouraging conflict of interest. 

MS ALUM: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I rise on a procedural issue. As a committee, we took a long time looking at this Bill. We called very many stakeholders, including Members of this Parliament.  I would like to give an example of hon. Justine Khainza from Bududa who came before the committee and gave us all her views. 

Madam Chairperson, we have reached a point where Members who never joined us in the constituency and never bothered to come before the committee are trying to bring on new issues, which were not even seen in the committee. The amendment by hon. Nandala–Mafabi was just given to the clerk and not to the chairperson. 

Is it, therefore, procedurally right for us to begin bringing discriminatory elements into the Bill and yet we took a long time discussing this? Members shunned the committee even when we visited their areas. Is it procedurally right, Madam Chairperson? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this is a Bill of 2018. You had a lot of opportunities to send in your views once it was given a first reading and you did not take the opportunity to go to the committee when they were sitting and meeting stakeholders. Therefore, I put the question that clause 32 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 32, agreed to.

Clause 33

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I seek your guidance. You have said the Bill was with us from 2018; can I get clarification if as we are here, we should not make any amendments to the law? If it is true, tell us. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, first, you have an opportunity to attend any committee and give your views, except you do not go there. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I wrote to the committee. I already submitted the proposals I am bringing to the committee and you even have a copy. Therefore, what I am raising is before the committee and you have a copy. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: The committee has rejected your proposals. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Rejecting is different from proposing in the House. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 33 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, we have an amendment on clause 33. The committee proposes that we amend paragraph (e) of sub-clause (2) by substituting the word “area” with the word “location”. The justification is that it is for clarity. I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 33 be amended as proposed.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 33, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 34 

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, on clause 34, the committee proposes to amend the provision as follows:

a) 	by transferring the current clause 34 to appear immediately after clause 32. This is for proper flow of the provisions. 

b) 	The committee also proposes that we delete the first paragraph (g). The justification is: to avoid repetition. It is already provided for under paragraph (d). 

c) 	The committee proposes that we insert a new paragraph at the end of the provision to read as follows: 
“(h) a register of instant, granulated and soluble coffee plant.” 

The justification is that it should be all inclusive. These are key players in the coffee value chain.

d) 	The committee also proposes that we insert a new clause immediately after clause 34 to read as follows: 

“The Register of coffee value chain actors 
The Register of coffee value chain actors shall contain the particulars of each of the coffee value chain actors including – 

    a. name and address of the value chain actor; 
    b. name and address of each director or partner and the shareholding of each shareholder; 
    c. the activity undertaken by the value chain actor; 
    d. capacity of the value chain actor; 
    e. the location of the value chain actor; 
    f. any other information which may be deemed necessary for the purpose of registration.”

The justification is: for ease of traceability. I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 34 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a new paragraph be introduced as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the committee also proposes that we insert a new Part V immediately after clause 34 to cater for licensing and it should read as follows: “Part V - Licensing of coffee value chain actors.” 

The justification: to create a separate part to cater for licensing. The licensing applies to the coffee processors. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new Part V be introduced – 

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I agree with the proposals of the committee but regarding the new addition of (h) under clause 34, we request to redraft the proposal by the committee. Instead of saying, “register of instant, granulated and soluble coffee plant”, we should redraft it to read, “a register of factories for instant, granulated and soluble coffee.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have already moved on from that. 

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Chairperson, instead of (h), which was added to the list to read, “a register of instant, granulated and soluble coffee plant”, We propose to redraft it to be “a register of factories for instant, granulated and soluble coffee.”

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I want the minister to clarify because “soluble” means that which dissolves. Supposing there are farmers - in our villages, there is coffee that they roast. You put it in a pot and it is not soluble, then you sieve; are you telling us that such factories should not be admitted and registered? You are only looking for factories, which are soluble.

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Chairperson, that can be included; we agree with it but our proposal as a ministry, we would like to say, “a register of factories for instant, granulated, soluble and –“ what hon. Mafabi- (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I want to make a proposal of those factories, which roast coffee. The justification is whether it is soluble or insoluble, they are all dealing in coffee.

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Chairperson, we agree with the proposal of hon. Nandala-Mafabi. We also have a proposal that after clause 34, all the national registers of other coffee value chain actors become No.1 and under it, there is (a) up to (h). Then we have 34 (2) in which we also agree with the committee about “the register of coffee value chain actors shall contain the particulars…” etcetera. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we are still at clause 34. First, there is a new paragraph (h) introduced and it has been amended by the minister and hon. Nandala-Mafabi. I put the question that a new paragraph be amended as proposed.
	
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Then, there is also a new clause by the committee. I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 34, as amended.
:
Clause 35

MS OKORI-MOE Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to amend the provision as follows:

    i. In sub clause (1) by inserting a new paragraph after paragraph (i) to read as, “A coffee extractor's license.” The justification is to be all-inclusive.
    ii. In sub clause (3) by deleting the letter “a” appearing before the word “operate.”
    iii. Delete the words “for internal marketing” and the word “and” appearing on the second line.
    iv.  Delete the word “operate” appearing in the third line of that clause.

The committee also proposes that we redraft the provision to read as follows:
“A person shall not operate a potpourri, buy coffee, grade coffee, roast coffee, brew coffee, operate a coffee shop or coffee store, a warehouse or coffee huller or process or export coffee on a commercial basis without a license issued by the Authority.” 

The justification is for proper structuring of the provision.

(v) In sub-clause (4), by inserting the words, “within thirty days” immediately after the word “shall”. The justification is to provide the timeline in which the applicant should get a response. This will avoid any possible abuse of the process by the Authority. I beg to move, Madam Chairperson.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Before we pass this, I need clarification from the minister about this coffee buyer.

At the village level, people who trade in coffee ride their bicycles and motorcycles to the farmers to buy coffee. I think this is going to bring a problem if we include buying coffee because they buy and take to the hullers. If a huller has a license, Madam Chairperson, we should not squeeze the poor people too much by including the coffee buyer’s license. It will be quite difficult for them to look for these licenses.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What does the minister say?

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Chairperson, in this sense, we are not stopping the bicycle people that are being made reference to by hon. Nsamba. We are saying if somebody has a store here and he gets a license, then he can have people he can send to go and collect the coffee as long as at the point of collection, somebody has a license. That person will be responsible; if he is adulterating, then we shall know that this is the person that we gave the license.

Therefore, I know that if I have a license here, then I can have may be two, three, or four bicycle people who bring to my store. Therefore, we are not eliminating those people who buy from the farmer.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, the challenge with what the minister is proposing-(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Chairperson, we have to be very careful with coffee buyers. First, hon. Bagiire, you know that you and I grow coffee but I can buy more coffee from somebody else. However, some people are not big scale buyers. They buy on a small scale. When you put that kind of legislation, it is going to cause problems to some of these buyers. We should amend it and give it a better provision.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you amend or do you delete?

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, we should be able to delete because it says “a person shall not operate.” That is very dangerous because he is not talking about a factory or a businessman but about a person, meaning anybody involved in buying coffee is expected to have a license. In my opinion, we should delete, “buy coffee”.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, the challenge with what the minister is proposing is simple. We are going to have an area like where I come from and we are going to have only one person with a license. That implies it is only that person who will determine the price and who is going to determine what he is giving to the farmers.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, can we delete, “buy coffee”?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, what is a store? Even a primary society, which collects coffee on behalf of the farmers is a store because there might be one in the village. 

There can also be a trader in a trading area who buys from farmers from the village and he brings it to the primary society. This is talking about export on a commercial basis. Nobody can export coffee without a license and nobody can operate a plant without a license.

Therefore, in the current state, as you are saying, this law is dangerous. It says it shall not operate a potpourri. Do you remember when we were working on the sugarcane and we would say, “You cannot deal in this one but you can deal in the other one?” 

When it comes to buying coffee, a villager is not allowed to buy from his colleague under this law unless he has a licence, yet he is going to take to somebody who will be doing it on commercial level by exporting or roasting.

Madam Chairperson, (3) should be deleted because for exporters, there will be an exporter licence. For a plant to be a roaster, it must be cleared by the Uganda National Bureau of Standards, the National Environment Management Authority and Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development for a factory permit. Therefore, in the current state, this one has no need to go to the villager at the grassroots. 
In this current state, it is redundant and I would like to ask the minister that the normal licencing should continue for those who are trading in coffee. 

MR EITUNGANANE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to say is –(Interjections) Yes, I am a member but I am giving information. The issue about the buyers is that during the time of processing this Bill, the largest culprits of adulteration of coffee are the buyers. This is where we had a scenario, where they even mixed stones that resembled coffee so that they can be able to sell.

Therefore, we are trying to cure this by putting it within the law. With a licence, at least you qualify. If you are genuinely a licensed person, there is no way you are going to get involved in adulterating the coffee. That is why we captured this issue in the Bill, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, I put the question that part (5) be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, have we deleted “the coffee buyer” and “the potpourri?”

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we have not. I put the question that clause 35, as amended, do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 35, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 36 agreed to.

Clause 37

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, in clause 37, the committee proposes to insert a new sub clause as follows; 
“The minister shall respond to the appeal within 30 days from the date of receipt of the appeal”.

The justification is to provide the timeline within which the minister should respond to an appeal. I beg to move.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: This is again very dangerous. You are again talking about villagers going to the minister for an appeal; there must be a mechanism. 

Madam Chairperson, the appeal to the minister, as per clause 37, is very cumbersome. This can only be done by big boys and big girls. However, in this current state, this cannot be. The appeal should be at a local level other than being at a higher level of the minister.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think there is a part we stood over, relating to the appeals; first, from the Authority and then to the minister on the registration. I think for now, let us leave the issue of appeals and go to clause 38.

Clause 38

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 38 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 38, agreed to.

Clause 39, agreed to.

Clause 40

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes that we amend the provision by inserting the word, “profiling” at the beginning of the headnote so that it reads as follows: 
“Profiling, grading and certification of coffee”. 

The justification is to broaden the scope of the provision.

Madam Chairperson, in sub clause 2, the committee proposes that we insert the word “profile” immediately before the word: “grade”.
 
In sub clause 3, the committee proposes that we insert the word “profiling” immediately before the word “grading”.

The justification is that it is a sub-sequential amendment. I beg to move.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like the Chairperson of the committee to clarify to me “certification.” What do you mean by the word “certification?” 

We have bodies, which certify that these are organic and non-organic farmers. Therefore, what is the Authority going to be responsible for? Is it going to certify the farmers of only the area the coffee is produced or it is certifying them as organic and non-organic? I need to understand that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: There is a clarification. Honourable minister, you are the author of the Bill.

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the certification is about coffee. When we are exporting coffee, we give a certificate, especially regarding the quality of the coffee. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 40 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 40, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 41

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, in clause 41 the committee proposes that we amend the provision as follows: 

In paragraph (d), we delete the words “for domestic consumption”.

The justification is to make it all inclusive.

Madam Chairperson, the committee also proposes that we delete paragraph (i).

The justification is that Uganda Coffee Development Authority does not have resources or an instrument authorising provision of finances. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I thought you are interested in Ugandans drinking more coffee. Why do you want to delete “domestic consumption?”  - Where? Oh, I see.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, first of all, they are saying “we are investing in research and we shall support farmers.” Why do they again delete paragraph (i)? Part of the money they will be paying will go to support farmers in the process of the value chain. 

Therefore, paragraph (i) should not be deleted because you collect from me and then at the end of the day, you must also put back.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 41 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 41, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 42

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, in clause 42, the committee proposes that we amend sub clause 2 as follows: 

    i) In paragraph (a) by replacing the current provision with “create awareness on coffee consumption”.

	The justification is to do proper wording.

    ii) In paragraph (c) of sub clause 2, the committee proposes that we insert the words “and other stakeholders” immediately after the word “coffee brewers”

The justification is for widening the scope of the provision. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 42 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 42, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 43

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, on clause 43, the committee proposes to amend paragraph (b) by deleting the words “50 per cent of the”. 
The justification is to correct a typing error because the 50 per cent was meant to go towards research. I beg to move.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, from what I am seeing, when the Authority collects money, the whole of it will be theirs. 

Therefore, I wanted to make an amendment that “the funds of the Authority shall”. Secondly, that the funds of the Authority shall be managed as per the Public Finance Management Act. 

The justification is that, one, Parliament will appropriate for them and two, if they collect any resources and there is excess, it should be put in the Consolidated Fund. They are free to apply for it if they want. 

If we do not do it this way, they will collect ceaselessly because the law does not allow them to do anything with the funds. That is why I am saying that we should insert, “and this money should be managed as per the Public Finance Management Act”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that under clause 43?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, it is under clause 43, Madam Chairperson. The reason is that it concerns the funds collected and the management of the same.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now, honourable members, I think sub clause (e) should not be there because we have, for a long time, not allowed agencies to get donations or gifts from other sources. We appropriate everything from here.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, we delete this and replace with what you have said.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Please, say it again for the record.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I am saying “the resources of the Authority shall be money appropriated by the Parliament and it will be managed as provided for under the Public Finance Management Act”. 

The justification is that anything that they will want, if they have collected even through the Non Tax Revenue, if they want to use it, it will be appropriated by Parliament for them.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That means that even (c), (d) and (e) should not be there.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Indeed, they should not be there. Clauses (b) (c), (d) and (e) should not be there.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is what we have been doing with all the agencies. I, therefore, put the question that clause 43 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 43, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 44

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Clause 44 talks about levy. This means you will tax. And the person you will tax is the farmer. Therefore, they are saying here that the Authority shall levy a charge not exceeding two per cent.

Madam Chairperson, if we rejected the one per cent withholding tax to the farmers, this is an indirect way of bringing the withholding tax but now, being done by somebody at the top. It is an indirect withholding tax. 

I would like to move that this clause 44 – the levy, should be deleted. The justification is that this tax will directly go to the farmer. 
What the farmer can pay, if he has made his profits, is the corporation tax or income tax, whatever the case. Secondly, if you are going to charge two per cent to the farmer, it is a very dangerous thing. It is not the trader who pays but rather, the farmer.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What do you say honourable minister?

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Chairperson, we can justify the proposal for the 2 per cent on the premise of the fact that we think we must put a lot of emphasis on our coffee sector. Like it has been put here by many colleagues, coffee is the most important cash crop in our country. 

We need resources to make sure that research is done. We need resources to make sure that regulation is done. We need resources to make sure that issues related to agronomic practices, payment of staff are all done. 

When we compare with our colleagues in Kenya, according to their Coffee Act of 2012, the levy is 3 per cent, including 2 per cent for coffee research. 

In Tanzania, the levy on coffee export is 1 per cent for Tanzania Coffee Board and 0.375 per cent for research. Rwanda, the levy is 3 per cent. 

Therefore, Madam Chairperson, we think that 1 per cent with 0.9 per cent for coffee development and 0.1 per cent for coffee research is very meagre. It does not make a lot of sense, according to the national coffee policy. 

Cabinet proposed increases in coffee sales from the current maximum of 1 per cent to a level of 2 or 3 per cent. And now, we are proposing 2 per cent. I seek the indulgence of the colleagues.

MR MPUUGA: Madam Chairperson, before you - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 44 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 44 agreed to.

Clause 45 agreed to.

Clause 46 agreed to.

Clause 47

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, in clause 47, if you are looking at Public Finance Management Act, borrowing powers should be deleted because this is already covered and there is no need for us to have it in the law for Uganda Coffee Development Authority. 

If you recall what we have done for clause 43, we deleted (b), (c), (d), (e) and replaced them with what is provided for in the Public Finance Management Act. 

That means that even this clause 47 is not applicable because the law we are following now is the Public Finance Management Act, and there is no need for us to have this put in this law. Therefore, my proposal is that clause 47 be deleted.

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, I would like to appreciate the proposal by my colleague, hon. Nandala. He submitted about 28 amendments to the committee and this was not part of it. This is just an afterthought and I beg that we stand with the position of the committee. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, our practice these days is that any appropriation must be done by Parliament. Therefore, no agency can get its own loan. They must come here. Therefore, clause 47 does not hold. (Applause) Let us delete clause 47.

I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 47 deleted.

Clause 48

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, on clause 48, the committee proposes to amend the provision as follows:

    (a) In sub-clause (1) by deleting the year “2015”.

	The justification is that the citation of laws changes; for example, when the law is repealed.

(b) 	In sub-clause (2) by replacing the word “minister” with the words “Minister responsible for Finance, Planning and Economic Development”.

The justification is for clarity and in conformity with the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. I beg to move.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. You are aware that nowadays, the budgets of these organisations are approved by Parliament. Much as we talked about the Minister responsible for Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which is good, it must be with the approval of Parliament. Otherwise, currently, all institutions where Government has an interest will submit their budgets through their ministries and they are approved by Parliament.

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Chairperson, it is our prayer that the citation, like the chairperson said in clause 48(1) where they are talking of changing the Act - Since hon. Nandala-Mafabi has suggested that we use the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, I think we should maintain it here. I think it is the right citation.

Under sub-clause (2) where they are suggesting “the minister”, I would like to add on to what hon. Nandala-Mafabi has said and I pray that the House approves it. I would like to propose that “The Authority shall not incur any expenditure exceeding its budget without the approval of the minister in consultation with the Minister responsible for Finance, Planning and Economic Development and approval by Parliament.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: What would exceeding the budget mean? Would it be a supplementary?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, what the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is saying is that – The committee is right to say and I think they have agreed to my proposal on that. I said with the Minister responsible for Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Madam Chairperson, the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is not responsible for money. That is why we are saying when we appropriate your money – When the agency needs a supplementary, they can pass it to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and then, it goes to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I know, my brother, hon. Bagiire will soon be the finance minister. Therefore, do not insist to leave it in agriculture. You are going to get it in the finance ministry. Let us make the law for posterity.

Madam Chairperson, the committee is right to say, “...with the Minister responsible for Finance, Planning and Economic Development.”

The other point I raised, which says “with approval of Parliament” – Madam Chairperson, currently there is no budget of any organisation, which is passed without the approval of Parliament. We are putting this for emphasis that this must be with the approval of Parliament.

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Chairperson, I would like to ask hon. Nandala-Mafabi. What is wrong with the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, who is the head of the sector? Uganda Coffee Development Authroirty is an agency under the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. We are proposing to say, “...with the approval of the minister in consultation with the Minister responsible for Finance, Planning and Economic Development and approval by Parliament”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like to know under what circumstances an agency would spend in excess of its budgets. What are the circumstances?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Supplementary. Madam Chairperson, a few minutes ago, you said that the minister is competent in agriculture. He knows nursery beds but the issues of money fall under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. He should not be over zealous. Otherwise, this is a function of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, in clause 48, we shall leave the citation but remove the comma and include the words “Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development” because any supplementary must be done with both Parliament and the finance ministry.

MR KIBALYA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to know from the chairperson of the committee what their worries and fears were. In the same line, where are the powers of the minister for the sector? Otherwise, there could be a possibility that because of the bureaucracy in finance ministry, they are worried and so may be, they wish to bring something forward - (Interjections)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, exceeding the budget is a supplementary.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, the best thing is for you to put the question because it is very clear.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, as I said under clause 48 (1), we remove the comma but leave the citation. I also said in sub clause (2) of the same clause that we take the committee’s proposal. 

I put the question that clause 48 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 48, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 49

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, in clause 49, the committee proposes to amend paragraphs (b) and (c) by substituting the word “three” with the word “two”.

The justification is to align it with section 51(1) and (2) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the committee also proposes to replace the word “Miscellaneous” with the words “Coffee Research and Coffee Auction”. That is part nine.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where is that? Is it also under clause 49?

MS OKORI-MOE: Part nine.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 49, as amended, do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 49, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 50 agreed to.

Clause 51

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes that we replace the word “miscellaneous” under part nine with the words “Coffee Research and Coffee Auction”.

The justification is that coffee research and coffee auction should form part of the substantive provision of the Bill and not appear under “miscellaneous.” I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, have you amended the head note? You are supposed to amend the head note. I think under clause 51, you had proposals, which I have here. I do not know whether you have abandoned them.

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, before clause 51, we propose to replace the word “miscellaneous” with the word “coffee research and coffee auction” under part 9. The justification-

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where are you? I am lost now.

MS OKORI-MOE: On the headnote, Madam Chairperson. 

MR OAGON: For clarity, Madam Chairperson, immediately after clause 50, it is supposed to be part 9 as a sub topic now; “miscellaneous.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, part 9.

MS OKORI-MOE: The justification is that coffee research and coffee auction should form part of substantive provision of the Bill and not appear under “miscellaneous.” I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the headnote be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The headnote, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 51

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, in clause 51, the committee proposes that we substitute the headnote to read as follows; “national coffee research.” The committee proposes to amend the provision to read as follows; 

In sub clause (1) by inserting the words, “in coordination with the National Research Agricultural Organisation” immediately after the word “Authority”.

In sub clause (2) the committee proposes to substitute the words “shall be validated by the board and industry stakeholders and approved by the board” with the words “shall be approved by the National Research Agricultural Organisation and validated by the board and industry stakeholders.”

The justification is to be in line with the National Coffee Policy, 2013 article 2.3.1 and 6.1 on pages 6 and 12 respectively, which provides that NARO is the body responsible for coffee research.

Madam Chairperson, the committee also proposes that we insert-

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, let us finish with the present clause 51. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 51(2) be amended as proposed?

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, it is almost 6.00 p.m. and we are still on curfew. Therefore, I would like to invite the minister to move for the House to resume.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Agriculture) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(The House resumed, the Speaker in the Chair_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Agriculture)(Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The National Coffee Bill, 2020” and clause 28 was stood over and clauses 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36 were passed with amendments, clause 37 was stood over and clauses 38, 39, 40, 41, 42 were passed with amendments.

Madam Speaker, on clause 43, I beg that this clause be recommitted because there is an issue that we want to put. Then clauses 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50 and 51 were passed with amendments.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have noted the intention of the minister to recommit clause 43. 

5.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Madam Speaker, I beg that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you very much for your work today. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2pm.

(The House rose at 5.57 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 22 July 2020 at 2 p.m.) 

